10-k
w48305e10vk.htm
form 10-k
e10vk
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington,d.c.
form10-k
(mark one)
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2007
o
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
commission file number 1-815
e. i. du pont de nemours
and company
(exact name of registrant as
specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
51-0014090
(i.r.s. employer identification
no.)
1007 market street
wilmington, delaware 19898
(address of principal executive
offices)
registrants telephone number, including area code:
302-774-1000
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the
act
(each class is registered on the
new york stock exchange, inc.):
title of each class
common stock ($.30par value)
preferred stock
(without par value-cumulative)
$4.50 series
$3.50 series
no securities are registered pursuant to section12(g)
of the act.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a well-known
seasoned issuer (as defined in rule405 of the securities
act).yesnoo
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is not required
to file reports pursuant to section13 or
section15(d) of the
act.yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has
filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or
15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the
preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has
been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item405 of
regulations-k
is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in
partiii of this
form10-k
or any amendment to this
form10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer
or a smaller reporting company. see definitions of large
accelerated filer, accelerated filer and
smaller reporting company in
rule12b-2
of the exchange act. (check one).
large accelerated
filer
accelerated
filero
non-accelerated
filero
smaller reporting
companyo
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell
company (as defined in
rule12b-2
of the
act).yesono
the aggregate market value of voting stock held by
nonaffiliates of the registrant (excludes outstanding shares
beneficially owned by directors and officers and treasury
shares) as of june30, 2007, was approximately
$46.6billion.
as of january31, 2008, 899,346,000shares
(excludes 87,041,000shares of treasury stock) of the
companys common stock, $.30par value, were
outstanding.
documents incorporated by
reference
(specific pages incorporated
are indicated under the applicable item herein):
incorporated
by reference
in part no.
the companys proxy statement in connection with the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held on april30, 2008
iii
table of contents
[this page intentionally left blank]
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
form10-k
table of
contents
the terms dupont or the company as used
herein refer to e. i. du pont de nemours and company and its
consolidated subsidiaries, or to e. i. du pont de nemours and
company, as the context may indicate.
page
parti
item 1.
business
item 1a.
risk factors
item 1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
partii
item 5.
market for registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
item 9b.
other information
partiii
item 10.
directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions,
and director independence
item 14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
item 15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
company's restated certificate of incorporation
company's retirement income plan for directors
computation of the ratio of earnings to fixed charges
subsidiaries of the registrant
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
certification of the company's principal executive officer
certification of the company's principal financial officer
section 1350 certification of the company's principal executive officer
section 1350 certification of the company's principal financial officer
note on
incorporation by reference
information pertaining to certain items in partiii of this
report is incorporated by reference to portions of the
companys definitive 2008 annual meeting proxy statement to
be filed within 120days after the end of the year covered
by this annual report on
form10-k,
pursuant to regulation14a (the proxy).
parti
item1.business
dupont was founded in 1802 and was incorporated in delaware in
1915. dupont is a world leader in science and technology in a
range of disciplines, including biotechnology, electronics,
materials science, safety and security and synthetic fibers. the
company operates globally, manufacturing a wide range of
products for distribution and sale to many different markets,
including the transportation, safety and protection,
construction, motor vehicle, agriculture, home furnishings,
medical, electronics, communications, protective apparel and the
nutrition and health markets. total worldwide employment at
december31, 2007, was approximately 60,000people.
the company is strategically aligned into five market- and
technology-focused growth platforms consisting of
agriculture& nutrition; coatings& color
technologies; electronic& communication technologies;
performance materials; and safety& protection. in
addition to the five growth platforms, the companys
reportable segments include pharmaceuticals. the company
includes embryonic businesses not included in the growth
platforms, such as applied biosciences, and nonaligned
businesses in other.
information describing the business of the company can be found
on the indicated pages of this report:
item
page
segment reviews
introduction
agriculture& nutrition
coatings& color technologies
electronic& communication
technologies
performance materials
safety& protection
pharmaceuticals
other
geographic information net sales and
net property
f-45
segment sales, net sales, pretax operating income
and segment net assets
f-46
the company has operations in approximately 80 countries
worldwide and about 60percent of consolidated net sales
are made to customers outside the united states of america
(u.s.). subsidiaries and affiliates of dupont conduct
manufacturing, seed production, or selling activities and some
are distributors of products manufactured by the company.
sources of
supply
the company utilizes numerous firms as well as internal sources
to supply a wide range of raw materials, energy, supplies,
services and equipment. to ensure availability, the company
maintains multiple sources for fuels and many raw materials,
including hydrocarbon feedstocks. large volume purchases are
generally procured under competitively priced supply contracts.
a substantial portion of the production and sales in performance
materials is dependent upon the availability of hydrocarbon and
hydrocarbon derivative feedstocks. current hydrocarbon feedstock
requirements are met by purchases from major energy and
petrochemical companies.
within agriculture& nutrition, the companys
wholly-owned subsidiary, pioneer hi-bred international, inc.
(pioneer), operates in the seed industry and has seed production
facilities located throughout the world. seed production is
performed directly by the company or contracted with independent
growers and conditioners. the companys ability to produce
seeds primarily depends upon weather conditions, contract
growers and the availability of preferred hybrids with desired
traits.
table of contents
part i
item 1.business, continued
the major commodities, raw materials and supplies for the
companys reportable segments in 2007 include the following:
agriculture&
nutrition:
benzene and carbamic acid related intermediates; copper; insect
control products; natural gas; soybeans; soy flake; soy
lecithin; sulfonamides
coatings&
color technologies:
butyl acetate; chlorine; hexamethylenediamine based poly
aliphatic isocyanates; industrial gases; pigments; resins;
titanium ore
electronic&
communication technologies:
block co-polymers; chloroform; copper; fluorspar; hydrofluoric
acid; hydroxylamine; oxydianiline; perchloroethylene; polyester
film; precious metals; pyromellitic dianhydride
performance
materials:
adipic acid; butadiene; butanediol; dimethyl terephthalate;
ethane; ethylene glycol; fiberglass; hexamethylenediamine;
methanol; natural gas; purified terephthalic acid
safety&
protection:
alumina hydroxide; ammonia; benzene; high density polyethylene;
isophthaloyl chloride; metaphenylenediamine; methyl
methacrylate; natural gas; paraphenylenediamine; polyester
fiber; propylene; terephthaloyl chloride; wood pulp
no commodities or raw materials are purchased for the
pharmaceutical segment. this segments revenues arise from
licensing arrangements for
cozaar
and
hyzaar
antihypertensive drugs, which are manufactured and distributed
by merck& co. (merck).
since 1997, dupont has contracted with computer sciences
corporation (csc) and accenture llp (accenture) to provide
certain services for the company. csc operates a majority of the
companys global information systems and technology
infrastructures and provides selected applications and software
services. in december 2005, dupont entered into a new contract
with csc to provide these services through december 2014.
accenture provides selected applications, software services and
enterprise resource planning solutions designed to enhance the
companys manufacturing, marketing, distribution and
customer service. accenture is contracted to provide these
services through december 2008.
in november 2005, dupont contracted with convergys corporation
to provide the company with global human resources transactional
services including employee development, workforce planning,
compensation management, benefits administration and payroll. as
of december31, 2007, some of the services associated with
this contract are in place and are operating. all services
associated with this contract are scheduled to be operating in
2010. convergys corporation is contracted to provide services
through 2018.
backlog
the company does not consider backlog to be a significant
indicator of the level of future sales activity. in general, the
company does not manufacture its products against a backlog of
orders. production and inventory levels are based on the level
of incoming orders as well as projections of future demand.
therefore, the company believes that backlog information is not
material to understanding its overall business and should not be
considered a reliable indicator of the companys ability to
achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance.
intellectual
property
the company believes that its intellectual property estate
provides it with an important competitive advantage. it has
established a global network of attorneys, as well as branding,
advertising and licensing professionals, to procure, maintain,
protect, enhance and gain value from this estate.
table of contents
part i
item 1.business, continued
the company owns and is licensed under various patents, which
expire from time to time, covering many products, processes and
product uses. these patents protect many aspects of the
companys significant research programs and the goods and
services it sells. the actual protection afforded by these
patents varies from country to country and depends upon the
scope of coverage of each individual patent as well as the
availability of legal remedies in each country. the company owns
approximately 21,000 worldwide patents and approximately 16,000
worldwide patent applications. in 2007, the company was granted
about 600 u.s.patents and about 1,500 international
patents. through an increase in research and development
productivity, since 2000, the companys u.s.patent
filings have more than doubled and the number of
u.s.patents granted has increased more than 50 percent for
duponts five growth platforms and embryonic businesses.
the companys rights under its patents and licenses, as
well as the products made and sold under them, are important to
the company as a whole, and to varying degrees, important to
each reportable segment. for a discussion of the importance of
patents to pharmaceuticals, see the segment discussion on
page34 of this report.
the environment in which pioneer and the rest of the companies
within the seed industry compete is increasingly affected by new
patents, patent positions, patent lawsuits and the status of
various intellectual property rights. ownership of and access to
intellectual property rights, particularly those relating to
biotechnology and germplasm, are important to pioneer and its
competitors. no single patent owned by pioneer or its
competitors is essential to pioneers ability to compete.
however, pioneer will continue to address freedom to operate
issues by enforcing its own intellectual property rights,
challenging claims made by others and, where appropriate,
obtaining licenses to important technologies on commercially
reasonable terms. during 2007, pioneer entered into a business
agreement on corn herbicide tolerance and insect control trait
technologies with monsanto company. among other provisions,
modifications were made to the existing corn license agreements;
both parties agreed to exchange certain non-assert and other
intellectual property rights; and both parties obtained rights
to reference and access certain regulatory data and approvals in
which the other has certain interests. see the contractual
obligations table on page39 and note11 to the
consolidated financial statements for more information.
the company has approximately 2,000 unique trademarks for its
products and services and approximately 18,000 worldwide
registrations and applications for these trademarks. ownership
rights in trademarks do not expire if the trademarks are
continued in use and properly protected. the company has many
trademarks that have significant recognition at the consumer
retail level
and/or
business to business level. significant trademarks at the
consumer retail level include the dupont oval and
duponttm
(the dupont brand trademarks);
pioneer
brand seeds;
teflon
fluoropolymers, films, fabric protectors, fibers and
dispersions;
corian
surfaces;
kevlar
high strength material; and
tyvek
protective material. the company actively pursues licensing
opportunities for selected trademarks at the retail level.
seasonality
sales of the companys products in agriculture&
nutrition are affected by seasonal patterns.
agriculture& nutritions sales and earnings
performance is strongest in the first half of the year. the
segment generally operates at a loss during the third and fourth
quarters of the year. as a result of the seasonal nature of its
seed business, agriculture& nutritions
inventory is at its highest level at the end of the calendar
year and is sold down in the first and second quarters. trade
receivables in agriculture& nutrition are at a low
point at year-end and increase through the selling season to
peak at the end of the second quarter.
in general, businesses in the remaining segments are not
significantly affected by seasonal factors.
marketing
with the exception of
pioneer
brand seeds and
solae
soy proteins, most products are marketed primarily through
duponts sales force, although in some regions, more
emphasis is placed on sales through distributors.
pioneer
brand products are promoted through multiple marketing channels
in north america. in the corn and soybean markets of the
u.s.corn belt, products are sold through a specialized
force of independent sales representatives. in other north
american markets,
pioneer
products are marketed through distributors and crop input
retailers.
pioneer
products outside of north america are marketed through a network
of subsidiaries, joint ventures and independent
producer-distributors.
solae
isolated and functional soy proteins are marketed using a
combination of outside distributors, joint ventures and direct
sales.
table of contents
part i
item 1.business, continued
major
customers
the companys sales are not materially dependent on a
single customer or small group of customers. however,
collectively, coatings& color technologies and
performance materials have several large customers, primarily in
the automotive original equipment manufacturer (oem) industry.
the company has long-standing relationships with these customers
and they are considered to be important to the segments
operating results.
competition
the company competes on a variety of factors such as price,
product quality and performance or specifications, continuity of
supply, customer service and breadth of product line, depending
on the characteristics of the particular market involved and the
product or service provided.
major competitors include diversified industrial companies
principally based in the u.s., western europe, japan, china and
korea. in the aggregate, these competitors offer a wide range of
products from agricultural, commodity and specialty chemicals to
plastics, fibers and advanced materials. the company also
competes in certain markets with smaller, more specialized firms
who offer a narrow range of products or converted products that
functionally compete with the companys offerings.
agriculture& nutrition sells advanced plant genetics
through pioneer, principally for the global production of corn
and soybeans and thus directly competes with other seed and
plant biotechnology companies. agriculture& nutrition
also provides food safety equipment and soy-based food
ingredients in competition with other major grain and food
processors.
research and
development
the company conducts research in the u.s.at over 30 sites
at either dedicated research facilities or manufacturing plants.
the highest concentration of research is in the wilmington,
delaware area at several large research centers. among these,
the experimental station laboratories engage in investigative
and applied research, the chestnut run laboratories focus on
applied research and the stine-haskell research center conducts
agricultural product research and toxicological research to
assure the safe manufacture, handling and use of products and
raw materials.
other major research locations in the u.s.include marshall
lab in philadelphia, pennsylvania, and mt. clemens in mt.
clemens, michigan, both dedicated to coatings research; pioneer
research facilities in johnston, iowa; the solae company
facilities in st.louis, missouri; polymer research
facilities in richmond, virginia, and parkersburg, west
virginia; and electronic technology research facilities in
research triangle park, north carolina, towanda, pennsylvania,
and santabarbara, california.
dupont, reflecting the companys global interests, also
operates more than 20 additional research and development
facilities at locations outside the u.s., with major facilities
located in meyrin, belgium; wuppertal, germany; kingston,
canada; utsunomiya, japan; and shanghai, china. a new research
and development facility was opened in taiwan in 2006 to better
serve the integrated circuit market. additionally, in 2007, the
company announced that it plans to construct its first research
and development center in india. the center, which is located in
hyderabad, is expected to be fully operational in early 2008.
the objectives of the companys research and development
programs are to create new technologies, processes and business
opportunities in relevant fields, as well as to improve existing
products and processes. each segment of the company funds
research and development activities that support its business
mission. recently, the company has broadened its sustainability
commitments beyond environmental footprint reduction to include
market-driven targets for research and development investment.
the company is expanding its offerings addressing safety,
environment, energy and climate challenges in the global
marketplace by developing and commercializing renewable,
bio-based materials; advanced biofuels; energy-efficient
technologies; enhanced safety and protection products; and
alternative energy products and technologies. the goals are tied
directly to business growth, specifically to the development of
safer and environmentally improved products that enhance the
environmental profile of its traditional businesses for
duponts key global markets, including transportation,
building and construction, agriculture and food and
communications.
table of contents
part i
item 1.business, continued
the corporate research laboratories are responsible for
conducting research programs aligned with corporate strategy as
provided by the growth platforms. all research and development
activities are administered by senior research and development
management to ensure consistency with the business and corporate
strategy. the future of the company is not dependent upon the
outcome of any single research program.
additional information with respect to research and development,
including the amount incurred during each of the last three
fiscal years, is included in item7, managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations, on page21 of this report.
facility
security
dupont recognizes that the security and safety of its operations
are critical to its employees, neighbors and, indeed, to the
future of the company. as such, the company has merged chemical
site security into its safety core value where it serves as an
integral part of its long standing safety culture. physical
security measures have been combined with process safety
measures (including the use of inherently safer technology),
administrative procedures and emergency response preparedness
into an integrated security plan. the company has conducted
vulnerability assessments at operating facilities in the
u.s.and high priority sites worldwide and identified and
implemented appropriate measures to protect these facilities
from physical or cyber attacks. dupont is partnering with
carriers, including railroad, shipping and trucking companies,
to secure chemicals in transit.
in april 2007, the department of homeland security (dhs) issued
an interim final rule (rule) that establishes risk-based
performance standards for the security of u.s.chemical
facilities. covered chemical facilities are required to prepare
security vulnerability assessments that identify facility
security vulnerabilities and to develop and implement site
security plans that include measures satisfying the identified
risk-based performance standards. the rule contains associated
provisions addressing inspections and audits, recordkeeping, and
the protection of information that constitutes
chemical-terrorism vulnerability information. dhs can seek
compliance through the issuance of orders, including orders
assessing civil penalty and orders for the cessation of
operations.
in november of 2007, dhs finalized the list of chemicals
regulated by the rule and required facilities that have those
chemicals in specified quantities to register with dhs. those
facilities must provide information by which dhs will determine
if and how the facility will be covered by the rules
security requirements. duponts u.s.facilities have
submitted this information and are awaiting dhs
determination of coverage. once dhs has determined which dupont
facilities are covered, it will work with the company to
establish security expectations specific to each facility. as a
result, management will be able to better assess the rules
impact on the company at that time. however, the company has
already devoted substantial effort and resources in assessing
security vulnerabilities and taking steps to reinforce security
at its chemical manufacturing facilities. management expects
that these steps will fulfill most of the rules risk-based
performance standards.
environmental
matters
information related to environmental matters is included in
several areas of this report: (1)environmental proceedings
on pages
11-12,
(2)managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations on pages 25 and 41- 44 and
(3)notes1 and 19 to the consolidated financial
statements.
available
information
the company is subject to the reporting requirements under the
securities exchange act of 1934. consequently, the company is
required to file reports and information with the securities
exchange commission (sec), including reports on the following
forms: annual report on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
current reports on
form8-k,
and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934.
the public may read and copy any materials the company files
with the sec at the secs public reference room at
100fstreet, ne, washington, dc 20549. the public may
obtain information on the operation of the public reference room
by calling the sec at
1-800-sec-0330.
the sec also maintains an internet site at
table of contents
part i
item 1.business, continued
http://www.sec.gov
that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and
other information regarding issuers that file electronically
with the sec.
the companys annual report on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
current reports on
form8-k
and amendments to those reports are also accessible on the
companys website at
http://www.dupont.com
by clicking on the tab labeled investor center and
then on sec filings. these reports are made
available, without charge, as soon as is reasonably practicable
after the company files or furnishes them electronically with
the securities and exchange commission.
item1a.risk
factors
the companys operations could be affected by various
risks, many of which are beyond its control. based on current
information, the company believes that the following identifies
the most significant risk factors that could affect its
businesses. however, the risks and uncertainties the company
faces are not limited to those discussed below. additional risks
and uncertainties not presently known to the company or that the
company currently believes to be immaterial also could affect
its businesses. past financial performance may not be a reliable
indicator of future performance and historical trends should not
be used to anticipate results or trends in future periods.
price increases
for energy and raw materials could have a significant impact on
the companys ability to sustain and grow
earnings.
the companys manufacturing processes consume significant
amounts of energy and raw materials, the costs of which are
subject to worldwide supply and demand as well as other factors
beyond the control of the company. significant variations in the
cost of energy, which primarily reflect market prices for oil
and natural gas and raw materials affect the companys
operating results from period to period. when possible, the
company purchases raw materials through negotiated long-term
contracts to minimize the impact of price fluctuations.
additionally, the company enters into over-the-counter and
exchange traded derivative commodity instruments to hedge its
exposure to price fluctuations on certain raw material
purchases. the company has taken actions to offset the effects
of higher energy and raw material costs through selling price
increases, productivity improvements and cost reduction
programs. success in offsetting higher raw material costs with
price increases is largely influenced by competitive and
economic conditions and could vary significantly depending on
the market served. if the company is not able to fully offset
the effects of higher energy and raw material costs, it could
have a significant impact on the companys financial
results.
failure to
develop and market new products could impact the companys
competitive position and have an adverse effect on the
companys financial results.
the companys operating results are largely dependent on
its ability to renew its pipeline of new products and services
and to bring those products and services to market. this ability
could be adversely affected by difficulties or delays in product
development such as the inability to identify viable new
products, successfully complete research and development, obtain
relevant regulatory approvals, obtain intellectual property
protection, or gain market acceptance of new products and
services. because of the lengthy development process,
technological challenges and intense competition, there can be
no assurance that any of the products the company is currently
developing, or could begin to develop in the future, will
achieve substantial commercial success. sales of the
companys new products could replace sales of some of its
current products, offsetting the benefit of even a successful
product introduction.
the
companys results of operations could be adversely affected
by litigation and other commitments and contingencies.
the company faces risks arising from various unasserted and
asserted litigation matters, including, but not limited to,
product liability claims, patent infringement claims and
antitrust claims. the company has noted a nationwide trend in
purported class actions against chemical manufacturers generally
seeking relief such as medical monitoring, property damages,
off-site remediation and punitive damages arising from alleged
environmental torts without claiming present personal injuries.
various factors or developments can lead to changes in current
estimates of liabilities such as a final adverse judgment,
significant settlement or changes in applicable law. a future
table of contents
part i
item1a.risk factors, continued
adverse ruling or unfavorable development could result in future
charges that could have a material adverse effect on the
company. an adverse outcome in any one or more of these matters
could be material to the companys financial results.
in the ordinary course of business, the company may make certain
commitments, including representations, warranties and
indemnities relating to current and past operations, including
those related to divested businesses and issue guarantees of
third party obligations. if the company were required to make
payments as a result, they could exceed the amounts accrued,
thereby adversely affecting the companys results of
operations.
as a result of
the companys current and past operations, including
operations related to divested businesses, the company could
incur significant environmental liabilities.
the company is subject to various laws and regulations around
the world governing the environment, including the discharge of
pollutants and the management and disposal of hazardous
substances. as a result of its operations, including its past
operations and operations of divested businesses, the company
could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs,
third-party property damage or personal injury claims. the costs
of complying with complex environmental laws and regulations, as
well as internal voluntary programs, are significant and will
continue to be so for the foreseeable future. the ultimate costs
under environmental laws and the timing of these costs are
difficult to predict. the companys accruals for such costs
and liabilities may not be adequate because the estimates on
which the accruals are based depend on a number of factors
including the nature of the allegation, the complexity of the
site, site geology, the nature and extent of contamination, the
type of remedy, the outcome of discussions with regulatory
agencies and other potentially responsible parties (prps) at
multi-party sites and the number and financial viability of
other prps.
the
companys ability to generate sales from genetically
enhanced products, particularly seeds and other agricultural
products, could be adversely affected by market acceptance,
government policies, rules or regulations and
competition.
the company is using biotechnology to create and improve
products, particularly in its agriculture& nutrition
segment. demand for these products could be affected by market
acceptance of genetically modified products as well as
governmental policies, laws and regulations that affect the
development, manufacture and distribution of products, including
the testing and planting of seeds containing biotechnology
traits and the import of crops grown from those seeds.
the company competes with major global companies that have
strong intellectual property estates supporting the use of
biotechnology to enhance products, particularly in the
agricultural products and production markets. speed in
discovering and protecting new technologies and bringing
products based on them to market is a significant competitive
advantage. failure to predict and respond effectively to this
competition could cause the companys existing or candidate
products to become less competitive, adversely affecting sales.
changes in
government policies and laws could adversely affect the
companys financial results.
sales outside the u.s.constitute more than half of the
companys revenue. the company anticipates that
international sales will continue to represent a substantial
portion of its total sales and that continued growth and
profitability will require further international expansion,
particularly in emerging markets. the companys financial
results could be affected by changes in trade, monetary and
fiscal policies, laws and regulations, or other activities of
u.s.and
non-u.s.governments,
agencies and similar organizations. these conditions include but
are not limited to changes in a countrys or regions
economic or political conditions, trade regulations affecting
production, pricing and marketing of products, local labor
conditions and regulations, reduced protection of intellectual
property rights in some countries, changes in the regulatory or
legal environment, restrictions on currency exchange activities,
burdensome taxes and tariffs and other trade barriers.
international risks and uncertainties, including changing social
and economic conditions as well as terrorism, political
hostilities and war, could lead to reduced international sales
and reduced profitability associated with such sales.
table of contents
part i
item1a.risk factors, continued
economic factors,
including inflation and fluctuations in currency exchange rates,
interest rates and commodity prices could affect the
companys financial results.
the company is exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange
rates, interest rates and commodity prices. because the company
has significant international operations, there are a large
number of currency transactions that result from international
sales, purchases, investments and borrowings. the company
actively manages currency exposures that are associated with
monetary asset positions, committed currency purchases and sales
and other assets and liabilities created in the normal course of
business. failure to successfully manage these risks could have
an adverse impact on the companys financial position,
results of operations and cash flows.
business
disruptions could seriously impact the companys future
revenue and financial condition and increase costs and
expenses.
business disruptions, including supply disruptions, increasing
costs for energy, temporary plant
and/or power
outages and information technology system and network
disruptions, could seriously harm the companys operations
as well as the operations of its customers and suppliers.
although it is impossible to predict the occurrences or
consequences of any such events, they could result in reduced
demand for the companys products, make it difficult or
impossible for the company to deliver products to its customers
or to receive raw materials from suppliers, and create delays
and inefficiencies in the supply chain. the company actively
manages the risks within its control that could cause business
disruptions to mitigate any potential impact from business
disruptions regardless of cause including acts of terrorism or
war, and natural disasters. despite these efforts, the impact
from business disruptions could significantly increase the cost
of doing business or otherwise adversely impact the
companys financial performance.
inability to
protect and enforce the companys intellectual property
rights could adversely affect the companys financial
results.
intellectual property rights are important to the companys
business. the company endeavors to protect its intellectual
property rights in jurisdictions in which its products are
produced or used and in jurisdictions into which its products
are imported. however, the company may be unable to obtain
protection for its intellectual property in key jurisdictions.
additionally, the company has designed and implemented internal
controls to restrict access to and distribution of its
intellectual property, including confidential information and
trade secrets. despite these precautions, it is possible that
unauthorized parties may access and use such property. when
misappropriation is discovered, the company reports such
situations to the appropriate governmental authorities for
investigation and takes measures to mitigate any potential
impact.
item1b.unresolved
staff comments
none.
table of contents
part i
item
2.properties
the companys corporate headquarters are located in
wilmington, delaware. the companys manufacturing,
processing, marketing and research and development facilities,
as well as regional purchasing offices and distribution centers
are located throughout the world.
information regarding research and development facilities is
incorporated by reference to item1, business-research and
development. additional information with respect to the
companys property, plant and equipment and leases is
contained in notes10, 19 and 24 to the consolidated
financial statements.
the company has investments in property, plant and equipment
related to global manufacturing operations. collectively there
are over 300 sites in total. the more significant sites are
listed by their applicable segment(s) as set forth below:
agriculture&
nutrition
u.s.
mobile, al; valdosta, ga; elpaso, il; gibson city, il;
pryor, ok; manati, puerto rico; memphis, tn; laporte, tx
asia pacific
toyko, japan
europe
leper, belgium; aahrus, denmark; cerney, france and asturias,
spain
latin america
camacari, brazil; esteio, brazil; lerma, mexico
coatings&
color technologies
u.s.
edgemoor, de; starke, fl; mount clemens, mi; delisle, ms; new
johnsonville, tn; houston, tx; front royal, va
asia pacific
kuan yin, taiwan
europe
mechelen, belgium; wuppertal, germany
latin america
sao paulo, brazil; altamira, mexico
electronic&
communication technologies
u.s.
hayward, ca; santabarbara, ca; torrance, ca;
fortmadison, ia; louisville, ky; fayetteville, nc;
research triangle park, nc; deepwater, nj; parlin, nj; buffalo,
ny; rochester, ny; circleville, oh; towanda, pa; manati, puerto
rico; bayport, tx; corpuschristi, tx; laporte, tx; logan,
ut; parkersburg, wv
asia pacific
changshu, china; hsinchu, china; shenzhen, china; madurai,
india; chiba, japan; shimizu, japan; taoyuan, taiwan; tokai,
japan
europe
luxembourg; mechelen, belgium; neu isenburg, germany; dordrecht,
netherlands; bristol, uk; east kilbride, uk; ruabon, uk
performance
materials
u.s.
newark, de; laplace, la; fayetteville, nc; deepwater, nj;
circleville, oh; charleston, sc; florence, sc; chattanooga, tn;
old hickory, tn; beaumont, tx; laporte, tx; orange, tx;
victoria, tx; hopewell, va; richmond, va; parkersburg, wv
asia pacific
shenzen, china; chiba, japan; gifu, japan; ibaraki, japan;
utsunomiya, japan; ulsan, korea; singapore
europe
antwerp, belgium; mechelen, belgium; uentrop, germany;
luxembourg; dordrecht, netherlands
latin america
berazategui, argentina; tlalnepantna, mexico
table of contents
part i
item
2.properties,
continued
safety&
protection
u.s.
red lion, de; wurtland, ky; burnside, la; laplace, la;
pascagoula, ms; deepwater, nj; linden, nj; buffalo, ny; niagara
falls, ny; forthill, oh; memphis, tn; old hickory, tn;
baytown, tx; beaumont, tx; elpaso, tx; james river, va;
richmond, va; belle, wv
asia pacific
guangzhou, china; ulsan, korea
europe
villers-st. paul, france; luxembourg; asturias, spain; sudbury,
united kingdom
canada
thetford mines
the companys plants and equipment are well maintained and
in good operating condition. sales as a percent of capacity were
over 80percent in 2007, 2006 and 2005. properties are
primarily owned by the company; however, certain properties are
leased. no title examination of the properties has been made for
the purpose of this report and certain properties are shared
with other tenants under long-term leases.
item3.legal
proceedings
litigation
benlate
information related to this matter is included in note19
to the consolidated financial statements under the heading
benlate.
pfoa:
environmental and litigation proceedings
for purposes of this report, the term pfoa means collectively
perfluorooctanoic acid and its salts, including the ammonium
salt and does not distinguish between the two forms. information
related to this matter is included in note19 to the
consolidated financial statements under the heading pfoa.
elastomers
antitrust matters
information related to this matter is included in note19
to the consolidated financial statements under the heading
elastomers antitrust matters.
environmental
proceedings
acid plants new
source review enforcement action
in 2003, the u.s.environmental protection agency (epa)
issued a notice of violation and finding of
violation for the companys forthill sulfuric
acid plant in ohio. the epa conducted a review of capital
projects at the plant over the past twenty years. based on its
review, the epa believes that two of the projects triggered a
requirement to meet the new source performance standards for
sulfuric acid plants and that the company should have sought a
permit under the new source review requirements of the clean air
act (caa). in july 2004, the epa issued a notice of violation
for the james river sulfuric acid plant in virginia with similar
allegations. the companys sulfuric acid plants in
louisiana and kentucky use similar technology.
in july 2007 a consent decree was reached under which the
company paid a total of $4,125,000 in civil penalties to the
u.s.federal government, louisiana, ohio and virginia.
under the decree, dupont must retrofit its burnside plant in
louisiana by september1, 2009 at an estimated cost of at
least $66million. in addition, by march1, 2012, the
other three plants must be retrofitted at an estimated total
cost of at least $87million or shut down.
belle spent acid
plant new source review notice of violation
on august2, 2007, the epa issued a notice and finding of
violation to dupont and lucite international regarding the spent
acid regeneration unit at the belle plant in south charleston,
west virginia. dupont sold the unit to imperial chemical
industries, plc (ici)in 1993, who sold it to lucite in
1999. dupont has operated the unit since it was built in 1964,
including after the sale to ici, through the present. the notice
alleges 5 projects in the time period 1988 to 1996 should have
triggered the new source review or new source performance
standard requirements of caa. if so, these would have required
retrofit to best available technology. dupont and
lucite are contesting the allegations. if the epa declines to
reconsider its findings it may bring an enforcement action in
the courts
table of contents
part i
item3.legal
proceedings,
continued
seeking retrofit and penalties. lucite has notified the company
that it intends to seek indemnity from dupont if this occurs.
gibson city,
illinois
the epa has alleged that the solae company violated the
caas new source review regulations and certain prevention
of significant deterioration requirements at its plant in gibson
city, illinois. the solae company, a majority-owned venture with
bunge limited, was formed in 2003. the epa has proposed a
settlement of this matter that would include sites located in
indiana, ohio, oklahoma and tennessee, some of which are wholly
owned by dupont, in addition to the gibson city site. the
epas proposed settlement includes a penalty of $350,000
and supplemental environmental projects involving expenditures
of at least $500,000. the company and the solae company are
negotiating with the epa and u.s.department of justice
(doj).
pascagoula,
mississippi
in october 2002, the first chemical corporation (fcc) plant in
pascagoula, mississippi experienced an explosion at one of its
process unitsthe mononitrotoluene
unitstill number 1 (mnt still). the unit
overheated, pressure built up in the column and a significant
release occurred. no significant injuries occurred, nor was
there any significant environmental harm as a result of the
incident.
at the time of the october 2002 incident, fcc was not affiliated
with dupont; however, dupont was in final negotiations for the
purchase of chemfirst, inc., of which fcc was a subsidiary.
after an extensive investigation of the incident by fcc and
dupont, dupont completed the purchase in november 2002.
two years after the incident, the epa began an investigation
under the caas prevention of accidental
releases general duty of care
provisionscaa 112(r). over the last three
years, the epa has requested significant documentation regarding
the incident and the rebuild of the mnt still. the epa also
requested, and fcc agreed to an independent third-party
process safety management audit of the fcc facility,
seeking information on pre-incident documents as well as the
post-incident repair and replacement of the mnt still.
the epa has referred the matter to doj for enforcement action
against fcc under the caa. the epa/doj and dupont are currently
engaged in settlement discussions to resolve the proposed caa
112(r) enforcement action. management cannot predict the outcome
of these discussions at this time.
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
table of contents
part i
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders,
continued
executive
officers of the registrant
the following is a list, as of february18, 2008, of the
companys executive officers:
executive
age
officer since
chairman of the board of directors and chief executive
officer:
charles o. holliday, jr.
other executive officers:
james c. borel,
senior vice president  global human resources
thomas m. connelly, jr.,
executive vice president and chief innovation officer
richard r. goodmanson,
executive vice president and chief operating officer
jeffrey l. keefer,
executive vice president and chief financial officer
ellen j. kullman,
executive vice president
stacey j. mobley,
senior vice president and chief administrative officer and
general counsel
the companys executive officers are elected or appointed
for the ensuing year or for an indefinite term and until their
successors are elected or appointed.
charles o. holliday,jr. joined dupont in 1970, and
has advanced through various manufacturing and supervisory
assignments in product planning and marketing. he is a former
president, executive vice president, president and
chairman-dupont asia pacific. mr.holliday became an
executive officer in 1992 when he was appointed senior vice
president. he became chief executive officer on february1,
1998, and chairman of the board of directors on january1,
1999.
james c. borel joined dupont in 1978, and held a variety
of product and sales management positions for agricultural
products. in 1993, he transferred to tokyo, japan with
agricultural products as regional manager, north asia and was
appointed regional director, asia pacific in 1994. in 1997, he
was appointed regional director, north america and was appointed
vice president and general manager-dupont crop protection later
that year. in january 2004, he was named to his current
position, senior vice president-dupont global human resources.
thomas m. connelly,jr. joined dupont in 1977 as a
research engineer. since then, mr.connelly has served in
various research and plant technical leadership roles, as well
as product management and business director roles.
mr.connelly served as vice president and general
manager-dupont fluoroproducts from 1999 until september 2000,
when he was named senior vice president and chief science and
technology officer. in june 2006, mr.connelly was named
executive vice president and chief innovation officer.
richard r. goodmanson joined dupont in 1999 as executive
vice president and chief operating officer. prior to joining
dupont, mr.goodmanson was president and chief executive
officer of america west airlines from 1996 to 1999. he was
senior vice president of operations for frito-lay inc. from 1992
to 1996, and he was a principal at mckinsey& company,
inc. from 1980 to 1992.
jeffrey l. keefer joined dupont in 1976 as a financial
analyst in corporate finance. in 1982, he accepted a field sales
assignment and was appointed customer service manager in 1985.
he advanced through various sales and management assignments and
in february 1999 he was named vice president and general
managerdupont
table of contents
part i
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders,
continued
titanium technologies. in january 2004, he was named group vice
presidentdupont performance materials. in june
2006, he was named executive vice
presidentdupont finance and chief financial
officer.
ellen j. kullman joined dupont in 1988 as marketing
manager and progressed through various roles as global business
director and was named vice president and general manager of
white pigment& mineral products in 1995. in 2000,
ms.kullman was named group vice president and general
manager of several businesses and new business development. she
became group vice president-dupont safety& protection
in 2002. in june 2006, ms.kullman was named executive vice
president and assumed leadership of marketing& sales
along with safety and sustainability.
stacey j. mobley joined duponts legal department in
1972. he was named director of federal affairs in the
companys washington,d.c. office in 1983, and was
promoted to vice president-federal affairs in 1986. he returned
to the companys wilmington, delaware headquarters in march
1992 as vice president-communications in external affairs and
was promoted to senior vice president in may 1992. he was named
chief administrative officer in may 1999 and general counsel in
november 1999.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities
market for
registrants common equity and related stockholder
matters
the companys common stock is listed on the new york stock
exchange, inc. (symbol dd)and certain
non-u.s.exchanges.
the number of record holders of common stock was 91,717 at
december31, 2007, and 91,405 at january31, 2008.
holders of the companys common stock are entitled to
receive dividends when they are declared by the board of
directors. while it is not a guarantee of future conduct, the
company has continuously paid a quarterly dividend since the
fourth quarter 1904. dividends on common stock and preferred
stock are usually declared in january, april, july and october.
when dividends on common stock are declared, they are usually
paid mid march, june, september and december. preferred
dividends are paid on or about the 25thof january, april,
july and october. the stock transfer agent and registrar is
computershare trustcompany, n.a.
the companys quarterly high and low trading stock prices
and dividends per common share for 2007 and 2006 are shown below.
market prices
per share
dividend
high
low
declared
fourth quarter
$
50.42
$
42.25
$
0.41
third quarter
53.90
45.75
0.37
second quarter
53.25
48.44
0.37
first quarter
53.67
47.58
0.37
fourth quarter
$
49.68
$
42.48
$
0.37
third quarter
43.49
38.82
0.37
second quarter
45.75
39.53
0.37
first quarter
43.50
38.52
0.37
issuer purchases
of equity securities
there were no purchases of the companys common stock
during the three months ended december31, 2007.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities,
continued
stock performance
graph
the following graph presents the cumulative five-year total
return for the companys common stock compared with the
s&p 500 stock index and a self-constructed peer group of
companies. the peer group companies for the year ended
december31, 2007 are alcoa inc.; basf corporation; the dow
chemical company; eastman kodak company; ford motor company;
general electric company; hewlett-packard company; minnesota
mining and manufacturing company; monsanto company; motorola,
inc.; ppg industries, inc.; rohm and haas company; and united
technologies corporation.
stock performance
graph
12/31/2002
12/31/2003
12/31/2004
12/31/2005
12/31/2006
12/31/2007
dupont
$
$
$
$
$
$
s&p 500
$
$
$
$
$
$
peer group
$
$
$
$
$
$
the graph assumes that the value of dupont common stock, the
s&p 500 stock index and the peer group of companies was
each $100 on december31, 2002 and that all dividends were
reinvested. the peer group is weighted by market capitalization.
table of contents
partii
item6.selected
financial data
(dollars in millions, except per share)
summary of operations
net sales
$
29,378
$
27,421
$
26,639
$
27,340
$
26,996
income before income taxes and minority interests
$
3,743
$
3,329
$
3,563
$
1,442
$
provision for (benefit from) income taxes
$
$
$
1,470
$
(329
)
$
(930
)
income before cumulative effect of changes in accounting
principles
$
2,988
$
3,148
$
2,056
$
1,780
$
1,002
net income
$
2,988
$
3,148
$
2,056
$
1,780
$
basic earnings per share of common stock
income before cumulative effect of changes in accounting
principles
$
3.25
$
3.41
$
2.08
$
1.78
$
1.00
net income
$
3.25
$
3.41
$
2.08
$
1.78
$
0.97
diluted earnings per share of common stock
income before cumulative effect of changes in accounting
principles
$
3.22
$
3.38
$
2.07
$
1.77
$
0.99
net income
$
3.22
$
3.38
$
2.07
$
1.77
$
0.96
financial position at year-end
working capital
$
4,619
$
4,930
$
4,986
$
7,272
$
5,419
total assets
$
34,131
$
31,777
$
33,291
$
35,632
$
37,039
borrowings and capital lease obligations
short-term
$
1,370
$
1,517
$
1,397
$
$
6,017
long-term
$
5,955
$
6,013
$
6,783
$
5,548
$
4,462
stockholders equity
$
11,136
$
9,422
$
8,962
$
11,377
$
9,781
general
for the year
purchases of property, plant& equipment and
investments in affiliates
$
1,698
$
1,563
$
1,406
$
1,298
$
1,784
depreciation
$
1,158
$
1,157
$
1,128
$
1,124
$
1,355
research and development (r&d) expense
$
1,338
$
1,302
$
1,336
$
1,333
$
1,349
average number of common shares outstanding (millions)
basic
diluted
1,003
1,000
dividends per common share
$
1.52
$
1.48
$
1.46
$
1.40
$
1.40
at year-end
employees (thousands)
closing stock price
$
44.09
$
48.71
$
42.50
$
49.05
$
45.89
common stockholders of record (thousands)
includes a cumulative effect of a
change in accounting principle charge of $29million or
$0.03 per share, basic and diluted, relating to the adoption of
statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no.143,
accounting for asset retirement obligations.
on december31, 2006, the
company adopted sfasno.158, employers
accounting for defined benefit pension and other postretirement
plans, an amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and
132(r). total assets and stockholders equity were
reduced by $2,159million and $1,555million,
respectively, as a result of such adoption.
includes borrowings and capital
lease obligations classified as liabilities held for sale.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
cautionary
statements about forward-looking statements
this report contains forward-looking statements which may be
identified by their use of words like plans,
expects, will, anticipates,
intends, projects, estimates
or other words of similar meaning. all statements that address
expectations or projections about the future, including
statements about the companys strategy for growth, product
development, market position, expenditures and financial results
are forward-looking statements.
forward-looking statements are based on certain assumptions and
expectations of future events. the company cannot guarantee that
these assumptions and expectations are accurate or will be
realized. for some of the important factors that could cause the
companys actual results to differ materially from those
projected in any such forward-looking statements see the risk
factors discussion set forth under parti, item1a
beginning on page7.
overview
dupont has been successfully executing its three growth
strategiesputting science to work,
leveraging the power of one dupont and going where the growth
is. in 2007, approximately 1,200 new products were
commercialized, approximately 2,000 new u.s.patent
applications were filed and more than one third of 2007 sales
were derived from products introduced in the last 5years.
the company again reduced fixed costs as a percent of net sales.
in 2007, over sixty percent of the companys sales were to
customers outside of the united states. the company achieved
18percent growth in the emerging markets of europe, asia
pacific and latin america.
in january 2008, the company outlined goals and objectives
beyond 2008 through 2010 in a five point plan. the company sees
potential for double digit earnings growth driven by advances in
several strategic areas:
new science for growing agriculture
marketswith demand for protein rising
rapidly, global food production will have to double between now
and 2025 on virtually the same amount of land currently in
production. as one of the worlds largest producers of corn
and soy seed and crop protection products, dupont is bringing to
market more efficient and cost-effective control systems for
weeds, insects and fungus to boost farm productivity, quality
and yield. the company anticipates that new products such as
optimumtm
gattm
traits and
rynaxyprtm
insecticide, will provide significant growth.
growing demand for safety&
protectionpeople want to feel safer and
more secure at home, on the job, in their
carseverywhere. the companys long
experience and $6billion base business in advanced
materials such as
kevlar,
nomex
and
tyvek
have resulted in a broad offering of products and services that
address this growing global need. in 2007, the company announced
a new $500million
kevlar
brand fiber production facility in south carolina, which came on
the heels of capacity expansions for
nomex
flame-resistant fibers. in 2008, the company will continue to
use its science and growth investments to take advantage of the
opportunity it sees for attractive growth in its
safety& protection segment.
springboard position in emerging
marketsthe companys rapid top line
growth in emerging markets is a key factor in counter-balancing
softness in the north american automotive and u.s.housing
markets. business unit leaders in the performance materials,
coatings& color technologies and
electronic& communication technologies segments are
succeeding in generating strong growth in the emerging markets
of asia pacific, central and eastern europe, and latin america.
extend cost productivity gainsdupont
continues to reduce fixed costs as a percent of net sales. cost
savings projects have offset inflation in personnel costs and
have provided funding for a large number of growth investments.
dupont is focused on continuing to generate cost productivity
gains as a mechanism for funding growth.
continue development of applied
biosciencesscience and innovation are
critical to the companys success. ongoing development and
commercialization of dupont applied
biosciencestm
products will continue through at least 2010 with increasing
intensity.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
analysis of
operations
(dollars in millions)
net sales
$
29,378
$
27,421
$
26,639
2007 versus 2006consolidated net sales
for 2007 were $29.4billion, up 7percent. this growth
was principally the result of an 11percent increase in
sales outside of the u.s., reflecting in part the benefit of a
weaker u.s.dollar (usd), which added 3percent to
worldwide sales. worldwide volumes and local selling prices each
increased 2percent. sales in the u.s.increased
1percent reflecting 3percent higher selling prices,
partially offset by 2percent lower volume. the decrease in
u.s.sales volume was primarily due to lower demand for the
companys products related to housing and automotive
production markets. sales in canada and latin america increased
15percent, primarily due to a 10percent volume
increase reflecting a substantial increase in sales of seed and
crop protection products in south america.
the table below shows a regional breakdown of 2007 consolidated
net sales based on location of customers and percentage
variances from prior year:
percent change due to:
percent
change vs.
local
currency
(dollars in billions)
net sales
price
effect
volume
worldwide
$
29.4
united states
11.3
-
(2
)
europe
8.8
asia pacific
5.2
canada& latin america
4.1
2006 versus 2005consolidated net sales
for 2006 were $27.4billion, up 3percent. the
increase reflects 2percent higher local selling prices and
2percent higher net volume partially offset by a
1percent reduction in worldwide sales attributable to the
transfer of certain elastomers assets in 2005. local selling
prices increased across all regions and business segments.
during 2006, significant volume increases in key growth regions,
particularly asia pacific and latin america, along with modest
growth in europe, more than offset lower u.s.volume.
volume declines in the u.s.are largely attributable to
lower demand in housing and automotive production markets. these
declines more than offset the recovery in the u.s.of
titanium dioxide, industrial chemical and packaging polymer
sales lost in 2005 as a result of business disruptions due to
hurricanes katrina and rita.
the table below shows a regional breakdown of 2006 consolidated
net sales based on location of customers and percentage
variances from prior year:
percent change due to:
percent
change vs.
local
currency
(dollars in billions)
net sales
price
effect
volume
other1
worldwide
$
27.4
-
(1
)
united states
11.1
-
-
(1
)
(2
)
europe
7.9
(1
)
(1
)
asia pacific
4.8
(2
)
(3
)
canada& latin america
3.6
-
percentage change due to the
absence in 2006 of sales from elastomers businesses transferred
to dow on june30, 2005. sales attributable to the
transferred assets were $386million in 2005.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
(dollars in millions)
other income, net
$
1,275
$
1,561
$
1,852
2007 versus 2006other income, net,
decreased $286million versus 2006. this reduction is
primarily due to an impairment charge of $165million to
write down the companys investment in a polyester films
joint venture, a decrease of $81million in net pretax
exchange gains, and a decrease in miscellaneous items of $239
offset by higher
cozaar/hyzaar
income of $136million (see page34 for
pharmaceuticals segment information and note2 to the
consolidated financial statements).
the decrease in miscellaneous items resulted from the absence of
2006 benefits of $90million for the reversal of accrued
interest related to the favorable settlement of certain
prior-year tax contingencies and $76million of insurance
recoveries from its insurance carriers. of the $76million,
$61million related to costs, including outside counsel
fees and expenses and settlements paid over the past twenty
years as part of asbestos litigation matters. during this twenty
year period, dupont has been served with thousands of lawsuits
alleging injury from exposure to asbestos on dupont premises.
most of these claims have been disposed of through trial,
dismissal or settlement. management believes it is remote that
the outcome of remaining or future asbestos litigation matters
will have a material adverse effect on the companys
consolidated financial position or liquidity. these asbestos
related insurance recoveries were reflected in cash provided by
operating activities within the companys consolidated
statements of cash flows. the remaining $15million is part
of a total recovery of $143million relating to insurance
recoveries associated with damages to the companys
facilities suffered as a result of hurricane katrina in 2005.
the majority of the hurricane katrina recovery was included in
cost of goods sold and other operating charges in the
consolidated income statements. no amounts were received from
insurance carriers for damages suffered by the company as a
result of hurricane rita.
2006 versus 2005other income, net
decreased $291million versus 2005. this reduction is
primarily due to a $407million decrease in net pretax
exchange gains (see page46 for a discussion of the
companys program to manage currency risk and note2
to the consolidated financial statements). in 2006, the company
recorded $76million of insurance recoveries in other
income, net from its insurance carriers.
additional information related to the companys other
income, net is included in note2 to the consolidated
financial statements.
(dollars in millions)
cost of goods sold and other operating charges
$
21,565
$
20,440
$
19,683
as a percent of net sales
%
%
%
2007 versus 2006cost of goods sold and
other operating charges (cogs) for the year 2007 were
$21.6billion, versus $20.4billion in 2006, an
increase of 6percent. cogs was 73percent of net
sales for 2007 versus 75percent for the year 2006. the
2percentage point reduction principally reflects the
absence of 2006 charges for restructuring, the effects of the
companys productivity initiatives and a current year
benefit from the weaker u.s.dollar due to currency
exchange rate changes which increased sales at a higher rate
than the rate they increased cogs. partly offsetting these
factors were increases in raw material and finished product
distribution costs, as well as the absence of a 2006 benefit of
$128million in insurance recoveries.
the 2006 restructuring programs included the elimination of
approximately 3,200 positions and redeployment of about
400employees in excess positions to the extent possible.
the company recorded a net charge of $326million in 2006
related to employee separation costs and asset impairment
charges. this included $184million to provide severance
benefits for approximately 2,800employees involved in
manufacturing, marketing and sales, administrative and technical
activities. additional details related to these programs are
contained in the individual segment reviews and in note4
to the consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
payments from operating cash flows to terminated employees as a
result of the 2006 plans totaled $77million during 2007
and $32million during 2006. annual pretax cost savings of
about $125million per year are associated with the
coatings& color technologies program, approximately
$53million of which is reflected in cogs. cumulative
savings of approximately 80percent and 35percent was
realized in 2007 and 2006, respectively, with the remainder
expected to be realized in 2008.
2006 versus 2005cogs for the year 2006
was $20.4billion, versus $19.7billion in 2005, up
4percent. cogs was 75percent of sales in 2006 versus
74percent in 2005. the 1percentage point increase in
cogs as a percent of sales principally reflects higher raw
material costs not entirely covered by selling price increases
and higher costs for restructuring plans discussed above.
in 2006, the company recorded a benefit to cogs for
$128million for insurance recoveries related to the
property damage suffered as a result of hurricane katrina. in
2005, the company recorded charges of $160million related
to the
clean-up and
restoration of manufacturing operations, as well as the
write-off of inventory and plant assets that were destroyed by
hurricanes katrina and rita. hurricane related charges reduced
segment earnings as follows: coatings& color
technologies$116million; performance
materials$17million; and
safety& protection$27million.
the company recorded a net charge of $326million in 2006
related to employee separation costs and asset impairment
charges as discussed above. in 2005, the company evaluated
capital investment requirements at its louisville, kentucky
facility and the declining demand for the neoprene products
produced at the facility. as a result, the company has made
plans to consolidate neoprene production at its upgraded
facility in laplace, louisiana. on december31, 2007, the
company initiated the shutdown, abatement and dismantlement
process at the louisville facility. a charge of $34million
was recorded in 2005 reflecting severance and related costs for
approximately 275employees, principally at the louisville
site. additionally, a benefit of $13million was recorded
in 2005 to reflect changes in estimates related to employee
separations that were implemented in earlier years.
(dollars in millions)
selling, general and administrative expenses
$
3,364
$
3,224
$
3,223
as a percent of net sales
%
%
%
selling, general and administrative (sg&a) expenses
increased $140million in 2007 as compared to 2006. the
increase is primarily due to increased global commissions, and
selling and marketing infrastructure investments in the
agriculture& nutrition segment.
(dollars in millions)
research and development expense
$
1,338
$
1,302
$
1,336
as a percent of net sales
%
%
%
research and development expense (r&d) as a percent of
sales remained constant over the three-year period. higher
r&d in 2007 for accelerated biotechnology trait research
and development in the agriculture& nutrition segment
was partially offset by a decrease in r&d in the
coatings& color technologies segment as a result of
consolidating research facilities as a part of its 2006 business
transformation plan. expenditures in 2006 were consistent with
spending by segment in 2005 and reflect concentration in
expansion of seed traits, breeding advancement and product
development within the agriculture& nutrition
segment, as well as activities to support the other growth
platforms.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
(dollars in millions)
interest expense
$
$
$
interest expense decreased $30million in 2007 compared to
2006 and $58million in 2006 versus 2005. these decreases
were primarily due to lower average borrowing levels and higher
capitalized interest, partially offset by slightly higher
average interest rates.
(dollars in millions)
separation activitiestextiles&
interiors
$
-
$
-
$
(62
)
on april30, 2004, the company sold a majority of the net
assets of the then textiles& interiors segment
(invista) to subsidiaries of koch industries, inc. (koch).
during 2005, the company sold its investments in three
affiliated companies to koch and its investment in a fourth
affiliated company to its equity partner, resulting in a net
benefit of $62million. although the transfer of these
affiliates completed the sale to koch, the company has
significant continuing involvement with invista as a result of
long-term purchase and supply contracts and a long-term contract
manufacturing agreement under which invista manufactures and
supplies certain products for the company. in january 2006, the
company sold its interest in a textiles& interiors
equity affiliate to its equity partner for proceeds of
$14million thereby completing the sale of all of the net
assets of textiles& interiors. for more information
related to the textiles& interiors separation, see
note5 to the consolidated financial statements.
(dollars in millions)
provision for income taxes
$
$
$
1,470
effective income tax rate
20.0
%
5.9
%
41.3
%
in 2007, the company recorded a tax provision of
$748million which included a benefit of $108million
related to tax settlements offset by net tax expense in other
operating results (see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements.)
in 2006, the company recorded a tax provision of
$196million which included a benefit of $272million
related to tax settlements and a $186million benefit for
reversal of tax valuation allowances related to the net deferred
tax assets of certain foreign subsidiaries due to the sustained
improved business performance in these subsidiaries. these tax
benefits were offset by net tax expense in other operating
results (see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements).
in 2005, the company recorded a tax provision of
$1,470million which included $483million of tax
expense on exchange gains associated with the companys
policy of hedging the foreign currency denominated monetary
assets and liabilities of its operations and $292million
of tax expense related to the repatriation of $9.1billion
under the american jobs creation act of 2004 (ajca). ajca
created a temporary incentive for u.s.corporations to
repatriate accumulated income earned abroad by providing an
85percent dividends received deduction for certain
dividends from controlled foreign corporations provided that
repatriated cash from such accumulated earnings is reinvested in
the u.s.pursuant to a domestic reinvestment plan.
the companys current estimate of the 2008 effective income
tax rate is about 26percent, excluding tax effects of
exchange gains and losses which can not be reasonably estimated
at this time. see note6 for additional detail on items
that significantly impact the companys effective tax
rates. in the past three years, these items have generally
included a lower effective tax rate on international operations
and tax settlements.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
(dollars in millions)
net income
$
2,988
$
3,148
$
2,056
2007 versus 2006net income for 2007
decreased 5percent versus 2006, primarily due to the
higher effective tax rate, as well as the decrease in other
income. these decreases were partially offset by a
7percent increase in net sales, the absence of the
restructuring charges taken in 2006 and a favorable foreign
currency exchange impact.
2006 versus 2005net income for 2006
increased 53percent versus 2005, reflecting higher selling
prices, higher sales volumes, lower fixed costs and an increase
in other income, net, partly offset by higher raw material
costs. selling prices increased year over year in each quarter
of 2006 and were higher for each platform and for each region
for the full year. net income for 2006 also included benefits
from tax settlements, reversals of tax valuation allowances and
insurance recoveries. these benefits were partly offset by
charges for restructuring and asset impairments. 2005 results
included significant hurricane related charges as well as tax
expenses associated with the repatriation of cash under ajca.
corporate
outlook
the companys current 2008 earnings outlook is a range of
$3.35 to $3.55 per share based on the expectation of continued
revenue growth in emerging markets and earnings growth across
all of the growth platforms. new product acceleration, mix
enrichment, pricing discipline and continued cost and capital
productivity gains across the company are expected to be
additional contributing factors. the companys 2008 outlook
is positive; however, it is moderated by continued weakness in
u.s.housing and north american automotive markets and
continued escalation of energy, ingredient and transportation
costs.
accounting
standards issued not yet adopted
in september 2006, the financial accounting standards board
(fasb) issued statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)
no.157, fair value measurements,
(sfas157)which addresses how companies should
measure fair value when required for recognition or disclosure
purposes under gaap. the standards provisions will be
applied to existing accounting measurements and related
disclosures that are based on fair value. sfas157 does not
require any new fair value measurements. the standard applies a
common definition of fair value to be used throughout gaap, with
emphasis on fair value as a market based measurement
versus an entity-specific measurement, and establishes a
hierarchy of fair value measurement methods. the disclosure
requirements are expanded to include the extent to which
companies use fair value measurements, the methods and
assumptions used to measure fair value and the effect of fair
value measurements on earnings. sfas157 is effective for
fiscal years beginning after november15, 2007. the new
standards provisions applicable to the company will be
applied prospectively beginning january1, 2008. the fasb,
on february12, 2008, issued fasb staff position (fsp)
fas157-2.
this fsp permits a delay in the effective date of sfas157
to fiscal years beginning after november15, 2008, for
nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities, except for
items that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the
financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually).
the delay is intended to allow the board and constituents
additional time to consider the effect of various implementation
issues that have arisen, or that may arise, from the application
of sfas157. on february14, 2008, the fasb issued fsp
fas157-1
to exclude sfas13, accounting for leases, and its related
interpretive accounting pronouncements from the scope of
sfas157. management expects that adoption of sfas157
will not have a material effect on the companys financial
position, liquidity or results of operations.
in december 2007, the fasb issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.141 (revised
2007)business combinations (sfas141r)
which replaces fasb statement no.141. sfas141r
addresses the recognition and measurement of identifiable assets
acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests in
business combinations. sfas141r also requires disclosure
that enables users of the financial statements to better
evaluate the nature and financial effect of business
combinations. sfas141r applies prospectively to business
combinations for which the acquisition date is on or after the
beginning of the first annual reporting period beginning on or
after december15, 2008. sfas141r will be adopted by
the company on january1, 2009. the company is currently
evaluating the impact of adoption on its consolidated financial
statements.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
in december 2007, the fasb issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.160, noncontrolling
interests in consolidated financial
statementsan amendment of accounting research
bulletinno.51 (sfas160)which
changes the accounting and reporting for minority interests and
for the deconsolidation of a subsidiary. it also clarifies that
a third-party, non-controlling interest in a consolidated
subsidiary is an ownership interest in the consolidated entity
that should be reported as equity in the consolidated financial
statements. sfas160 also requires disclosure that clearly
identifies and distinguishes between the interests of the parent
and the interests of the non-controlling owners. sfas160
is effective for fiscal years beginning after december15,
2008. sfas160 will be adopted by the company on
january1, 2009. the company is currently evaluating the
impact of adoption on its consolidated financial statements.
critical
accounting estimates
the companys significant accounting policies are more
fully described in note1 to the consolidated financial
statements. management believes that the application of these
policies on a consistent basis enables the company to provide
the users of the financial statements with useful and reliable
information about the companys operating results and
financial condition.
the preparation of the consolidated financial statements in
conformity with gaap requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts, including, but not
limited to, receivable and inventory valuations, impairment of
tangible and intangible assets, long-term employee benefit
obligations, income taxes, restructuring liabilities,
environmental matters and litigation. managements
estimates are based on historical experience, facts and
circumstances available at the time and various other
assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. the company
reviews these matters and reflects changes in estimates as
appropriate. management believes that the following represents
some of the more critical judgment areas in the application of
the companys accounting policies which could have a
material effect on the companys financial position,
liquidity or results of operations.
long-term
employee benefits
accounting for employee benefit plans involves numerous
assumptions and estimates. discount rate and expected return on
plan assets are two critical assumptions in measuring the cost
and benefit obligation of the companys pension and other
long-term employee benefit plans. management reviews these two
key assumptions annually as of december31st. these and
other assumptions are updated periodically to reflect the actual
experience and expectations on a plan specific basis as
appropriate. as permitted by gaap, actual results that differ
from the assumptions are accumulated on a plan by plan basis and
to the extent that such differences exceed 10percent of
the greater of the plan obligations or the applicable plan
assets, the excess is amortized over the average remaining
working life of current employees.
about 80percent of the companys benefit obligation
for pensions and essentially all of the companys other
long-term employee benefit obligations are attributable to the
benefit plans in the u.s.the company utilizes published
long-term high quality bond indices to determine the discount
rate at the balance sheet date. where commonly available, the
company considers indices of various durations to reflect the
timing of future benefit payments.
within the u.s., the company establishes strategic asset
allocation percentage targets and appropriate benchmarks for
significant asset classes with the aim of achieving a prudent
balance between return and risk. strategic asset allocations in
other countries are selected in accordance with the laws and
practices of those countries. where appropriate, asset-liability
studies are also taken into consideration. the long-term
expected return on plan assets in the u.s.is based upon
historical real returns (net of inflation) for the asset classes
covered by the investment policy and projections of inflation
over the long-term period during which benefits are payable to
plan participants.
in determining annual expense for the principal
u.s.pension plan, the company uses a market-related value
of assets rather than their fair value. accordingly, there may
be a lag in recognition of changes in market valuation. as a
result, changes in the fair market value of assets are not
immediately reflected in the companys calculation of net
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
pension cost. the following table shows the market-related value
and fair market value of plan assets for the principal
u.s.pension plan:
(dollars in billions)
market-related value of assets
$
19.3
$
17.5
fair market value of plan assets
$
19.1
$
18.3
for plans other than the principal u.s.pension plan,
pension expense is typically determined using the fair value of
assets. the fair value of assets in all pension plans was
$22.6billion at december31, 2007, and the related
projected benefit obligations were $22.2billion. in
addition, obligations under the companys unfunded other
long-term employee benefit plans were $3.8billion at
december31, 2007.
the following table highlights the potential impact on the
companys pretax earnings due to changes in certain key
assumptions with respect to the companys pension and other
long-term employee benefit plans, based on assets and
liabilities at december31, 2007:
1/2percentage point
1/2percentage point
(dollars in millions)
increase
decrease
discount rate
$10
$(3)
expected rate of return on plan pension assets
(110)
additional information with respect to pension and other
long-term employee benefits expenses, liabilities and
assumptions is discussed under long-term employee
benefits beginning on page40.
environmental
matters
dupont accrues for remediation activities when it is probable
that a liability has been incurred and a reasonable estimate of
the liability can be made. the companys estimates are
based on a number of factors, including the complexity of the
geology, the nature and extent of contamination, the type of
remedy, the outcome of discussions with regulatory agencies and
other potentially responsible parties (prps) at multiparty sites
and the number of and financial viability of other prps. the
company has recorded a liability of $357million on the
consolidated balance sheet as of december31, 2007; these
accrued liabilities exclude claims against third parties and are
not discounted.
considerable uncertainty exists with respect to environmental
remediation costs and, under adverse changes in circumstances,
the potential liability may range up to two to three times the
amount accrued. much of this liability results from the
comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability
act (cercla, often referred to as the superfund), the resource
conservation and recovery act (rcra) and similar state laws.
these laws require the company to undertake certain
investigative and remedial activities at sites where the company
conducts or once conducted operations or at sites where
company-generated waste was disposed. the accrual also includes
a number of sites identified by the company for which it is
probable that environmental remediation will be required, but
which are not currently the subject of cercla, rcra or state
enforcement activities. federal and state authorities may seek
fines and penalties for violation of the various laws and
governmental regulations and could, among other things, impose
liability on the company for cleaning up the damage resulting
from company-generated waste disposal. over the next two
decades, the company could incur significant costs under both
cercla and rcra.
remediation activities vary substantially in duration and cost
from site to site. these activities and their associated costs,
depend on the mix of unique site characteristics, evolving
remediation technologies, diverse regulatory agencies and
enforcement policies, as well as the presence or absence of
prps. therefore, it is difficult to develop precise estimates of
future site remediation costs.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
legal
contingencies
the companys results of operations could be affected by
significant litigation adverse to the company, including product
liability claims, patent infringement claims and antitrust
claims. the company records accruals for legal matters when the
information available indicates that it is probable that a
liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be
reasonably estimated. management makes adjustments to these
accruals to reflect the impact and status of negotiations,
settlements, rulings, advice of counsel and other information
and events that may pertain to a particular matter. predicting
the outcome of claims and lawsuits and estimating related costs
and exposure involves substantial uncertainties that could cause
actual costs to vary materially from estimates. in making
determinations of likely outcomes of litigation matters,
management considers many factors. these factors include, but
are not limited to, the nature of specific claims including
unasserted claims, the companys experience with similar
types of claims, the jurisdiction in which the matter is filed,
input from outside legal counsel, the likelihood of resolving
the matter through alternative dispute resolution mechanisms and
the matters current status. considerable judgment is
required in determining whether to establish a litigation
accrual when an adverse judgment is rendered against the company
in a court proceeding. in such situations, the company will not
recognize a loss if, based upon a thorough review of all
relevant facts and information, management believes that it is
probable that the pending judgment will be successfully
overturned on appeal. a detailed discussion of significant
litigation matters is contained in note19 to the
consolidated financial statements.
income
taxes
the breadth of the companys operations and the global
complexity of tax regulations require assessments of
uncertainties and judgments in estimating the ultimate taxes the
company will pay. the final taxes paid are dependent upon many
factors, including negotiations with taxing authorities in
various jurisdictions, outcomes of tax litigation and resolution
of disputes arising from federal, state and international tax
audits. the resolution of these uncertainties may result in
adjustments to the companys tax assets and tax
liabilities. it is reasonably possible that changes from future
completed tax examinations could be significant when compared to
the companys global unrecognized tax benefits, however due
to the uncertainty regarding the timing of completion of these
audits and the possible outcomes, a current estimate of the
range of increase or decrease that may occur within the next
twelve months cannot be made.
deferred income taxes result from differences between the
financial and tax basis of the companys assets and
liabilities and are adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax
laws when changes are enacted. valuation allowances are recorded
to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not
that a tax benefit will not be realized. significant judgment is
required in evaluating the need for and magnitude of appropriate
valuation allowances against deferred tax assets. the
realization of these assets is dependent on generating future
taxable income, as well as successful implementation of various
tax planning strategies. for example, changes in facts and
circumstances that alter the probability that the company will
realize deferred tax assets could result in recording a
valuation allowance, thereby reducing the deferred tax asset and
generating a deferred tax expense in the relevant period. in
some situations these changes could be material.
at december31, 2007, the company had a net deferred tax
asset balance of $4,750million, net of valuation allowance
of $1,424million. realization of these assets is expected
to occur over an extended period of time. as a result, changes
in tax laws, assumptions with respect to future taxable income
and tax planning strategies could result in adjustments to these
assets.
valuation of
assets
assessment of the potential impairment of property, plant and
equipment, goodwill, other purchased intangible assets and
investments in affiliates is an integral part of the
companys normal ongoing review of operations. testing for
potential impairment of long-lived assets is significantly
dependent on numerous assumptions and reflects managements
best estimates at a particular point in time. the dynamic
economic environments in which the companys businesses
operate and key economic and business assumptions with respect
to projected selling prices, market growth and inflation rates,
can significantly affect the outcome of impairment tests.
estimates based on these assumptions may differ significantly
from actual results. changes in factors and assumptions used in
assessing potential impairments can have a significant impact on
the existence and magnitude of impairments, as
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
well as the time in which such impairments are recognized.
future changes in the environment and the economic outlook for
the assets being evaluated could also result in additional
impairment charges. information with respect to the
companys significant accounting policies on long-lived
assets is included in note1 to the consolidated financial
statements.
segment
reviews
segment sales include transfers. segment pretax operating income
(ptoi) is defined as operating income before income taxes,
minority interests, exchange gains (losses), corporate expenses
and net interest. a reconciliation of segment sales to
consolidated net sales and segment ptoi to income before income
taxes and minority interests for 2007, 2006 and 2005 is included
in note25 to the consolidated financial statements.
effective january1, 2007, the company
changed the alignment of certain businesses within
agriculture& nutrition, performance materials and
other. these changes were made to better align the businesses
with the particular growth platform that management believes
will provide more opportunity for synergy and technology
development in future periods. the 2006 and 2005 segment
information below has been reclassified to reflect the 2007
organizational structure.
agriculture&
nutrition
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
6.8
$
$
6.0
$
$
6.1
$
agriculture& nutrition leverages the companys
technology, customer relationships and industry knowledge to
improve the quantity, quality and safety of the global food
supply. land available for worldwide agricultural production is
increasingly limited. therefore, increases in production will
need to be achieved principally through improving crop yields
and productivity rather than through increases in planted
acreage. agriculture& nutrition delivers a broad
portfolio of products and services that are specifically
targeted to achieve gains in crop yields and productivity,
including
pioneer
brand seed products and well-established brands of insecticides,
fungicides and herbicides. the segment operates across the food
value chain from inputs for producing agriculture products to
global production and distribution of soy-based food ingredients
to food quality diagnostic testing equipment. research and
development focuses on leveraging technology to increase grower
productivity and enhance the value of grains and soy through
improved seed traits, superior germplasm and the effective use
of insecticides, herbicides and fungicides.
agriculture& nutrition includes the companys
wholly owned subsidiary, pioneer hi-bred international, inc.
(pioneer), which is also the worlds leading seed brand and
a world leader in improving crop yields with hybrid and varietal
seeds that improve grower yields and provide insect protection
and herbicide tolerance. the principal products of pioneer are
hybrid seed corn and soybean seed. sales of
pioneer
brand seeds increased 19percent in 2007 with gains in corn
seed sales globally, partially offset by lower north american
soybean seed sales on a decline in north american planted
acreage. in 2007, farmers in north america continued to
demonstrate a preference for corn hybrids containing
biotechnology traits and pioneer had a limited supply of these
products. as a result, corn market share in north america is at
30percent. pioneer will have increased supply of leading
products containing biotechnology traits in 2008 and expects to
maintain its present market share. in international operations,
pioneer increased market share in key segments supported by
strong product performance. pioneer benefited from the global
launch of approximately 25 new soybean varieties and 130 new
pioneer
brand corn hybrids that include new combinations of corn borer,
corn rootworm and weed management traits highlighted by the
expansion of the
herculex1
family of traits.
1registered
trademark of dow agrosciences llc
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
during the third quarter 2007, pioneer entered into a business
agreement on corn herbicide tolerance and insect control trait
technologies with monsanto company. among other provisions,
modifications were made to the existing corn license agreements;
both parties agreed to exchange certain non-assert and other
intellectual property rights; and both parties obtained rights
to reference and access certain regulatory data and approval in
which the other party has certain interests. refer to
note11 to the consolidated financial statements for
further description of this agreement.
agriculture& nutrition also serves the global
production agriculture industry with crop protection products in
the grain and specialty crop sectors, forestry and vegetation
management. principal crop protection products are herbicides,
fungicides, insect control products and plant growth regulators.
the segment continued to expand its presence in fruit and
vegetable specialty markets and continues to expand product
offerings in the professional pest control market. additionally,
the segment operates within the specialty food ingredients
market, including soy proteins and lecithins through its
majority-owned venture with bunge limited, the solae company.
in 2006, the segment launched a restructuring plan to increase
investment in plant genetics, biotechnology and other growth
opportunities while consolidating manufacturing assets,
technology centers and marketing strategies in its nutrition and
crop protection businesses. the segment recorded a charge of
$122million in the fourth quarter 2006 for employee
separations and asset impairments associated with this
investment and streamlining plan. the plan includes the closure
of manufacturing units and the elimination of approximately
1,500 positions. operating costs savings of approximately
$100million per year will be reinvested into the seed
business (see note4 to the consolidated financial
statements). during 2007, operating costs savings of
$40million were realized, which partially offset the
growth investment in the seed business.
2007 versus 2006sales of
$6.8billion were 14percent higher reflecting
9percent higher usd selling prices and a 5percent
increase in volume. higher usd selling prices reflected a richer
mix of corn and soybean seed, and crop protection herbicides and
fungicides. volume increases were driven by corn seed sales in
north america, herbicides in europe and fungicides in latin
america, partially offset by a decrease in the sale of soybean
seed on lower planting acreage in north america.
2007ptoi was $894million versus $604million in
2006. 2006 ptoi included a $122million restructuring
charge. in addition, 2007 ptoi benefited from sales volume and
price gains, partially offset by higher production costs across
most of the segment and the growth investment in the seed
business.
2006 versus 2005sales of
$6.0billion were 1percent lower reflecting slightly
lower usd selling prices and volumes. lower selling prices
reflected declines in the crop protection market partially
offset by prices for a richer mix in corn and soybean seed.
volume declines were driven by lower corn seed sales in north
america, specialty products in india and herbicide sales in
north america and europe, partially offset by increases in the
sale of soybean seed. 2006 included some earlier than
anticipated seed sales for the 2007 planting season in europe.
2006ptoi was $604million versus $875million in
2005. the decline in 2006 ptoi reflected the charge of
$122million described above. in addition, 2006 ptoi
reflected the sales decline and higher production costs across
most of the segment, slightly offset by income related to
technology transfers, licensing agreements and asset sales.
outlookin 2008, the segment
anticipates continued ptoi growth through increased pioneer corn
value offerings, including stacked traits and seed treatments in
the u.s.and canada. pioneer will build on their north
american product offerings with the addition of approximately 30
new soybean varieties and 60 new
pioneer
brand corn hybrids. in international operations, pioneer expects
continued market share gains supported by strong product
performance. pioneer also expects continued market share gains
in key soybean markets including the u.s., canada and brazil.
the segments introduction of new crop protection products
is projected to drive volume gains, particularly in europe and
latin america, and higher benefits from the 2006 restructuring
program are expected to be realized. higher production and raw
material costs and continued growth investments in research,
sales and marketing will be moderating factors.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
coatings&
color technologies
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
6.6
$
$
6.3
$
$
6.1
$
coatings& color technologies is one of the
worlds leading automotive coatings suppliers and the
worlds largest manufacturer of titanium dioxide white
pigments. products offered include high performance liquid and
powder coatings for automotive oems, the automotive aftermarket
and general industrial applications, such as coatings for heavy
equipment, pipes and appliances and electrical insulation. the
company markets its refinish products using the
duponttm,
standox,
spies
hecker
and
nason
brand names.
standox
and spies
hecker
are focused on the high-end automotive aftermarkets, while
nason
is primarily focused on economy coating applications. the
segments broad line of
duponttm
ti-pure
titanium dioxide products, in both slurry and powder form, serve
the coatings, plastic and paper industries.
the segments titanium tetrachloride business has moved
from a startup business to an established, growing venture,
shipping product globally. by mid-2008, the business plans to
complete construction and begin operation of a $30million
titanium tetrachloride facility at its titanium dioxide plant in
tennessee.
the key markets in which coatings& color technologies
operates continued to grow in 2007, with more significant growth
in europe and asia pacific. global demand for titanium dioxide
white pigment was strong in 2007 with global market volumes up
about 5percent from 2006.
sales for refinish products increased in all regions. the oem
market realized growth in latin america and asia pacific,
partially offsetting declines in the u.s.and canada. this
reflects the lower 2007 north american builds of automobiles and
light trucks. powder coatings sales increased in all regions,
more significantly in asia pacific, u.s.and europe.
worldwide sales in electrical insulation and metal coatings
markets continued to improve.
2007 versus 2006sales of
$6.6billion were up 5percent, reflecting about
4percent higher usd selling prices for the segment, as
well as a 1percent increase in volume. usd selling prices
were higher across a majority of the segments products.
the increase in volume was primarily attributable to the sales
of titanium dioxide, particularly in europe and asia pacific.
this increase was partially offset by declines in volume for
products sold to automotive oem producers, primarily in north
america and europe. volumes for sales of refinish products were
relatively flat as compared to 2006.
ptoi in 2007 of $840million increased from
$817million in 2006. the ptoi improvement was primarily
the result of higher revenue driven by higher usd selling prices
and benefits realized from the 2006 restructuring program,
partially offset by higher raw material and transportation
costs. ptoi in 2006 included a net charge of $132million
for restructuring and $30million primarily for accelerated
depreciation related to the transformation plan that was
initiated in the first quarter 2006 (see note4 to the
consolidated financial statements). these charges were partially
offset by $142million in insurance proceeds, primarily
related to the hurricane damages incurred in 2005.
2006 versus 2005sales of
$6.3billion were up 4percent, reflecting about
2percent higher usd selling prices for the segment. an
additional 2percent increase from volume was primarily
realized in the pigments business, reflecting strong global
demand as well as the first quarter startup of the delisle,
mississippi plant following hurricane katrina. higher selling
prices reflected concerted efforts within the segment to
increase prices for the majority of its products as part of its
efforts to offset the impact of higher raw material costs and
the impact of lower global oem automotive volumes.
ptoi in 2006 of $817million increased from
$536million in 2005. lower fixed costs in both years and
higher volumes in pigments contributed to the improved 2006
earnings. ptoi in 2006 included a net charge of
$132million for restructuring and $30million
primarily for accelerated depreciation. 2006 ptoi also included
$142million in insurance proceeds, primarily related to
the hurricane damages suffered in 2005. 2005 ptoi included
charges of
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
$116million related to the
clean-up and
restoration of manufacturing operations, as well as the
write-off of inventory and plant assets that were destroyed by
hurricanes.
outlooksales in 2008 are expected to
increase modestly, reflecting emerging market growth and pricing
actions. industry demand for titanium dioxide is expected to
moderate in 2008, in line with more moderate global economic
growth of about 2percent. competitive conditions in the
global coatings industry will continue to provide a challenging
operating environment in 2008. modest growth is expected for
refinish markets in mature economies while strong growth is
expected to continue in emerging markets. profitability of
coatings sold to automotive oem producers is highly dependent
upon volume at specific plants the company services. global
automotive industry builds in 2008 are expected to be slightly
higher than 2007 with moderate growth in asia pacific and latin
america, partially offset by slightly lower levels in north
america. significant segment ptoi growth is expected based upon
sales growth and cost productivity gains.
electronic&
communication technologies
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
3.8
$
$
3.6
$
$
3.4
$
electronic& communication technologies provides a
broad range of advanced materials for the electronics industry,
flexographic printing and color communication systems and a wide
range of fluoropolymer and fluorochemical products. the segment
also continues to pursue development activities related to
displays and alternative energy.
in the electronics industry, dupont is a leading supplier of
electronic and advanced display materials. the company offers a
broad portfolio of ceramic, flexible and rigid organic circuit
materials; materials for semiconductor fabrication and
packaging; and a wide range of products for advanced displays.
the segments products enable increased functionality and
lower costs for electronic and communications devices.
electronic& communication technologies is the market
leader in flexographic printing and black pigmented ink serving
the packaging and commercial printing industries. its offerings
include
duponttm
cyrel
and
cyrel
fasttm
flexographic printing systems. dupont is the worlds
leading supplier of solvent-free thermal flexographic
platemaking technologies, with a broad array of patented
products and equipment.
the segment also includes a portfolio of industrial and
specialty fluorochemicals and fluoropolymers that are sold into
the refrigeration, insulation, aerosol propellants, fire
extinguishants, telecommunications, aerospace, automotive,
electronics, chemical processing and housewares industries.
electronic& communication technologies leverages
duponts strong materials and technology base to target
growth opportunities in electronics, fluoropolymers,
fluorochemicals, packaging graphics, ink-jet and photovoltaic
materials. in semiconductor fabrication, packaging and
interconnect, the segment is extending and broadening its
portfolio of materials to address critical needs in the
industry, e.g., chemical mechanical planarization for
semiconductor manufacture, flex circuitry and embedded passives
enabling miniaturization. in the rapidly growing market for flat
panel displays, the segment continues to be a leading materials
supplier for plasma displays. in addition, the segment is
developing new innovative technologies for liquid crystal
displays, such as thermal color filters and display films, while
continuing to invest in developing materials technologies for
organic light-emitting diode (oled) displays and field emission
displays. in fluoropolymers and fluorochemicals, the segment
continues to pursue product renewal innovations such as next
generation refrigerants, while broadening the scope of
applications into high growth areas such as photovoltaics. in
packaging graphics, products such as
cyrelfasttm
have rapidly grown, solidifying the segments market
leadership position. also, dupont is maintaining its leadership
position in black pigmented inks for ink-jet applications.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
2007 versus 2006sales of
$3.8billion were up 6percent versus 2006, reflecting
5percent volume growth and 1percent higher usd
selling prices. the volume growth was primarily due to increased
demand for fluoroproducts and packaging graphics. sales growth
was strongest outside the u.s.
ptoi in 2007 was $594million, an increase of
3percent compared to 2006. this increase reflects
5percent sales volume growth, as well as the benefit of
$53million related to a gain on a land sale and inventory
valuation adjustments. these increases were partially offset by
higher ingredient and transportation costs, as well as increased
fixed cost from growth initiatives.
2006 versus 2005sales of
$3.6billion increased about 5percent over 2005,
reflecting 2percent higher usd prices coupled with a
3percent improvement in volume. price improvements reflect
higher metals prices primarily for microcircuit materials.
higher volumes reflect increased demand for fluoroproducts and
electronic materials. sales growth was strongest outside the
u.s.ptoi in 2006 was $577million versus
$558million in 2005. earnings growth in 2006 resulted from
improved volume, modest pricing improvement and continued
productivity gains. 2005 ptoi included a gain of
$48million on the sale of the companys remaining
interest in dupont photomasks, inc.
outlookfor 2008, moderate sales growth
is expected with gains in electronic materials, fluoropolymers,
and packaging graphics. the segments ptoi is expected to
reflect moderate sales growth for 2008 versus 2007, modestly
offset by investments in new applications, emerging markets and
technologies. this segment manufactures products that could be
affected by uncertainties associated with pfoa matters. see the
discussion on page44 under the subheading pfoa.
performance
materials
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
6.6
$
$
6.2
$
$
6.1
$
performance materials provides productive, higher performance
polymer materials, systems and solutions to improve the
uniqueness, functionality and profitability of their
customers offerings. performance materials delivers a
broad polymer-based materials product portfolio, including
thermoplastic and thermoset engineering polymers that are
primarily used by customers to fabricate components for
mechanical and electrical systems, as well as specialized resins
and films used in packaging and industrial applications,
sealants and adhesives, sporting goods and interlayers for
laminated safety glass. key brands include
duponttm
zytel
nylon resins,
delrin
acetal resins,
hytrel
polyester thermoplastic elastomer resins,
tynex
filaments,
surlyn
resins,
sentryglas
plus and
butacite
laminate interlayers,
mylar
and
melinex
polyester films,
kalrez
perfluoroelastomer and
viton
fluoroelastomers.
the key markets served by the segment include the automotive oem
and associated after-market industries, as well as electrical,
electronics, packaging, construction and consumer durable goods.
the segments core competencies are polymer science and
applications development focusing on substituting traditional
materials with new materials that offer performance, durability,
aesthetics and weight reduction advantages. other areas of focus
include new applications and processing materials into
innovative parts and systems. a recent example of this core
innovation capability is the introduction of
sorona
and
hytrel
resins based on renewable resources which have the performance
attributes of high performance engineering resins but are based
on plant feedstock.
in 2007, certain businesses were realigned to the performance
materials segment from the agriculture& nutrition
segment. as a result of reclassifying the 2006 segment
information to reflect the 2007 organizational structure,
performance materials results in 2006 reflect a $72million
restructuring charge related to businesses that were originally
included in the 2006 agriculture& nutrition
restructuring plan (see note4 to the consolidated
financial statements).
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
on june30, 2005, dupont completed a transaction with dow
related to dupont dow elastomers llc (dde), a 50/50 joint
venture. dow acquired from dde certain assets related to the
engage,
nordel
and
tyrin
businesses. upon the completion of this transaction, the
remaining elastomers business became a wholly owned subsidiary
of dupont and was renamed dupont performance elastomers, llc. in
response to a long-term declining demand for the polychloroprene
products and the anticipated capital investment requirements at
the louisville, kentucky facility, the company is consolidating
production at its upgraded laplace, louisiana facility. on
december31, 2007, the company initiated the shutdown,
abatement and dismantlement process at the louisville facility.
in 2005, the company recorded a restructuring charge of
$34million, reflecting severance and related costs for
approximately 275employees. cash payouts of
$25million are largely expected to be paid in 2008. annual
cost reductions related to ceasing neoprene production at
louisville and consolidating production at laplace are expected
to offset reduced revenue related to declining demand.
2007 versus 2006sales of
$6.6billion were 7percent higher than 2006
reflecting 8percent higher usd selling prices, partly
offset by 1percent lower volume. sales volume declines
reflect the impact of ingredients shortages, temporary operating
unit shutdowns and softness in north america, principally in the
automotive markets, partly offset by volume improvements in
latin america, europe and asia.
2007ptoi increased 12percent to $626. 2007 ptoi
included an impairment charge of $165million to write down
the companys investment in a polyester films joint
venture. the impairment resulted from several factors, including
adverse changes in market conditions and the rapid rise in
oil-related raw material costs, which have had a negative impact
on the profitability on the ventures operations in north
america and europe. ptoi in 2006 included a $72 restructuring
charge. improvement in 2007 ptoi was driven by improved pricing,
which reflected both the offset of the ingredient cost increases
seen during the year and improved product sales mix, and
positive currency benefits, offset in part by the weaker volume.
the segment is involved in the elastomers antitrust matters and
recorded a net $20 charge in 2007 related to these matters (see
note19 to the consolidated financial statements).
2006 versus 2005sales of
$6.2billion were 2percent higher than 2005
reflecting 3percent higher usd selling prices, partly
offset by 1percent decline in volume. sales volume
reflects the year over year impact of the businesses transferred
to dow at june30, 2005. excluding from 2005 the sales
related to assets transferred to dow ($386million), sales
volumes were up reflecting stronger business environment in asia
and europe and the recovery from the segments business
interruption due to the 2005 hurricanes.
ptoi in 2006 was $559million compared to $515million
in 2005. 2006 ptoi included the $72million restructuring
charge. 2005 ptoi included a $17million hurricane charge,
$47million in operating income related to certain dde
assets sold, a $25million gain on sale of these dde assets
and a charge of $34million related to the planned
consolidation of the companys neoprene operations at its
laplace, louisiana facility.
outlookglobal automotive industry
builds in 2008 are expected to be slightly higher than 2007 with
moderate growth in asia pacific and latin america, partially
offset by slightly lower levels in north america. however, the
half year pattern is expected to be the reverse of 2007 with
higher production in the second half of 2008. global packaging
market growth is expected to remain at current levels. the
residential construction market in north america is expected to
continue to be weak through 2008, but it is anticipated that the
electrical and electronics markets will continue to improve. the
2008 outlook also assumes a second half softening from a weak
petrochemical cycle. revenue growth is expected to continue
through volume growth and higher usd selling prices in 2008.
ptoi is expected to increase, benefitting from higher revenue,
price increases, improved fixed cost performance and
customer-driven innovations for products and processes. the
level of earnings improvements in 2008 will depend on offsetting
the continued high intermediate feedstock costs with price
increases and further productivity gains.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
safety&
protection
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
5.6
$
1,199
$
5.5
$
1,080
$
5.1
$
safety& protection satisfies the growing global needs
of businesses, governments and consumers for solutions that make
life safer, healthier and more secure. by uniting market-driven
science with the strength of highly regarded brands such as
kevlar,
tyvek
and
nomex,
safety& protection has built a unique presence in the
marketplace since its inception in 2002.
the segments businesses serve customers in diverse markets
that include construction, transportation, communications,
industrial chemicals, oil and gas, electric utilities,
automotive, manufacturing, defense, homeland security and safety
consulting.
in addition to serving its existing customer base,
safety& protection is investing in the future by
expanding into emerging markets. over the past two years the
segment has achieved strong double-digit growth in greater
china, india, eastern europe and latin america.
safety& protection is focusing its efforts globally
on four major value propositions where it has a distinct
competitive advantage: protecting lives, safe and durable
buildings, protecting critical processes and protecting the
environment.
duponttm
kevlar
and
nomex
hold strong positions in the life protection markets due to
continued demand for body armor and personal protective gear for
the military, law enforcement personnel, firefighters and other
first responders, as well as for workers in the oil and gas
industry and in emerging regions. global demand for products
that prevent disease and improve productivity in the food,
health care and industrial markets continue to create growth
opportunities for the segments clean and disinfect
offerings. additionally, the surfaces protection businesses
continue to offer new products that meet demand for sustainable
solutions.
in 2007, dupont announced a $500million investment at its
cooper river site near charleston, sc, to significantly expand
production of
duponttm
kevlar
brand fiber for industrial and military uses as well as
investments in related polymer production. the company also
announced a multi-product, multi-region expansion plan to
increase worldwide capacity of
duponttm
nomex.
the company expects to invest more than $100million in the
three-part expansion plan for
nomex;
the first phase was completed in 2007.
safety& protection continues to strengthen and
enhance the building envelope and building interiors with
offerings that improve comfort, energy efficiency, air quality
and protection from the elements. in 2007, the business
introduced 40 new products globally, including new
corian
surfaces and the metalized
tyvek
product family. the business is also taking advantage of
substantial growth opportunities in china, india and eastern
europe while focusing even more on commercial construction and
remodeling markets.
through its consulting services businesses, safety&
protection continued to help organizations worldwide reduce
workplace injuries and fatalities while improving operating
costs, productivity and quality. dupont is a leader in the
safety consulting field, selling training products, as well as
consulting services. additionally, safety& protection
is dedicated to clean air, clean fuel, and clean water with
offerings that help reduce sulfur and other emissions, formulate
cleaner fuels, or dispose of liquid waste. its goal is to help
maintain business continuity and environmental compliance for
companies in the refining and petrochemical industries, as well
as for government entities.
2007 versus 2006sales of
$5.6billion were 3percent higher than last year, due
to higher usd selling prices across all businesses within the
platform. sales volumes remained relatively flat as higher sales
of
kevlar
and
nomex
were offset by decreased sales of products for
u.s.residential construction markets.
ptoi in 2007 was $1,199million, an increase of
11percent over the prior year. the increased earnings were
primarily due to higher sales of
kevlar
and
nomex.
2006 ptoi included a $47million asset impairment charge
related to an industrial chemical asset held for sale, partially
offset by a $33million benefit from insurance proceeds.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
2006 versus 2005sales of
$5.5billion were up 7percent due to 5percent
higher usd prices and 2percent higher volumes. all
businesses in the platform grew sales year over year with the
strongest growth in chemical solutions and aramids. segment
sales experienced slower u.s.growth as a result of shifts
in demand for construction, but were offset by higher sales
growth in other regions, especially emerging regions.
ptoi in 2006 was $1,080million, up 9percent from
$994million in the prior year. the increase in ptoi
reflects pricing gains and tight fixed cost control. 2006 ptoi
included a $47million asset impairment charge related to
an industrial chemical asset held for sale, partially offset by
a $33million benefit from insurance proceeds.
outlooksafety& protection
will continue to drive growth in its product lines globally with
the strength of its brands. u.s.and global demand for
kevlar
and
nomex
is expected to remain strong. the personal protection, medical
packaging and medical fabrics market segments are expected to
grow during the year. volume declines in the
u.s.residential construction market will continue, but are
expected to be mitigated by continued growth, in commercial,
remodel and
non-u.s.construction
markets. overall, continued revenue growth and moderate earnings
growth in 2008 is expected based on continued market
penetration, the introduction of new products and technologies
and continued investment in its growth initiatives.
pharmaceuticals
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
-
$
$
-
$
$
-
$
on october1, 2001, dupont pharmaceuticals was sold to the
bristol-myers squibb company. dupont retained its interest in
cozaar
(losartan potassium) and
hyzaar
(losartan potassium with hydrochlorothiazide). these drugs were
discovered by dupont and developed in collaboration with merck
and are used in the treatment of hypertension. the
u.s.patents covering the compounds, pharmaceutical
formulation and use for the treatment of hypertension, including
approval for pediatric use, will expire in 2010. dupont has
exclusively licensed worldwide marketing and manufacturing
rights for
cozaar
and
hyzaar
to merck. pharmaceuticals receives royalties and net proceeds as
outlined below. merck is responsible for manufacturing,
marketing and selling
cozaar
and
hyzaar.
pharmaceuticals
cozaar/hyzaar
income is the sum of two parts derived from a royalty on
worldwide contract net sales linked to the exclusivity term in a
particular country, and a share of the profits from north
american sales and certain markets in europe, regardless of
exclusivity term. patents and exclusivity have already started
to expire and the u.s.exclusivity for
cozaar
ends in april 2010. the worldwide agreement terminates when the
following conditions are met: (i)the canadian exclusivity
ends in 2013, and (ii)north american sales fall below a
certain level. therefore, absent any major changes in the
markets, the company expects its income to take its first
significant step-down in 2010, and from that year on, continue
to step-down each year to zero when the contract ends, which is
expected to be after 2013. the company cannot predict the
magnitude of the earnings step-down in each year. in general,
management expects a traditional sales and earnings decline for
a drug going off patent in the pharmaceutical industry.
outlookdupont and merck continue to
support
cozaar
and
hyzaar
with clinical studies designed to identify additional
therapeutic benefits for patients with hypertension and
co-morbid conditions. the company expects the ongoing
cozaar/hyzaar
collaboration to continue to be an important contributor to
earnings until the u.s.patents expire in 2010. thereafter,
earnings are expected to decline significantly as outlined above.
other
the company includes embryonic businesses not included in the
growth platforms, such as applied biosciences and nonaligned
businesses in other. applied biosciences is focused on the
development of biotechnology solutions using biology, chemistry,
materials science and engineering in an integrated fashion to
serve our customers. specific growth projects across the company
globally are consolidated within applied biosciences to
capitalize on the market
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
opportunities and technology needs in this high-growth industry,
including crop-based products and technologies, the biorefinery
initiative with the u.s.department of energy and the
development of advanced biofuels technologies through a
collaboration with bp p.l.c. the first advanced biofuels product
from this partnership will be biobutanol.
dupont partnered with tate& lyle plc to produce
1,3-propanediol
(bio-pdotm)
using a proprietary fermentation and purification process based
on corn sugar.
bio-pdotm
is the key building block for
duponttm
sorona
polymer and
duponttm
cerenoltm
polyols, two new families of renewably sourced products. it is
also being marketed for use as an ingredient in nearly a dozen
direct applications ranging from industrial to personal care
uses. the first commercial-scale plant to manufacture
bio-pdotm
began production in november 2006, marking the beginning of
commercial availability of the companys bio-based pipeline.
a life cycle assessment of the production of nylon-6 polymer
versus the production of renewably sourced
sorona
with
bio-pdotm
shows significant environmental benefits. the
sorona
process uses 30percent less energy than nylon-6
manufacturing. greenhouse gas emissions from the
sorona
operations are 63percent lower than nylon-6 manufacturing
including bio-based content stored in the product.
nonaligned businesses include activities and costs associated
with
benlate
fungicide and other discontinued businesses and, since january
2005, activities related to the remaining assets of
textiles& interiors. in 2005, the company completed
the transfer of three equity affiliates to koch and sold its
interest in another equity affiliate. in january 2006, the
company completed the sale of its interest in an equity
affiliate to its equity partner for proceeds of $14million
thereby completing the sale of all the net assets of
textiles& interiors.
in the aggregate, sales in other for 2007, 2006 and 2005
represent less than 1percent of total segment sales.
ptoi in 2007 was a loss of $224million compared to a loss
of $173million in 2006. the 29percent increase in
the pretax loss was primarily due to higher inventory, freight
and business development costs. ptoi in 2007 included litigation
charges for former businesses of $69million. ptoi in 2006
included a charge of $27million to write down certain
specialty resins manufacturing assets to estimated fair value.
ptoi in 2006 was a loss of $173million compared to a loss
of $90million in 2005. the losses in 2006 are reflective
of the concentration of activities in applied biosciences and
include the $27million charge to write down certain
specialty resins manufacturing assets to estimated fair value.
ptoi in 2005 included a net gain of $62million related to
the disposition of equity affiliates, primarily associated with
the textiles& interiors separation.
liquidity&
capital resources
management believes that the companys ability to generate
cash and access the capital markets will be adequate to meet
anticipated future cash requirements to fund working capital,
capital spending, dividend payments and other cash needs for the
foreseeable future. the companys liquidity needs can be
met through a variety of sources, including: cash provided by
operating activities, cash and cash equivalents, marketable
securities, commercial paper, syndicated credit lines, bilateral
credit lines, equity and long-term debt markets and asset sales.
the companys current strong financial position, liquidity
and credit ratings provide excellent access to the capital
markets.
pursuant to its cash discipline policy, the company seeks first
to maintain a strong balance sheet and second, to return excess
cash to shareholders unless the opportunity to invest for growth
is compelling. cash and cash equivalents and marketable
securities balances of $1.4billion as of december31,
2007, provide primary liquidity to support all short-term
obligations. in the unlikely event that the company would not be
able to meet its short-term liquidity needs, the company has
access to approximately $4.3billion in credit lines with
several major financial institutions. these credit lines are
primarily multi-year facilities.
the company continually reviews its debt portfolio for
appropriateness and occasionally may rebalance it to ensure
adequate liquidity and an optimum maturity debt schedule.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
the companys long term and short term credit ratings have
not changed over the last three year ends and are as follows:
long term
short term
outlook
standard& poor
a
a-1
stable
moodys investor services
a2
p-1
negative
fitch ratings
a
f1
stable
(dollars in millions)
cash provided by operating activities
$
4,290
$
3,736
$
2,542
the companys cash provided by operating activities was
$4.3billion in 2007, a $554million increase from the
$3.7billion generated in 2006. the increase is primarily
due to higher earnings after adjusting for noncash items. net
income for 2006 included noncash tax benefits totaling
$615million (see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements.) while the change in net working capital was
essentially flat year over year, the company did realize
productivity gains in inventory days supply and days payable
outstanding. however, days sales outstanding slightly increased.
the companys cash provided by operating activities was
$3.7billion in 2006, a $1.2billion increase from the
$2.5billion generated in 2005. the increase is primarily
due to higher net income in 2006 and a reduction in
contributions made to pension plans, partially offset by the
timing of tax payments. working capital productivity measures of
days sales outstanding and inventory days supply were
essentially flat in 2006 versus 2005, while days payable
outstanding slightly decreased.
(dollars in millions)
cash used for investing activities
$
(1,750
)
$
(1,345
)
$
(602
)
in 2007, cash used for investing activities totaled
$1.8billion compared to $1.3billion used in 2006.
the $405million increase was mainly due to the settlement
of forward exchange contracts and a slight increase in capital
spending, partially offset by higher proceeds from sales of
assets. due to the impact of a weakening usd, the settlement of
forward exchange contracts issued to hedge the companys
net exposure, by currency, related to monetary assets and
liabilities resulted in the payment of $285million in 2007
versus the receipt of $45million in 2006. the forward
exchange contract settlements were largely offset by the
revaluation of the items being hedged, which are reflected in
the appropriate categories in the consolidated statements of
cash flows.
in 2006, cash used for investing activities totaled
$1.3billion compared to  $602million used in 2005.
the increase reflects higher purchases of property, plant and
equipment and lower proceeds from the sale of assets. in
addition, due to the impacts of a weakening usd, the settlement
of forward exchange contracts issued to hedge the companys
net exposure, by currency, related to monetary assets and
liabilities resulted in the receipt of $45million in 2006
versus the receipt of $653million in 2005. these
settlements were largely offset by revaluation of the items
being hedged, which are reflected in the appropriate categories
in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
purchases of property, plant and equipment totaled
$1.6billion, $1.5billion and $1.3billion in
2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. the company expects 2008
purchases of plant, property and equipment to be higher than
2007 levels. this incremental spending is primarily based on the
companys previously announced investments in
kevlar,
nomex
and titanium dioxide.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
(dollars in millions)
cash used for financing activities
$
(3,069
)
$
(2,323
)
$
(2,851
)
the $746million increase in cash used for financing
activities in 2007 compared to 2006 was primarily due to the
companys share repurchase activity, partially offset by
the increase in proceeds from stock options exercised. the
$528million decrease in cash used for financing activities
in 2006 compared to 2005 was primarily due to the companys
borrowings and share repurchase activity.
total debt at december31, 2007 was $7.3billion, a
$205million decrease from december31, 2006. this
decrease was primarily due to the repayment of borrowings
related to the 2005 ajca cash repatriation program, partially
offset by the issuance of $750million in 5year notes
in december 2007.
total debt at december31, 2006 was $7.5billion, a
$650million decrease from december31, 2005. this
decrease was primarily due to the repayment of borrowings
related to the 2005 ajca cash repatriation program, partially
offset by the issuance of $1billion in 10 and 30year
notes in december 2006.
dividends paid to common and preferred shareholders were
$1.4billion in 2007, 2006 and 2005. dividends per share of
common stock were $1.52, $1.48 and $1.46 in 2007, 2006 and 2005,
respectively. the common dividend declared in the first quarter
2008 was the companys 414thconsecutive dividend
since the companys first dividend in the fourth quarter
1904.
the companys board of directors authorized a
$2billion share buyback plan in june 2001. during 2005,
the company purchased and retired 9.9million shares at a
total cost of $505million. during 2007 and 2006, there
were no purchases of stock under this program. as of
december31, 2007, the company has purchased
20.5million shares at a total cost of $962million.
management has not established a timeline for the buyback of the
remaining shares of stock under this plan.
in october 2005, the board of directors authorized a
$5billion share buyback plan. in october 2005, the company
repurchased 75.7million shares of its common stock under
an accelerated share repurchase agreement and paid
$3.0billion for the repurchase. upon the conclusion of the
agreement in 2006, the company paid $180million in cash to
goldman, sachs& co. to settle the agreement.
additionally, in 2006, the company made open market purchases of
its shares for $100million. in 2007, the company purchased
34.7million shares for $1.7billion, thereby,
completing this program. see note20 to the consolidated
financial statements for a reconciliation of shares activity.
cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities
cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled
$1.4billion at december31, 2007 and
$1.9billion at december31, 2006 and 2005. the
$457million decrease from 2006 to 2007 is primarily due to
the companys share repurchase activity, as well as cash
used to meet other business requirements.
off-balance sheet
arrangements
certain guarantee
contracts
indemnifications
the company has indemnified respective parties against certain
liabilities that may arise in connection with acquisitions and
divestitures and related business activities prior to the
completion of the transactions. the terms of these
indemnifications, which typically pertain to environmental, tax
and product liabilities, are generally indefinite. in addition,
the company indemnifies its duly elected or appointed directors
and officers to the fullest extent permitted by delaware law,
against liabilities incurred as a result of their activities for
the company, such as adverse judgments relating to litigation
matters. if the indemnified party were to incur a liability or
have a liability increase as a result of a successful claim,
pursuant to the terms of the indemnification, the company would
be required to reimburse the indemnified party. the maximum
amount of potential future payments is generally indeterminable.
the carrying amounts recorded for all indemnifications as of
december31, 2007 and 2006 were $101million and
$105million, respectively. although it is reasonably
possible that future payments may exceed
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
amounts accrued, due to the nature of indemnified items, it is
not possible to make a reasonable estimate of the maximum
potential loss or range of loss. no assets are held as
collateral and no specific recourse provisions exist.
in connection with the sale of invista, the company indemnified
the purchasers, subsidiaries of koch, against certain
liabilities primarily related to taxes, legal and environmental
matters and other representations and warranties under the
purchase and sale agreement. koch has presented claims under
these indemnities which the companies are discussing; however,
dupont disagrees with kochs presentation. the estimated
fair value of the indemnity obligations under the purchase and
sale agreement is $70million and is included in the
indemnifications balance of $101million at
december31, 2007. the fair value was based on
managements best estimate of the value expected to be
required to issue the indemnifications in a standalone,
arms length transaction with an unrelated party and, where
appropriate, by the utilization of probability weighted
discounted net cash flow models. the company does not believe
that these indemnities will have a material impact on the future
liquidity of the company (see note19 to the consolidated
financial statements.)
obligations for
equity affiliates and others
the company has directly guaranteed various debt obligations
under agreements with third parties related to equity
affiliates, customers, suppliers and other affiliated and
unaffiliated companies. at december31, 2007, the company
had directly guaranteed $583million of such obligations,
plus $121million relating to guarantees of obligations for
divested subsidiaries and affiliates. this represents the
maximum potential amount of future (undiscounted) payments that
the company could be required to make under the guarantees. the
company would be required to perform on these guarantees in the
event of default by the guaranteed party. at december31,
2007, a current liability of $135million had been recorded
for these obligations, principally related to obligations of the
companys polyester films joint venture which are
guaranteed by the company. no additional material loss is
anticipated by reason of such agreements and guarantees.
existing guarantees for customers, suppliers and other
unaffiliated companies arose as part of contractual agreements.
existing guarantees for equity affiliates and other affiliated
companies arose for liquidity needs in normal operations. in
certain cases, the company has recourse to assets held as
collateral as well as personal guarantees from customers and
suppliers.
the company has guaranteed certain obligations and liabilities
related to divested subsidiaries including conoco and its
subsidiaries and affiliates and consolidation coal sales
company. the restructuring, transfer and separation agreement
between dupont and conoco requires conoco to use its best
efforts to have conoco, or any of its subsidiaries, substitute
for dupont. conoco and consolidation coal sales company have
indemnified the company for any liabilities the company may
incur pursuant to these guarantees. no material loss is
anticipated by reason of such agreements and guarantees. at
december31, 2007, the company had no liabilities recorded
for these obligations.
additional information with respect to the companys
guarantees is included in note19 to the consolidated
financial statements. historically, the company has not had to
make significant payments to satisfy guarantee obligations;
however, the company believes it has the financial resources to
satisfy these guarantees.
master operating
leases
at december31, 2007, the company has one master operating
lease program relating to miscellaneous short-lived equipment
valued at approximately $119million. lease payments for
these assets totaled $59million in 2007, $58million
in 2006 and $51million in 2005, and were reported as
operating expenses in the consolidated income statements. the
leases under this program are considered operating leases and
accordingly the related assets and liabilities are not recorded
on the consolidated balance sheets. furthermore, the lease
payments associated with this program vary based on one month
libor. the company may terminate the program at any time by
purchasing the assets. should the company decide neither to
renew the leases nor to exercise its purchase option, it must
pay the owner a residual value guarantee amount, which may be
recovered from a sale of the property to a third party. residual
value guarantees totaled $104million at december31,
2007.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
contractual
obligations
information related to the companys significant
contractual obligations is summarized in the following table:
payments due in
total at
december31,
2013 and
(dollars in millions)
beyond
long-term and short-term
debt1
$
5,966
$
$
2,437
$
$
3,094
expected cumulative cash requirements for interest payments
through maturity
2,497
1,344
capital
leases1
operating leases
1,020
purchase
obligations2
information technology infrastructure& services
raw material obligations
utility obligations
invista-related
obligations3
human resource services
other4
-
-
total purchase obligations
2,417
other
liabilities1,5
workers compensation
asset retirement obligations
environmental remediation
legal settlements
-
license
agreement6
other7
total other long-term liabilities
1,386
contractual tax
obligations8
-
-
-
total contractual obligations
$
13,379
$
1,886
$
4,235
$
1,760
$
5,498
included in the consolidated
financial statements.
represents enforceable and legally
binding agreements in excess of $1million to purchase
goods or services that specify fixed or minimum quantities;
fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate
timing of the agreement.
includes raw material supply
obligations of $744million and contract manufacturing
obligations of $77million.
primarily represents obligations
associated with distribution, health care/benefit
administration, research and development and other professional
and consulting contracts.
pension and other postretirement
benefit obligations have been excluded from the table as they
are discussed below within long-term employee benefits.
represents remaining expected
payments under a license agreement between pioneer hi-bred
international, inc. and monsanto company. see note11 to
the consolidated financial statements.
primarily represents
employee-related benefits other than pensions and other
postretirement benefits.
due to uncertainty regarding the
completion of tax audits and possible outcomes, the remaining
estimate of obligations related to unrecognized tax benefits
cannot be made. see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements for additional detail.
the company expects to meet its contractual obligations through
its normal sources of liquidity and believes it has the
financial resources to satisfy these contractual obligations
should unforeseen circumstances arise.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
long-term
employee benefits
the company has various obligations to its employees and
retirees. the company maintains retirement-related programs in
many countries that have a long-term impact on the
companys earnings and cash flows. these plans are
typically defined benefit pension plans, as well as medical,
dental and life insurance benefits for pensioners and survivors
and disability and life insurance protection for employees.
approximately 80percent of the companys worldwide
benefit obligation for pensions and essentially all of the
companys worldwide other long-term employee benefit
obligations are attributable to the u.s.benefit plans.
pension coverage for employees of the companys
non-u.s.consolidated
subsidiaries is provided, to the extent deemed appropriate,
through separate plans. the company regularly explores
alternative solutions to meet its global pension obligations in
the most cost effective manner possible as demographics, life
expectancy and country-specific pension funding rules change.
where permitted by applicable law, the company reserves the
right to change, modify or discontinue its plans that provide
pension, medical, dental, life insurance and disability benefits.
benefits under defined benefit pension plans are based primarily
on years of service and employees pay near retirement.
pension benefits are paid primarily from trust funds established
to comply with applicable laws and regulations. unless required
by law, the company does not make contributions that are in
excess of tax deductible limits. the actuarial assumptions and
procedures utilized are reviewed periodically by the plans
actuaries to provide reasonable assurance that there will be
adequate funds for the payment of benefits. by law, no
contributions are currently required to be made to the principal
u.s.pension plan in 2008 and no contributions are
currently anticipated. contributions beyond 2008 are not
determinable since the amount of any contribution is heavily
dependent on the future economic environment and investment
returns on pension trust assets. u.s.pension benefits that
exceed federal limitations are covered by separate unfunded
plans and these benefits are paid to pensioners and survivors
from operating cash flows.
funding for each pension plan is governed by the rules of the
sovereign country in which it operates. thus, there is not
necessarily a direct correlation between pension funding and
pension expense. in general, however, improvements in plans
funded status tends to moderate subsequent funding needs. in
2007, the company contributed $277million to its pension
plans. the company anticipates that it will make approximately
$250million in contributions in 2008 to pension plans
other than the principal u.s.pension plan.
the pension protection act of 2006 (the act) was
signed into law in the u.s.in august 2006. the act
introduces new funding requirements for single-employer defined
benefit pension plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension
plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes,
introduces benefit limitations for certain underfunded plans and
raises tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement
plans. the new funding requirements are generally effective for
plan years beginning after december31, 2007. the company
does not anticipate that the act will have a material impact on
its required contributions.
in august 2006, the company announced major changes to its
principal u.s.pension plan and principal defined
contribution plan. as part of this announcement, the defined
contribution benefits for most u.s.employees are in
transition. effective january1, 2007, for employees hired
on that date or thereafter, and effective january1, 2008,
for active employees on the rolls as of december31, 2006,
the company will make a contribution of 100percent of the
first 6percent of the employees contribution
election. additionally, the company will contribute
3percent of each eligible employees compensation
regardless of the employees contribution election. the
definition of eligible compensation has also been expanded to be
similar to the definition of eligible compensation in the
u.s.pension plan. covered full service employees on the
rolls as of december31, 2006 will also accrue additional
benefits in the pension plan, but the annual rate of pension
accrual will be about one-third of the previous rate. in
addition, company-paid postretirement survivor benefits for
these employees will not continue to grow after
december31, 2007. covered employees hired in the
u.s.after december31, 2006 will not participate in
the pension plan.
as a result of the amendment to the principal u.s.pension
plan, the company was required to remeasure its pension expense
for the remainder of 2006, reflecting plan assets and benefit
obligations as of the remeasurement date. as a result of better
than expected return on plan assets and a higher discount rate
of 6percent as of the remeasurement date, pretax pension
expense decreased by $72million for 2006. for 2007, the
plan amendment resulted in a reduction in pension expense of
about $40million. for 2008, the plan amendment is expected
to result in a net
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
reduction of approximately $40million in combined pension
and defined contribution plans expense. this estimate is
composed of a reduction in pension expense of about
$190million, partially offset by an increase in defined
contribution plan expense of approximately $150million.
actual cash contributions for the savings plan will increase
less than $130million in 2008. additional information
related to these changes in the plans noted above is included in
note21 to the consolidated financial statements.
on december31, 2006, the company adopted sfas158 and
recorded a $1,555million after-tax charge to
stockholders equity primarily due to reclassifying
unrecognized actuarial losses and prior service costs related to
the pension plans.
medical, dental, life insurance and disability plans are
unfunded and the cost of the approved claims is paid from
operating cash flows. pretax cash requirements to cover actual
net claims costs and related administrative expenses were
$315million, $335million and $408million for
2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. this amount is expected to be
about $315million in 2008. changes in cash requirements
reflect the net impact of higher per capita health care costs,
demographic changes and changes in participant premiums, co-pays
and deductibles.
the companys income can be significantly affected by
pension and defined contribution benefits as well as retiree
medical, dental and life insurance benefits. the following table
summarizes the extent to which the companys income over
each of the last 3years was affected by pretax charges and
credits related to long-term employee benefits.
(dollars in millions)
defined benefit pension charges
$
(54
)
$
$
company contributions to defined contribution plans
other long-term employee benefit charges
net amount
$
$
$
the above charges for pension and other long-term employee
benefits are determined as of the beginning of each year. the
decrease in pension expense in 2007 reflects favorable returns
on pension assets, plan amendments and changes in demographics
and discount rates. the increase in 2007 other long-term
employee benefit charges principally reflects changes in
demographics, discount rates and higher than expected health
care costs. the decrease in pension expense in 2006 reflects
favorable returns on pension assets, plan amendments and changes
in discount rates. the decrease in 2006 other long-term employee
benefit charges principally reflects the favorable medical
trends in 2005 and refinements in estimates to reflect the
anticipated commencement of the medicare prescription drug
program.
the companys key assumptions used in calculating its
pension and other long-term employee benefits are the expected
return on plan assets, the rate of compensation increases and
the discount rate (see note21 to the consolidated
financial statements). for 2008, lower than anticipated medical
trends, the net impact of the u.s.retirement plan
amendments, changes in demographics and discount rates, and the
expiration of a prior service cost amortization credit in 2007
are expected to result in a reduction in pension and other
long-term employee benefit pretax expenses of about
$170million.
environmental
matters
dupont operates global manufacturing, product handling and
distribution facilities that are subject to a broad array of
environmental laws and regulations. company policy requires that
all operations fully meet or exceed legal and regulatory
requirements. in addition, dupont implements voluntary programs
to reduce air emissions, eliminate the generation of hazardous
waste, decrease the volume of waste water discharges, increase
the efficiency of energy use and reduce the generation of
persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic materials. the costs to
comply with complex environmental laws and regulations, as well
as internal voluntary programs and goals, are significant and
will continue for the foreseeable future. while these costs may
increase in the future, they are not expected to have a material
impact on the companys financial position, liquidity or
results of operations.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
pretax environmental expenses charged to current operations
totaled $576million in 2007 compared with
$521million in 2006 and $468million in 2005. these
expenses include the remediation accruals discussed below;
operating, maintenance and depreciation costs for solid waste,
air and water pollution control facilities and the costs of
environmental research activities. while expenses related to the
costs of environmental research activities are not a significant
component of the companys overall environmental expenses,
the company expects these costs to become proportionally greater
as the company increases its participation in businesses for
which environmental assessments are required during product
development. the largest of the environmental expenses in 2007
was $113million for the operation of water pollution
control facilities and $131million for solid waste
management. about 78percent of total annual environmental
expenses resulted from operations in the u.s.
in 2007, dupont spent approximately $110million on
environmental capital projects either required by law or
necessary to meet the companys internal environmental
goals. the company currently estimates expenditures for
environmental-related capital projects to be approximately
$150million in 2008. in the u.s., significant capital
expenditures are expected to be required over the next decade
for treatment, storage and disposal facilities for solid and
hazardous waste and for compliance with the clean air act (caa).
until all caa regulatory requirements are established and known,
considerable uncertainty will remain regarding future estimates
for capital expenditures. total caa capital costs over the next
two years are currently estimated to range from $40million
to $70million.
the goal of the toxic substances control act (tsca) is to
prevent unreasonable risks of injury to health or the
environment associated with the manufacture, processing,
distribution in commerce, use, or disposal of chemical
substances. under tsca, the epa has established reporting,
record-keeping, testing and control-related requirements for new
and existing chemicals. in 1998, the epa challenged the
u.s.chemical industry to voluntarily conduct screening
level health and environmental effects testing on nearly 3,000
high production volume (hpv) chemicals or to make equivalent
information publicly available. an hpv chemical is a chemical
listed on the 1990 inventory update rule with annual
u.s.cumulative production and imports of one million
pounds or more. the company expects to complete its commitments
regarding the hpv chemicals it volunteered to sponsor within the
next two to three years.
in december 2006, the european union adopted a new regulatory
framework concerning the registration, evaluation and
authorization of chemicals. this regulatory framework known as
reach entered into force on june1, 2007. one of its main
objectives is the protection of human health and the
environment. reach requires manufacturers and importers to
gather information on the properties of their substances that
meet certain volume or toxicological criteria and register the
information in a central database to be maintained by a chemical
agency in finland. the regulation also calls for the progressive
substitution of the most dangerous chemicals when suitable
alternatives have been identified. pre-registration will occur
between june1, 2008 and november30, 2008; complete
registrations containing extensive data on the characteristics
of the chemical will be required in 2010 if production usage or
tonnage exceeds 1,000 metric tons per year; 2013 if it is
between 100 and 1,000 metric tons per year; and 2018 if it is
100 metric tons per year or less. by june1, 2013, the
commission will review whether substances with endocrine
disruptive properties should be authorized if safer alternatives
exist. by june1, 2019, the commission will determine
whether to extend the duty to warn from substances of very high
concern to those that could be dangerous or unpleasant.
management does not expect that the costs to comply with reach
will be material to its operations and consolidated financial
position.
dupont believes that climate change is an important global issue
that will present numerous risks and opportunities to business
and society at large. since the early 1990s when dupont began
taking action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the company
has achieved major global reductions in emissions. voluntary
emissions reductions implemented by dupont and other companies
are valuable but alone will not be sufficient to effectively
address a problem of this scale. the kyoto protocol to the
united nations framework convention on climate change entered
into force in february 2005 and, while not ratified by the u.s.,
has spurred policy action by many other countries and regions
around the world including the european union. considerable
international attention is now focused on development of a
post-2012 international policy framework to guide international
action to address climate change when the kyoto protocol expires
in 2012. proposed and existing legislative efforts to control or
limit greenhouse gas emissions could affect the companys
energy source and supply choices as well as increase the cost of
energy and raw materials derived from fossil fuels. however, the
successful negotiation and implementation of sensible national,
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
regional, and international climate change policies could
provide the business community with greater certainty for the
regulatory future, help guide investment decisions, and drive
growth in demand for low-carbon and energy-efficient products,
technologies, and services.
the company actively manages the potential risks that climate
change could present, including those associated with the
companys physical assets, as well as with regulatory and
economic issues. dupont looks for opportunities to make its
overall portfolio less energy intensive, and energy use is one
factor that is weighed when investments or divestitures are
considered. dupont is committed to continuing to bring to market
more products and services to meet new and expanded demands of a
low-carbon economy.
dupont has discovered that very low levels of dioxins (parts per
trillion to low parts per billion) and related compounds are
inadvertently generated during its titanium dioxide pigment
production process. over 99percent of the dioxin generated
at duponts production plants becomes associated with
process solid wastes that are disposed in controlled landfills
where public exposure is negligible. a multi-year research and
process engineering development program has culminated in
capital projects and other process modifications intended to
reduce dioxin generation by at least 90percent. the last
of these projects and process modifications were completed
during 2007. as of december31, 2007, the companys
operations had results verifying the capability to reduce dioxin
generation by 90percent.
remediation
expenditures
the rcra extensively regulates and requires permits for the
treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. rcra
requires that permitted facilities undertake an assessment of
environmental contamination at the facility. if conditions
warrant, companies may be required to remediate contamination
caused by prior operations. in contrast to cercla, the costs of
the rcra corrective action program are typically borne solely by
the company. the company anticipates that significant ongoing
expenditures for rcra remediation activities may be required
over the next two decades. annual expenditures for the near
term, however, are not expected to vary significantly from the
range of such expenditures experienced in the past few years.
longer term, expenditures are subject to considerable
uncertainty and may fluctuate significantly. the companys
expenditures associated with rcra and similar remediation
activities were approximately $47million, $44million
and $49million in 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively.
from time to time, the company receives requests for information
or notices of potential liability from the epa and state
environmental agencies alleging that the company is a prp under
cercla or similar state statutes. cercla is often referred to as
the superfund and requires companies to undertake certain
investigative and research activities at sites where it conducts
or once conducted operations or where company generated waste
has been disposed. the company has also, on occasion, been
engaged in cost recovery litigation initiated by those agencies
or by private parties. these requests, notices and lawsuits
assert potential liability for remediation costs at various
sites that typically are not company owned, but allegedly
contain wastes attributable to the companys past
operations.
as of december31, 2007, the company had been notified of
potential liability under cercla or state laws at 383 sites
around the u.s., with active remediation under way at 139 of
these sites. in addition, the company has resolved its liability
at 161 sites, either by completing remedial actions with other
prps or by participating in de minimis buyouts with
other prps whose waste, like the companys, represented
only a small fraction of the total waste present at a site. the
company received notice of potential liability at six new sites
during 2007 compared with six similar notices in 2006 and eight
in 2005. the companys expenditures associated with cercla
and similar state remediation activities were approximately
$20million, $19million and $27million in 2007,
2006 and 2005, respectively.
for nearly all superfund sites, the companys potential
liability will be significantly less than the total site
remediation costs because the percentage of waste attributable
to the company versus that attributable to all other prps is
relatively low. other prps at sites, where the company is a
party, typically have the financial strength to meet their
obligations and, where they do not, or where prps cannot be
located, the companys own share of liability has not
materially increased. there are relatively few sites where the
company is a major participant and the cost to the
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
company of remediation at those sites and at all cercla sites in
the aggregate, is not expected to have a material impact on the
financial position, liquidity or results of operations of the
company.
total expenditures for previously accrued remediation activities
under cercla, rcra and similar state laws were $68million,
$64million and $79million in 2007, 2006 and 2005,
respectively.
remediation
accruals
at december31, 2007, the consolidated balance sheets
included an accrued liability of $357million compared to
$349million at december31, 2006. considerable
uncertainty exists with respect to environmental remediation
costs and, under adverse changes in circumstances, potential
liability may range up to two to three times the amount accrued
as of december31, 2007. of the $357million accrued
liability, approximately 10percent was reserved for
non-u.s.facilities.
approximately 65percent of the reserve balance was
attributable to rcra and similar remediation liabilities, while
about 25percent was attributable to cercla liabilities.
remediation accruals of $76million, $71million and
$64million were added to the reserve in 2007, 2006 and
2005, respectively.
pfoa
dupont manufactures fluoropolymer resins and dispersions as well
as fluorotelomers, marketing many of them under the
teflon
and
zonyl
brands. the fluoropolymer resins and dispersions businesses are
part of the electronic& communication technologies
segment; the fluorotelomers business is part of the
safety& protection segment.
fluoropolymer resins and dispersions are high-performance
materials with many end uses including architectural fabrics,
telecommunications and electronic wiring insulation, automotive
fuel systems, computer chip processing equipment,
weather-resistant/breathable apparel and non-stick cookware.
fluorotelomers are used to make soil, stain and grease
repellants for paper, apparel, upholstery and carpets as well as
firefighting foams and coatings.
a form of pfoa (collectively, perfluorooctanoic acid and its
salts, including the ammonium salt) is used as a processing
agent to manufacture fluoropolymer resins and dispersions. for
over 50years, dupont purchased its pfoa needs from a third
party, but beginning in the fall of 2002, it began producing
pfoa to support the manufacture of fluoropolymer resins and
dispersions. pfoa is not used in the manufacture of
fluorotelomers; however, it is an unintended by-product present
at trace levels in some fluorotelomer-based products.
dupont performance elastomers, llc (dpe) uses pfoa in the
manufacture of raw materials to manufacture
kalrez
perfluoroelastomer parts. pfoa is also used in the manufacture
of some fluoroelastomers marketed by dpe under the
viton
trademark. the wholly owned subsidiary is a part of the
performance materials segment.
pfoa is bio-persistent and has been detected at very low levels
in the blood of the general population. as a result, the epa
initiated a process to enhance its understanding of the sources
of pfoa in the environment and the pathways through which human
exposure to pfoa is occurring. in 2003, the epa issued a
preliminary risk assessment on pfoa that focuses on the exposure
of the u.s.general population to pfoa and possible health
effects, including developmental toxicity concerns. on
january12, 2005, the epa issued a draft risk assessment on
pfoa. the draft stated that cancer data for pfoa may be best
described as suggestive evidence of carcinogenicity, but
not sufficient to assess human carcinogenic potential
under the epas guidelines for carcinogen risk assessment.
under the guidelines, the descriptor suggestive is
typically applied to agents if animal testing finds any evidence
that exposure causes tumors in one species of animal.
the epa requested that the science advisory board (sab) review
and comment on the scientific soundness of this assessment. on
may31, 2006, the sab released its report setting forth the
view, based on laboratory studies in rats, that the human
carcinogenic potential of pfoa is more consistent with the
epas descriptor of likely to be carcinogenic
as defined in the guidelines for carcinogen risk assessment.
however, in its report the sab indicated that additional data
should be considered before the epa finalizes its risk
assessment of pfoa. under the guidelines the likely
descriptor is typically applied to agents that have tested
positive in more than one species, sex, strain, site or exposure
route with or without evidence of carcinogenicity in humans. the
epa has acknowledged that it will consider additional data,
including new research and testing, and has indicated that
another sab review will be sought after the epa makes its risk
assessment. dupont disputes the cancer classification
recommended in the
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
sab report. the epa has stated that it is premature to draw any
conclusions on the potential risks, including cancer, from pfoa
until the additional data are integrated into the risk
assessment. although the epa has stated that there remains
considerable scientific uncertainty regarding potential risks
associated with pfoa, it also stated that it does not believe
that there is any reason for consumers to stop using any
products because of concerns about pfoa.
dupont respects the epas position raising questions about
exposure routes and the potential toxicity of pfoa and dupont
and other companies have outlined plans to continue research,
emission reduction and product stewardship activities to help
address the epas questions. in january 2006, dupont
pledged its commitment to the epas
2010/15 pfoa
stewardship program. the epa program asks participants
(1)to commit to achieve, no later than 2010, a
95percent reduction in both facility emissions and product
content levels of pfoa, pfoa precursors and related higher
homologue chemicals and (2)to commit to working toward the
elimination of pfoa, pfoa precursors and related higher
homologue chemicals from emissions and products by no later than
2015. in october 2007, (for the year 2006), dupont reported to
the epa that it had achieved an almost 98percent reduction
of pfoa emissions in u.s.manufacturing facilities. about a
95percent reduction was achieved in global manufacturing
emissions, meeting the epa 2010 objective well ahead of the
timeline. dupont will work individually and with others in the
industry to inform epas regulatory counterparts in the
european union, canada, china and japan about these activities
and pfoa in general, including emissions reductions from
duponts facilities, reformulation of the companys
fluoropolymer dispersions and new manufacturing processes for
fluorotelomers products.
in february 2007, dupont announced its commitment to eliminate
the need to make, use or buy pfoa by 2015. dupont has discovered
technology that should enable the elimination of pfoa use in
fluoropolymer production. commercial scale quantities of some
fluoropolymer products have been made without pfoa and customers
were notified in the fourth quarter 2007 that these products
will be available for testing in their processes in 2008. also,
dupont is developing the next generation of fluorotelomer
products and already introduced two of them in the fourth
quarter 2007.
in the meantime, dupont has developed
echelontm
technology that can reduce the pfoa content in fluoropolymer
dispersions by 97percent. the company has already
converted 90percent of its product line by volume to
manufacturing processes based on
echelontm.
dupont also has successfully commercialized a new, patented
manufacturing process to remove greater than 97percent of
trace by-product levels of pfoa, its homologues and direct
precursors from its fluorotelomer products. the new products are
being marketed as lx
platformtm
products.
in november 2006, dupont entered into an order on consent under
the safe drinking water act (sdwa) with the epa establishing a
precautionary interim screening level for pfoa of 0.5 part per
billion (ppb) in drinking water sources in the area around the
washington works site located in parkersburg, west virginia.
dupont is required under the agreement to offer to install water
treatment systems or an epa-approved alternative if pfoa levels
are detected at or above 0.5 ppb.
in february 2007, the new jersey department of environmental
protection (njdep) identified a preliminary drinking-water
guidance level for pfoa of 0.04 ppb as part of the first phase
of an ongoing process to establish a state drinking-water
standard. while the njdep will continue sampling and evaluation
of data from all sources, it has not recommended a change in
consumption patterns.
while occupational exposure to pfoa has been associated with
small increases in some lipids (e.g. cholesterol), it is not
known whether these are causal associations. these associations
were not observed in a community study. based on health and
toxicological studies, dupont believes the weight of evidence
indicates that pfoa exposure does not pose a health risk to the
general public. to date, there are no human health effects known
to be caused by pfoa, although study of the chemical continues.
currently, there are no regulatory actions pending that would
prohibit the production or use of pfoa. however, because there
continues to be regulatory interest, there can be no assurance
that the epa or any other regulatory entity will not choose to
regulate or prohibit the production or use of pfoa in the
future. products currently manufactured by the company
representing approximately $1billion of 2007 revenues
could be affected by any such regulation or prohibition. dupont
has established reserves in connection with certain pfoa
environmental and litigation matters (see note19 to the
consolidated financial statements).
table of contents
partii
item7a.quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
financial
instruments
derivatives
and other hedging instruments
under procedures and controls established by the companys
financial risk management framework, the company enters into
contractual arrangements (derivatives) in the ordinary course of
business to hedge its exposure to foreign currency, interest
rate and commodity price risks. the counterparties to these
contractual arrangements are major financial institutions,
petrochemical and petroleum companies and exchanges.
the company hedges foreign currency denominated monetary assets
and liabilities, certain business-specific foreign currency
exposures and certain energy feedstock purchases. in addition,
the company enters into exchange traded agricultural commodity
derivatives to hedge exposures relevant to agricultural
feedstock purchases.
concentration
of credit risk
financial instruments that potentially subject the company to
significant concentrations of credit risk consist principally of
cash, investments, accounts receivable and derivatives.
as part of the companys risk management processes, it
continuously evaluates the relative credit standing of all of
the financial institutions that service dupont and monitors
actual exposures versus established limits. the company has not
sustained credit losses from instruments held at financial
institutions.
the company maintains cash and cash equivalents, short- and
long-term investments, derivatives and certain other financial
instruments with various financial institutions. these financial
institutions are generally highly rated and geographically
dispersed and the company has a policy to limit the dollar
amount of credit exposure with any one institution.
the companys sales are not materially dependent on a
single customer or small group of customers. as of
december31, 2007, no one individual customer balance
represented more than 5percent of the companys total
outstanding receivables balance. credit risk associated with its
receivables balance is representative of the geographic,
industry and customer diversity associated with the
companys global businesses.
the company also maintains strong credit controls in evaluating
and granting customer credit. as a result, it may require that
customers provide some type of financial guarantee in certain
circumstances. length of terms for customer credit varies by
industry and region.
foreign
currency risk
the companys objective in managing exposure to foreign
currency fluctuations is to reduce earnings volatility
associated with foreign currency rate changes. accordingly, the
company enters into various contracts that change in value as
foreign exchange rates change to protect the value of its
existing foreign currency-denominated assets, liabilities and
commitments.
the company routinely uses forward exchange contracts to offset
its net exposures, by currency, related to the foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities of its
operations. the primary business objective of this hedging
program is to maintain an approximately balanced position in
foreign currencies so that exchange gains and losses resulting
from exchange rate changes, net of related tax effects, are
minimized.
the following table summarizes the impacts of this program on
the companys results of operations for the years ended
december31, 2007, 2006 and 2005.
(dollars in millions)
pretax exchange (loss)/gain
$
(85
)
$
(4
)
$
tax (expense)/benefit
(26
)
(483
)
after-tax loss
$
(31
)
$
(30
)
$
(38
)
this table includes the companys pro rata share of its
equity affiliates exchange gains and losses and
corresponding gains and losses on forward exchange contracts.
table of contents
partii
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk continued
from time to time, the company will enter into forward exchange
contracts to establish with certainty the usd amount of future
firm commitments denominated in a foreign currency. decisions
regarding whether or not to hedge a given commitment are made on
a
case-by-case
basis, taking into consideration the amount and duration of the
exposure, market volatility and economic trends. forward
exchange contracts are also used, from time to time, to manage
near-term foreign currency cash requirements and to place
foreign currency deposits and marketable securities investments.
interest rate
risk
the company uses interest rate swaps to manage the interest rate
mix of the total debt portfolio and related overall cost of
borrowing.
interest rate swaps involve the exchange of fixed for floating
rate interest payments to effectively convert fixed rate debt
into floating rate debt based on usd libor. interest rate swaps
allow the company to maintain a target range of floating rate
debt.
commodity
price risk
the company enters into over-the-counter and exchange-traded
derivative commodity instruments to hedge its exposure to price
fluctuations on certain raw material purchases.
a portion of energy feedstock purchases are hedged to reduce
price volatility using fixed price swaps and options. hedged
feedstock purchases include natural gas and ethane.
the company contracts with independent growers to produce
finished seed inventory. under these contracts, growers are
compensated with bushel equivalents that are marketed to the
company for the market price of grain for a period of time
following harvest. derivative instruments, such as commodity
futures that have a high correlation to the underlying
commodity, are used to hedge the commodity price risk involved
in compensating growers.
the company utilizes agricultural commodity futures to manage
the price volatility of soybean meal. these derivative
instruments have a high correlation to the underlying commodity
exposure and are deemed effective in offsetting soybean meal
feedstock price risk.
additional details on these and other financial instruments are
set forth in note23 to the consolidated financial
statements.
sensitivity
analysis
the following table illustrates the fair values of outstanding
derivative contracts at december31, 2007 and 2006, and the
effect on fair values of a hypothetical adverse change in the
market prices or rates that existed at december31, 2007
and 2006. the sensitivity for interest rate swaps is based on a
one percent change in the market interest rate. foreign
currency, agricultural and energy derivative sensitivities are
based on a 10percent change in market rates.
fair value
fair value
asset/ (liability)
sensitivity
(dollars in millions)
interest rate swaps
$
$
(24
)
$
(26
)
$
(42
)
foreign currency contracts
(5
)
(536
)
(322
)
agricultural feedstocks
(1
)
energy feedstocks
-
(2
)
-
(1
)
since the companys risk management programs are highly
effective, the potential loss in value for each risk management
portfolio described above would be largely offset by changes in
the value of the underlying exposure.
item8.financial
statements and supplementary data
the financial statements and supplementary data required by this
item are included herein, commencing on
pagef-1
of this report.
table of contents
partii
item9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
none.
item9a.controls
and procedures
the company maintains a system of disclosure controls and
procedures for financial reporting to give reasonable assurance
that information required to be disclosed in the companys
reports submitted under the securities exchange act of 1934
(exchange act) is recorded, processed, summarized and reported
within the time periods specified in the rules and forms of the
sec. these controls and procedures also give reasonable
assurance that information required to be disclosed in such
reports is accumulated and communicated to management to allow
timely decisions regarding required disclosures.
as of december31, 2007, the companys chief executive
officer (ceo) and chief financial officer (cfo), together with
management, conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of the
companys disclosure controls and procedures pursuant to
rules13a-15(e)
and
15d-15(e) of
the exchange act. based on that evaluation, the ceo and cfo
concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are
effective.
there has been no change in the companys internal control
over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter
2007 that has materially affected the companys internal
control over financial reporting. the company has completed its
evaluation of its internal controls and has concluded that the
companys system of internal controls was effective as of
december31, 2007 (see
pagef-2).
the company continues to take appropriate steps to enhance the
reliability of its internal control over financial reporting.
management has identified areas for improvement and discussed
them with the companys audit committee and independent
registered public accounting firm.
item9b.
other information
none.
table of contents
partiii
item10.directors,
executive officers and corporate governance
information with respect to this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the proxy. information related to directors is
included within the section entitled, election of
directors. the company has not made any material changes
to the procedures by which security holders may recommend
nominees to its board of directors since these procedures were
communicated in the companys 2007 proxy statement for the
annual meeting of stockholders held on april25, 2007.
information related to the audit committee is incorporated
herein by reference to the proxy and is included within the
sections entitled committees of the board and
committee membership. information regarding
executive officers is contained in the proxy section entitled
section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance and in parti, item4 of this report.
the company has adopted a code of ethics for its ceo, cfo and
controller that may be accessed from the companys website
at www.dupont.com by clicking on investor center and then
corporate governance. any amendments to, or waiver from, any
provision of the code will be posted on the companys
website at the above address.
item11.executive
compensation
information with respect to this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the proxy and is included in the sections
compensation discussion and analysis, summary
compensation table,  grants of plan-based
awards, outstanding equity awards,
option exercises and stock vested, retirement
plan benefits, nonqualified deferred
compensation, employment agreements, and
directors compensation. information related to
the compensation committee is included within the sections
entitled compensation committee interlocks and insider
participation and compensation committee
report.
item12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
information with respect to beneficial owners is incorporated
herein by reference to the proxy and is included in the section
entitled ownership of company stock.
securities
authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans as of
december31, 2007
(shares and option amounts in
thousands)
weighted-average
number of securities
number of securities to
warrants and rights
remaining available
be issued upon exercise
exercise price of
for future issuance
of outstanding options,
outstanding options,
under equity
plan category
warrants and rights
warrants and
rights2
compensation
plans3
equity compensation plans approved by security holders
68,639
$
47.15
59,933
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
11,600
$
43.97
-
total
80,239
$
46.65
59,933
includes stock-settled time-vested
and performance-based restricted stock units granted and stock
units deferred under the companys equity and incentive
plan, stock performance plan, variable compensation plan and the
stock accumulation and deferred compensation plan for directors.
performance-based restricted stock units reflect the maximum
number of shares to be awarded at the conclusion of the
performance cycle (200% of the original grant). the actual award
payouts can range from zero to 200percent of the original
grant.
represents the weighted-average
exercise price of the outstanding stock options only; the
outstanding stock-settled time-vested and performance-based
restricted stock units and deferred stock units are not included
in this calculation.
reflects shares available pursuant
to the issuance of stock options, restricted stock, restricted
stock units or other stock-based awards under the equity and
incentive plan approved by the shareholders on april25,
2007 (see note22 to the companys consolidated
financial statements). the maximum number of shares of stock
reserved for the grant or settlement of awards under the equity
and incentive plan (the share limit) shall be
60,000,000 and shall be subject to adjustment as provided
therein; provided that each share in excess of 20,000,000 issued
under the equity and incentive plan pursuant to any award
settled in stock, other than a stock option or stock
appreciation right, shall be counted against the foregoing share
limit as four shares for every one share actually issued in
connection with such award. (for example, if
22,000,000shares of restricted stock are granted under the
equity and incentive plan, 28,000,000 shall be charged against
the share limit in connection with that award.)
includes options totaling 10,434
granted under the companys 2002 corporate sharing program
(see note22 to the consolidated financial statements) and
100 options with an exercise price of $46.50 granted to a
consultant. also includes 1,066 options from the conversion of
dupont canada options to dupont options in connection with the
companys acquisition of the minority interest in dupont
canada.
table of contents
partiii
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions and director
independence
information with respect to the companys policy and
procedures for the review, approval or ratification of
transactions with related persons is incorporated by reference
herein to the proxy and is included in the section entitled
review and approval of transactions with related
persons. information with respect to director independence
is incorporated by reference herein to the proxy and is included
in the sections entitled dupont board of directors:
corporate governance guidelines, guidelines for
determining the independence of dupont directors,
committees of the board and committee
membership.
item14.principal
accounting fees and services
information with respect to this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the proxy and is included in the sections entitled
ratification of independent registered public accounting
firm and appendixa.
table of contents
partiv
item15.exhibitsand
financial statement schedules
(a)
financial statements, financial statement schedules and exhibits:
1.
financial statements (see the index to the consolidated
financial statements on
pagef-1
of this report).
2.
financial statement schedules
scheduleiivaluation
and qualifying accounts
(dollars in millions)
balance at
charged to
balance at
beginning
costs and
end of
description
of period
expenses
deductions
period
for the year ended december31, 2007
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
total allowances deducted from assets
$
$
$
$
for the year ended december31, 2006
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
total allowances deducted from assets
$
$
$
$
for the year ended december31, 2005
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
total allowances deducted from assets
$
$
$
$
the following should be read in conjunction with the previously
referenced consolidated financial statements:
financial statement schedules listed under sec rules but not
included in this report are omitted because they are not
applicable or the required information is shown in the
consolidated financial statements or notes thereto incorporated
by reference.
condensed financial information of the parent company is omitted
because restricted net assets of consolidated subsidiaries do
not exceed 25percent of consolidated net assets. footnote
disclosure of restrictions on the ability of subsidiaries and
affiliates to transfer funds is omitted because the restricted
net assets of subsidiaries combined with the companys
equity in the undistributed earnings of affiliated companies
does not exceed 25percent of consolidated net assets at
december31, 2007.
separate financial statements of affiliated companies accounted
for by the equity method are omitted because no such affiliate
individually constitutes a 20percent significant
subsidiary.
3.
exhibits
table of contents
partiv
item15.exhibitsand financial statement
schedules, continued
the following list of exhibits includes both exhibits submitted
with this
form10-k
as filed with the sec and those incorporated by reference to
other filings:
exhibit
number
description
.1
companys restated certificate of incorporation.
.2
companys bylaws, as last revised january1, 1999
(incorporated by reference to exhibit3.2 to the
companys annual report on
form10-k
for the year ended december31, 2003).
the company agrees to provide the commission, on request, copies
of instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt
of the company and its subsidiaries.
.1*
the dupont stock accumulation and deferred compensation plan for
directors, as last amended effective april25, 2007
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended june30, 2007).
.2*
terms and conditions of time-vested restricted stock units
granted in 2007 to non-employee directors under the
companys stock accumulation and deferred compensation
plan, as amended, or equity and incentive plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.3 to the companys quarterly
report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2007).
.3*
companys supplemental retirement income plan, as last
amended effective june4, 1996 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.3 to the companys annual report on
form10-k
for the year ended december31, 2006).
.4*
companys pension restoration plan, as restated effective
july17, 2006 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit99.1 to the companys current report on
form8-k
filed on july20, 2006).
.5*
companys rules for lump sum payments adopted july17,
2006 (incorporated by reference to exhibit99.2 to the
companys current report on
form8-k
filed on july20, 2006).
.6*
companys stock performance plan, as last amended effective
january25, 2007 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.7 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2007).
.7*
companys equity and incentive plan as approved by the
companys shareholders on april25, 2007 (incorporated
by reference to pages c1-c13 of the companys annual
meeting proxy statement dated march19, 2007).
.8*
terms and conditions, as last amended effective january1,
2007, of performance-based restricted stock units granted in
2005 under the companys stock performance plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.8 to the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2007).
.9*
terms and conditions, as last amended effective january1,
2007, of performance-based restricted stock units granted in
2006 under the companys stock performance plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.9 to the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2007).
.10*
terms and conditions of stock appreciation rights granted in
2007 under the companys stock performance plan or equity
and incentive plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.10 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2007).
.11*
terms and conditions of stock options granted in 2007 under the
companys stock performance plan or equity and incentive
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.11 to the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2007).
.12*
terms and conditions of performance-based restricted stock units
granted in 2007 under the companys stock performance plan
or equity and incentive plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.12 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2007).
.13*
terms and conditions of time-vested restricted stock units
granted in 2007 under the companys stock performance plan
or equity and incentive plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.13 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2007).
.14*
companys variable compensation plan, as last amended
effective april30, 1997 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.15 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended june30, 2007).
table of contents
partiv
item15.exhibitsand financial statement
schedules, continued
.15*
companys salary deferral& savings restoration
plan, as last amended effective january1, 2007
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.11 to the
companys annual report on
form10-k
for the period ended december31, 2006).
.16*
companys retirement savings restoration plan adopted
effective january1, 2007 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.12 to the companys annual report on
form10-k
for the period ended december31, 2006).
.17*
companys retirement income plan for directors, as last
amended august 1995.
.18*
letter agreement and employee agreement, dated as of
july30, 2004, as amended, between the company and r.r.
goodmanson (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.8 to
the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended june30, 2004).
.19
companys bicentennial corporate sharing plan, adopted by
the board of directors on december12, 2001 and effective
january9, 2002 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.19 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the quarter ended september30, 2007).
.20
purchase agreement by and among the company as seller and the
other sellers identified therein and ked fiber ltd. and ked
fiber llc as buyers, dated as of november16, 2003
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.12 to the
companys annual report on
form10-k
for the year ended december31, 2003). the company agrees
to furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule to the
commission upon request.
.21
amendment to the purchase agreement dated december23,
2003, by and among the company as seller and the other sellers
identified therein and ked fiber ltd. and ked fiber llc as
buyers (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.13 to the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2004). the company agrees to
furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule to the
commission upon request.
.22
amendment to the purchase agreement dated april7, 2004, by
and among the company as seller and the other sellers identified
therein and ked fiber ltd. and ked fiber llc as buyers
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.14 to the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2004). the company agrees to
furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule to the
commission upon request.
.23
amendment to the purchase agreement dated april22, 2004,
by and among the company as seller and the other sellers
identified therein and ked fiber ltd. and ked fiber llc as
buyers (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.15 to the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended june30, 2004). the company agrees to
furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule to the
commission upon request.
computation of the ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
subsidiaries of the registrant.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
.1
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)certification
of the companys principal executive officer.
.2
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)certification
of the companys principal financial officer.
.1
section1350 certification of the companys principal
executive officer. the information contained in this exhibit
shall not be deemed filed with the securities and exchange
commission nor incorporated by reference in any registration
statement filed by the registrant under the securities act of
1933, as amended.
.2
section1350 certification of the companys principal
financial officer. the information contained in this exhibit
shall not be deemed filed with the securities and exchange
commission nor incorporated by reference in any registration
statement filed by the registrant under the securities act of
1933, as amended.
*
management contract or compensatory
plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to this
form10-k.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
date february18, 2008
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
by:
/s/j.
l. keefer
j. l. keefer
executive vice president and chief financial officer
(principal financial and accounting officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act
of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following
persons on behalf of the registrant in the capacities and on the
dates indicated:
signature
title(s)
date
/s/c.
o. holliday, jr.
c.
o. holliday, jr.
chairman of the board and
chief executive officer and director
(principal executive officer)
february18,2008
/s/r.
a. brown
r.
a. brown
director
february18,2008
/s/r.
h. brown
r.
h. brown
director
february 18, 2008
/s/b.
p. collomb
b.
p. collomb
director
february 18, 2008
/s/c.
j. crawford
c.
j. crawford
director
february 18, 2008
/s/j.
t. dillon
j.
t. dillon
director
february 18, 2008
/s/e.
i. du
pont,ii
e.
i. du pont,ii
director
february 18, 2008
/s/m.
a. hewson
m.
a. hewson
director
february 18, 2008
/s/l.
d. juliber
l.
d. juliber
director
february 18, 2008
/s/m.
naitoh
m.
naitoh
director
february 18, 2008
/s/s.
okeefe
s.
okeefe
director
february 18, 2008
/s/w.
k. reilly
w.
k. reilly
director
february 18, 2008
table of contents
[this page intentionally left blank]
table of contents
e.i. du pont de
nemours and company
index to the
consolidated financial statements
page(s)
consolidated financial statements:
managements reports on responsibility for
financial statements and internal control over financial
reporting
f-2
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
f-3
consolidated income statements for the years
ended december31, 2007, 2006 and 2005
f-4
consolidated balance sheets as of
december31, 2007 and december31, 2006
f-5
consolidated statements of stockholders
equity for the years ended december31, 2007, 2006 and
f-6
consolidated statements of cash flows for the
years ended december31, 2007, 2006 and 2005
f-7
notes to the consolidated financial statements
f-8
f-1
table of contents
managements
reports on responsibility for financial statements and
internal control over financial reporting
managements
report on responsibility for financial statements
management is responsible for the consolidated financial
statements and the other financial information contained in this
annual report on
form10-k.
the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles in the united states of
america (gaap) and are considered by management to present
fairly the companys financial position, results of
operations and cash flows. the financial statements include some
amounts that are based on managements best estimates and
judgments. the financial statements have been audited by the
companys independent registered public accounting firm,
pricewaterhousecoopers llp. the purpose of their audit is to
express an opinion as to whether the consolidated financial
statements included in this annual report on
form10-k
present fairly, in all material respects, the companys
financial position, results of operations and cash flows. their
report is presented on the following page.
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
adequate system of internal control over financial reporting as
defined in
rules13a-15(f)
and
15d-15(f)
under the securities exchange act of 1934. the companys
internal control over financial reporting is a process designed
to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. the companys internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that:
i.
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable
detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company;
ii.
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
only in accordance with authorization of management and
directors of the company; and
iii.
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisitions, use or disposition of
the companys assets that could have a material effect on
the financial statements. internal control over financial
reporting has certain inherent limitations which may not prevent
or detect misstatements. in addition, changes in conditions and
business practices may cause variation in the effectiveness of
internal controls.
management assessed the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting as of
december31, 2007, based on criteria set forth by the
committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission
(coso) in internal control-integrated framework. based on
its assessment and those criteria, management concluded that the
company maintained effective internal control over financial
reporting as of december31, 2007.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, has issued an audit report on the effectiveness
of the companys internal control over financial reporting
as of december31, 2007, which is presented on the
following page.
charles o. holliday, jr.
jeffrey l. keefer
chairman of the board and
chief executive officer
executive vice president
and chief financial officer
february18, 2008
f-2
table of contents
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
to the stockholders and the board of directors of
e. i. du pont de nemours and company:
in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and
the related consolidated statements of income,
stockholders equity and cash flows present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of e. i. du pont de
nemours and company and its subsidiaries at december31,
2007 and december31, 2006, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended december31, 2007 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america. in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement
schedule listed in the index appearing under item15(a)
(2)presents fairly, in all material respects, the
information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the
related consolidated financial statements. also in our opinion,
the company maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of
december31, 2007, based on criteria established in
internal control  integrated framework issued by
the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission (coso). the companys management is responsible
for these financial statements and financial statement schedule,
for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of
internal control over financial reporting, included in
managements reports on responsibility for financial
statements and internal control over financial reporting
appearing on
pagef-2.
our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial
statements and financial statement schedule and on the
companys internal control over financial reporting based
on our integrated audits. we conducted our audits in accordance
with the standards of the public company accounting oversight
board (united states). those standards require that we plan and
perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement and
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. our audits of the financial
statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements, assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. our audit of internal
control over financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting,
assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk. our audits also
included performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. we believe our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinions.
as discussed in note1 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company changed the manner in which it accounts
for uncertainty in incomes taxes in 2007.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
philadelphia, pennsylvania
february18, 2008
f-3
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
consolidated
financial statements
consolidated
income statements
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
for the year ended december 31,
net sales
$
29,378
$
27,421
$
26,639
other income, net
1,275
1,561
1,852
total
30,653
28,982
28,491
cost of goods sold and other operating charges
21,565
20,440
19,683
selling, general and administrative expenses
3,364
3,224
3,223
amortization of intangible assets
research and development expense
1,338
1,302
1,336
interest expense
separation activities  textiles& interiors
-
-
(62
)
total
26,910
25,653
24,928
income before income taxes and minority interests
3,743
3,329
3,563
provision for income taxes
1,470
minority interests in earnings (losses) of consolidated
subsidiaries
(15
)
net income
$
2,988
$
3,148
$
2,056
basic earnings per share of common stock
$
3.25
$
3.41
$
2.08
diluted earnings per share of common stock
$
3.22
$
3.38
$
2.07
see notes to the consolidated
financial statements beginning on pagef-8.
f-4
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
consolidated
financial statements
consolidated
balance sheets
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
december 31,
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,305
$
1,814
marketable securities
accounts and notes receivable, net
5,683
5,198
inventories
5,278
4,941
prepaid expenses
income taxes
total current assets
13,160
12,870
property, plant and equipment
26,593
25,719
less: accumulated depreciation
15,733
15,221
net property, plant and equipment
10,860
10,498
goodwill
2,074
2,108
other intangible assets
2,856
2,479
investment in affiliates
other assets
4,363
3,019
total
$
34,131
$
31,777
liabilities and stockholders equity
current liabilities
accounts payable
$
3,172
$
2,711
short-term borrowings and capital lease obligations
1,370
1,517
income taxes
other accrued liabilities
3,823
3,534
total current liabilities
8,541
7,940
long-term borrowings and capital lease obligations
5,955
6,013
other liabilities
7,255
7,692
deferred income taxes
total liabilities
22,553
21,914
minority interests
commitments and contingent liabilities
stockholders equity
preferred stock, without par value-cumulative;
23,000,000shares authorized; issued at december31,
2007 and 2006:
$4.50 series  1,673,000shares (callable at $120)
$3.50 series  700,000shares (callable at $102)
common stock, $.30par value; 1,800,000,000shares
authorized; issued at december31, 2007
986,330,000; 2006 1,009,109,000
additional paid-in capital
8,179
7,797
reinvested earnings
9,945
9,679
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(794
)
(1,867
)
common stock held in treasury, at cost (shares:
december31, 2007 and 2006 87,041,000)
(6,727
)
(6,727
)
total stockholders equity
11,136
9,422
total
$
34,131
$
31,777
see notes to the consolidated
financial statements beginning on pagef-8.
f-5
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
consolidated
financial statements
consolidated
statements of stockholders equity
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
accumulated
additional
other
total
preferred
common
paid in
reinvested
comprehensive
treasury
stockholders
comprehensive
stock
stock
capital
earnings
loss
stock
equity
income
balance january1, 2005
$
$
$
7,784
$
10,182
$
(423
)
$
(6,727
)
$
11,377
net income
2,056
2,056
$
2,056
cumulative effect from initial application of planned major
maintenance change, net of tax of $27
cumulative translation adjustment
(109
)
(109
)
(109
)
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
(2
)
(2
)
(2
)
minimum pension liability
net unrealized loss on securities
(11
)
(11
)
(11
)
total comprehensive income
$
1,961
common dividends ($1.46 per share)
(1,429
)
(1,429
)
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
common stock
issuedcompensation plans
repurchased
(3,530
)
(3,530
)
retired
(25
)
(644
)
(2,861
)
3,530
-
balance december31, 2005
$
$
$
7,678
$
7,990
$
(518
)
$
(6,727
)
$
8,962
net income
3,148
3,148
$
3,148
cumulative translation adjustment
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
minimum pension liability
net unrealized gain on securities
total comprehensive income
$
3,354
common dividends ($1.48 per share)
(1,368
)
(1,368
)
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
common stock
issued compensation plans
repurchased
(180
)
(100
)
(280
)
retired
(1
)
(18
)
(81
)
-
adjustment to initially apply defined benefit plan standard, net
of tax of $1,043 and minority interest of $8
(1,555
)
(1,555
)
balance december31, 2006
$
$
$
7,797
$
9,679
$
(1,867
)
$
(6,727
)
$
9,422
net income
2,988
2,988
$
2,988
cumulative translation adjustment
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
pension benefit plans
other benefit plans
net unrealized gain on securities
total comprehensive income
$
4,061
common dividends ($1.52 per share)
(1,399
)
(1,399
)
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
common stock
issued compensation plans
repurchased
(1,695
)
(1,695
)
retired
(10
)
(256
)
(1,429
)
1,695
-
adjustment to initially apply uncertainty in income taxes
standard
balance december31, 2007
$
$
$
8,179
$
9,945
$
(794
)
$
(6,727
)
$
11,136
see notes to the consolidated
financial statements beginning on pagef-8.
f-6
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
consolidated
financial statements
consolidated
statements of cash flows
(dollars
in millions)
for the year ended december 31,
operating activities
net income
$
2,988
$
3,148
$
2,056
adjustments to reconcile net income to cash provided by
operating activities:
depreciation
1,158
1,157
1,128
amortization of intangible assets
deferred tax (benefit)/expense
(1
)
(615
)
other noncash charges and credits net
separation activities textiles& interiors
-
-
(62
)
contributions to pension plans
(277
)
(280
)
(1,253
)
(increase) decrease in operating assets:
accounts and notes receivable
(214
)
(194
)
(74
)
inventories and other operating assets
(267
)
(61
)
increase (decrease) in operating liabilities:
accounts payable and other operating liabilities
(633
)
accrued interest and income taxes
(145
)
(269
)
cash provided by operating activities
4,290
3,736
2,542
investing activities
purchases of property, plant and equipment
(1,585
)
(1,532
)
(1,340
)
investments in affiliates
(113
)
(31
)
(66
)
payments for businesses net of cash acquired
(13
)
(60
)
(206
)
proceeds from sale of assets net of cash sold
net (increase) decrease in short-term financial instruments
(39
)
forward exchange contract settlements
(285
)
other investing activities net
cash used for investing activities
(1,750
)
(1,345
)
(602
)
financing activities
dividends paid to stockholders
(1,409
)
(1,378
)
(1,439
)
net increase (decrease) in short-term (less than 90days)
borrowings
1,117
(263
)
(494
)
long-term and other borrowings:
receipts
1,998
2,611
4,311
payments
(3,458
)
(3,139
)
(2,045
)
repurchase of common stock
(1,695
)
(280
)
(3,530
)
proceeds from exercise of stock options
other financing activities net
(67
)
(22
)
(13
)
cash used for financing activities
(3,069
)
(2,323
)
(2,851
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash
(722
)
increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(509
)
(1,633
)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
1,814
1,736
3,369
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
1,305
$
1,814
$
1,736
supplemental cash flow information:
cash paid during the year for
interest, net of amounts capitalized
$
$
$
taxes
see notes to the consolidated
financial statements beginning on pagef-8.
f-7
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
1.
summary of
significant accounting policies
dupont follows generally accepted accounting principles in the
united states of america (gaap). the significant accounting
policies described below, together with the other notes that
follow, are an integral part of the consolidated financial
statements.
preparation of
financial statements
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with gaap
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues
and expenses during the reporting period. actual results could
differ from those estimates.
accounting
changes
effective january1, 2007, the company adopted financial
accounting standards board (fasb) interpretation no.48,
accounting for uncertainty in income taxes
(fin48). fin48 clarifies the application of
sfas109, accounting for income taxes,
(sfas109)by defining criteria that an individual
income tax position must meet for any part of the benefit of
that position to be recognized in an enterprises financial
statements and provides guidance on measurement, derecognition,
classification, accounting for interest and penalties,
accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. upon
adoption, the company recorded a $116 reduction in the
previously accrued liabilities and a corresponding $116 increase
in reinvested earnings at january1, 2007 (see note6).
basis of
consolidation
the consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
the company, subsidiaries in which a controlling interest is
maintained and variable interest entities (vie) for which dupont
is the primary beneficiary. for those consolidated subsidiaries
in which the companys ownership is less than
100percent, the outside stockholders interests are
shown as minority interests. investments in affiliates over
which the company has significant influence but not a
controlling interest are carried on the equity basis. this
includes majority-owned entities for which the company does not
consolidate because a minority investor holds substantive
participating rights. investments in affiliates over which the
company does not have significant influence are accounted for by
the cost method. gains or losses arising from issuances by an
affiliate or a subsidiary of its own stock are recorded as
nonoperating items.
revenue
recognition
the company recognizes revenue when the earnings process is
complete. the companys revenues are from the sale of a
wide range of products to a diversified base of customers around
the world. revenue for product sales is recognized upon
delivery, when title and risk of loss have been transferred,
collectibility is reasonably assured and pricing is fixed or
determinable. substantially all product sales are sold fob (free
on board) shipping point or, with respect to
non-u.s.customers,
an equivalent basis. accruals are made for sales returns and
other allowances based on the companys experience. the
company accounts for cash sales incentives as a reduction in
sales and noncash sales incentives as a charge to cost of goods
sold or selling expense, depending on the nature of the
incentive. amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling
fees are included in net sales and costs incurred by the company
for the delivery of goods are classified as cost of goods sold
and other operating charges in the consolidated income
statements. taxes on revenue-producing transactions are excluded
from net sales.
the company periodically enters into prepayment contracts with
customers in the agriculture& nutrition segment and
receives advance payments for product to be delivered in future
periods. these advance payments are recorded as deferred revenue
and are included in other accrued liabilities on the
consolidated balance sheets. revenue associated with advance
payments is recognized as shipments are made and title,
ownership and risk of loss pass to the customer.
licensing and royalty income is recognized in accordance with
agreed upon terms, when performance obligations are satisfied,
the amount is fixed or determinable and collectibility is
reasonably assured.
f-8
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
cash and cash
equivalents
cash equivalents represent investments with maturities of three
months or less from time of purchase. they are carried at cost
plus accrued interest, which approximates fair value because of
the short-term maturity of these instruments.
investments in
securities
marketable securities represent investments in fixed and
floating rate financial instruments with maturities of twelve
months or less from time of purchase. they are classified as
held-to-maturity and recorded at amortized cost.
other assets include long-term investments in securities, which
comprise investments for which market values are not readily
available (cost investments) and available-for-sale securities
that are reported at fair value (see note13).
inventories
the majority of the companys inventories are valued at
cost, as determined by the
last-in,
first-out (lifo) method; in the aggregate, such valuations are
not in excess of market. seed inventories are valued at the
lower of cost, as determined by the
first-in,
first-out (fifo) method, or market.
elements of cost in inventories include raw materials, direct
labor and manufacturing overhead. stores and supplies are valued
at cost or market, whichever is lower; cost is generally
determined by the average cost method.
property, plant
and equipment
property, plant and equipment (pp&e) is carried at cost and
is depreciated using the straight-line method. pp&e placed
in service prior to 1995 is depreciated under the
sum-of-the-years digits method or other substantially
similar methods. substantially all equipment and buildings are
depreciated over useful lives ranging from 15 to 25years.
capitalizable costs associated with computer software for
internal use are amortized on a straight-line basis over 5 to
7years. when assets are surrendered, retired, sold or
otherwise disposed of, their gross carrying values and related
accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and
included in determining gain or loss on such disposals.
maintenance and repairs are charged to operations; replacements
and improvements are capitalized.
goodwill and
other intangible assets
goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for
impairment at least annually; however, these tests are performed
more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate
the carrying value may not be recoverable. the companys
fair value methodology is based on quoted market prices, if
available. if quoted market prices are not available, an
estimate of fair market value is made based on prices of similar
assets or other valuation methodologies including present value
techniques. impairment losses are included in cost of goods sold
and other operating charges.
definite-lived intangible assets, such as purchased and licensed
technology, patents and customer lists are amortized over their
estimated useful lives, generally for periods ranging from 5 to
20years. the company continually evaluates the
reasonableness of the useful lives of these assets. once these
assets are fully amortized, they are removed from the
consolidated balance sheets.
impairment of
long-lived assets
the company evaluates the carrying value of long-lived assets to
be held and used when events or changes in circumstances
indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. the carrying
value of a long-lived asset is considered impaired when the
total projected undiscounted cash flows from such asset are
separately identifiable and are less than its carrying value. in
that event, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which
the carrying value exceeds the fair market value of the
long-lived asset. the companys fair value methodology is
based on quoted market prices, if available. if quoted market
prices are not available, an estimate of fair market value is
made based on prices of similar assets or other valuation
methodologies including present value techniques. long-lived
assets to be disposed of other than by sale are classified as
held for use until their disposal. long-lived assets to be
f-9
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
disposed by sale are classified as held for sale and are
reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair market value
less cost to sell and depreciation is discontinued.
research and
development
research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
environmental
accruals for environmental matters are recorded in operating
expenses when it is probable that a liability has been incurred
and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated.
accrued liabilities do not include claims against third parties
and are not discounted.
costs related to environmental remediation are charged to
expense. other environmental costs are also charged to expense
unless they increase the value of the property or reduce or
prevent contamination from future operations, in which case,
they are capitalized.
asset retirement
obligations
the company records asset retirement obligations at fair value
at the time the liability is incurred. accretion expense is
recognized as an operating expense using the credit-adjusted
risk-free interest rate in effect when the liability was
recognized. the associated asset retirement obligations are
capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the long-lived
asset and depreciated over the estimated remaining useful life
of the asset, generally for periods ranging from 1 to
20years.
litigation
the company accrues for liabilities related to litigation
matters when the information available indicates that it is
probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of
the liability can be reasonably estimated. legal costs such as
outside counsel fees and expenses are charged to expense in the
period incurred.
insurance/self-insurance
the company self-insures certain risks where permitted by law or
regulation, including workers compensation, vehicle
liability and employee related benefits. liabilities associated
with these risks are estimated in part by considering historical
claims experience, demographic factors and other actuarial
assumptions. for other risks, the company uses a combination of
insurance and self-insurance, reflecting comprehensive reviews
of relevant risks.
income
taxes
the provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and
liability approach of accounting for income taxes. under this
approach, deferred taxes represent the future tax consequences
expected to occur when the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities are recovered or paid. the provision for income
taxes represents income taxes paid or payable for the current
year plus the change in deferred taxes during the year. deferred
taxes result from differences between the financial and tax
bases of the companys assets and liabilities and are
adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax laws when changes are
enacted. valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred
tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit
will not be realized. provision has been made for income taxes
on unremitted earnings of subsidiaries and affiliates, except
for subsidiaries in which earnings are deemed to be permanently
invested. investment tax credits or grants are accounted for in
the period earned (the flow-through method). interest accrued
related to unrecognized tax benefits is included in
miscellaneous income and
expenses-net,
under other income, net. income tax related penalties are
included in the provision for income taxes. it is reasonably
possible that changes from future completed tax examinations
could be significant when compared to the companys global
unrecognized tax benefits, however due to the uncertainty
regarding the timing of completion of these audits and the
possible outcomes, a current estimate of the range of increase
or decrease that may occur within the next twelve months cannot
be made.
f-10
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
foreign currency
translation
the u.s.dollar (usd) is the functional currency of most of
the companys worldwide operations. for subsidiaries where
the usd is the functional currency, all foreign currency asset
and liability amounts are remeasured into usd at end-of-period
exchange rates, except for inventories, prepaid expenses,
property, plant and equipment, goodwill and other intangible
assets, which are remeasured at historical rates. foreign
currency income and expenses are remeasured at average exchange
rates in effect during the year, except for expenses related to
balance sheet amounts remeasured at historical exchange rates.
exchange gains and losses arising from remeasurement of foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities are
included in income in the period in which they occur.
for subsidiaries where the local currency is the functional
currency, assets and liabilities denominated in local currencies
are translated into usd, at end-of-period exchange rates and the
resultant translation adjustments are reported, net of their
related tax effects, as a component of accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss) in stockholders equity. assets
and liabilities denominated in other than the local currency are
remeasured into the local currency prior to translation into usd
and the resultant exchange gains or losses are included in
income in the period in which they occur. income and expenses
are translated into usd at average exchange rates in effect
during the period.
variable interest
entities (vies)
the company consolidates vies where dupont is considered the
primary beneficiary. at december31, 2007, the assets,
liabilities and operations of these entities are not material to
the consolidated financial statements of the company.
the company is also involved with other entities that are vies
for which the company is not currently the primary beneficiary.
future events may require these vies to be consolidated if the
company becomes the primary beneficiary. at december31,
2007, the assets and liabilities of the other vies are
immaterial to the consolidated financial statements of the
company. the companys share of the net income (loss) of
these vies is included in other income, net, in the consolidated
income statements and is not material.
hedging and
trading activities
derivative instruments are reported on the consolidated balance
sheets at their fair values. for derivative instruments
designated as fair value hedges, changes in the fair values of
the derivative instruments will generally be offset on the
income statement by changes in the fair value of the hedged
items. for derivative instruments designated as cash flow
hedges, the effective portion of any hedge is reported in
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) until it is
cleared to earnings during the same period in which the hedged
item affects earnings. the ineffective portion of all hedges is
recognized in current period earnings. changes in the fair
values of derivative instruments that are not designated as
hedges are recorded in current period earnings.
in the event that a derivative designated as a hedge of a firm
commitment or an anticipated transaction is terminated prior to
the maturation of the hedged transaction, gains or losses
realized at termination are deferred and included in the
measurement of the hedged transaction. if a hedged transaction
matures, or is sold, extinguished, or terminated prior to the
maturity of a derivative designated as a hedge of such
transaction, gains or losses associated with the derivative
through the date the transaction matured are included in the
measurement of the hedged transaction and the derivative is
reclassified as for trading purposes. derivatives designated as
a hedge of an anticipated transaction are reclassified as for
trading purposes if the anticipated transaction is no longer
likely to occur.
cash flows from derivative instruments accounted for as either
fair value hedges or cash flow hedges are reported in the same
category as the cash flows from the items being hedged. cash
flows from all other derivative instruments are generally
reported as investing activities in the consolidated statements
of cash flows. see note23 for additional discussion
regarding the companys objectives and strategies for
derivative instruments.
reclassifications
certain reclassifications of prior years data have been
made to conform to 2007 classifications.
f-11
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
accounting
standards issued not yet adopted
in september 2006, the fasb issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.157, fair value
measurements, (sfas157)which addresses how
companies should measure fair value when required for
recognition or disclosure purposes under gaap. the
standards provisions will be applied to existing
accounting measurements and related disclosures that are based
on fair value. sfas157 does not require any new fair value
measurements. the standard applies a common definition of fair
value to be used throughout gaap, with emphasis on fair value as
a market-based measurement versus an entity-specific
measurement and establishes a hierarchy of fair value
measurement methods. the disclosure requirements are expanded to
include the extent to which companies use fair value
measurements, the methods and assumptions used to measure fair
value and the effect of fair value measurements on earnings.
sfas157 is effective for fiscal years beginning after
november15, 2007. the new standards provisions
applicable to the company will be applied prospectively
beginning january1, 2008. the fasb, on february12,
2008, issued fasb staff position (fsp)
fas157-2.
this fsp permits a delay in the effective date of sfas157
to fiscal years beginning after november15, 2008, for
nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities, except for
items that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the
financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually).
the delay is intended to allow the board and constituents
additional time to consider the effect of various implementation
issues that have arisen, or that may arise, from the application
of sfas157. on february14, 2008, the fasb issued fsp
fas157-1
to exclude sfas13, accounting for leases, and its related
interpretive accounting pronouncements from the scope of
sfas157. management expects that the adoption of
sfas157 will not have a material effect on the
companys financial position, liquidity or results of
operations.
in december 2007, the fasb issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.141 (revised
2007)business combinations (sfas141r)
which replaces fasb statement no.141. sfas141r
addresses the recognition and measurement of identifiable assets
acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests in
business combinations. sfas141r also requires disclosure
that enables users of the financial statements to better
evaluate the nature and financial effect of business
combinations. sfas141r applies prospectively to business
combinations for which the acquisition date is on or after the
beginning of the first annual reporting period beginning on or
after december15, 2008. sfas141r will be adopted by
the company on january1, 2009. the company is currently
evaluating the impact of adoption on its consolidated financial
statements.
in december 2007, the fasb issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.160, noncontrolling
interests in consolidated financial
statementsan amendment of accounting research
bulletinno.51 (sfas160)which
changes the accounting and reporting for minority interests and
for the deconsolidation of a subsidiary. it also clarifies that
a third-party, non-controlling interest in a consolidated
subsidiary is an ownership interest in the consolidated entity
that should be reported as equity in the consolidated financial
statements. sfas160 also requires disclosure that clearly
identifies and distinguishes between the interests of the parent
and the interests of the non-controlling owners. sfas160
is effective for fiscal years beginning after december15,
2008. sfas160 will be adopted by the company on
january1, 2009. the company is currently evaluating the
impact of adoption on its consolidated financial statements.
f-12
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
2.
other income,
net
cozaar/hyzaar
licensing income
$
$
$
royalty income
interest income
equity in (losses) earnings of affiliates (note12)
(130
)
net gains on sales of assets
net exchange (losses)
gains1
(65
)
miscellaneous income and
expensesnet2
$
1,275
$
1,561
$
1,852
the company routinely uses forward
exchange contracts to offset its net exposures, by currency,
related to the foreign currency- denominated monetary assets and
liabilities of its operations. the objective of this program is
to maintain an approximately balanced position in foreign
currencies in order to minimize, on an after-tax basis, the
effects of exchange rate changes. the net pretax exchange gains
and losses are largely offset by the associated tax impact.
miscellaneous income and
expensesnet, principally includes insurance
recoveries, litigation settlements, interest items, and other
miscellaneous items.
3.
interest
expense
interest incurred
$
$
$
interest capitalized
(45
)
(37
)
(23
)
$
$
$
4.
restructuring
activities
activities
during 2007, the company did not institute any significant
restructuring programs. in 2007, employee separation payments,
net of exchange impact, of $77 associated with 2006
restructuring activities were made. at december31, 2007,
total liabilities relating to prior year restructuring
activities were $82 including $70 associated with the plans
initiated in 2006.
activities
during 2006, the company initiated restructuring actions within
its agriculture& nutrition and coatings&
color technologies segments to improve the companys global
competitiveness. as a result, a net charge of $326 was recorded
in cost of goods sold and other operating charges for employee
separation and asset write-downs. further details are discussed
below.
agriculture&
nutrition
during the fourth quarter 2006, the agriculture&
nutrition platform launched plans to re-deploy capital and
resources within various segments of the business. the plans
included the closing or streamlining of manufacturing units at
about twelve sites and the reduction of approximately 1,500
positions globally. restructuring charges resulting from the
plans totaled $194, $72 of which are reflected within
performance materials segment results following the realignment
of certain businesses in 2007. the global program included $64
for severance payments and $130 principally for asset
impairments, primarily related to definite-lived intangible
assets whose remaining useful lives were reduced, abandoned
technology and other non-personnel charges. at december31,
2007, 1,054employees were separated from the company and
118 were redeployed. essentially all employees are expected to
be separated from the company by 2009. cash payments related to
these separations were approximately $25 in 2007 and $4 in 2006.
f-13
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
coatings&
color technologies
a business transformation plan was instituted during the first
quarter 2006 within the coatings& color technologies
segment to better serve the companys customers and improve
profitability. the plan included the elimination of
approximately 1,700 positions. restructuring charges resulting
from the plan totaled $135, including $123 related to severance
payments primarily in europe and the u.s.for approximately
1,300employees involved in manufacturing, marketing,
administrative and technical activities. in connection with this
program, a $12 charge was also recorded related to exit costs of
non-strategic assets. as of december31, 2007, essentially
all positions identified as a part of the companys 2006
program have been separated from the company. this consisted of
1,200 separations and 450 individuals redeployed. cash payments
related to these separations were approximately $52 in 2007 and
$28 in 2006.
account balances and activity for the 2006 restructuring
programs are summarized below:
employee
separation
write-down of assets
costs
total
net charges to income in 2006
$
$
$
charges to accounts
employee separation payments
-
(32
)
(32
)
asset write-offs
(142
)
-
(142
)
balance at december31, 2006
$
-
$
$
employee separation payments
-
(77
)
(77
)
net charges (credits) to income
(5
)
-
asset write-offs
(5
)
-
(5
)
balance at december31, 2007
$
-
$
$
activities
during 2005, the company did not institute any significant
restructuring programs. in 2005, employee separation payments of
$133 associated with prior year programs were made.
5.
separation
activities-textiles& interiors
on april30, 2004, the company sold a majority of the net
assets of textiles& interiors, referred to as
invista, to koch, inc. (koch). during 2005, the company sold its
investments in three affiliated companies with a book value of
$84 to koch and its investment in a fourth affiliated company to
its equity partner. in january 2006, the company completed the
sale of its interest in the last equity affiliate to its equity
partner for proceeds of $14 thereby completing the sale of all
of the net assets of textiles& interiors.
in 2005, the company recorded a net benefit of $62 resulting
from divestiture activities. the companys transfer of its
interest in the affiliates to koch resulted in a gain of $35.
the sale of two of these affiliates had been delayed until the
company received approval from its equity partners. the company
also recorded a gain of $29 in 2005 related to the sale of the
companys investment in another equity affiliate and $2 of
other charges associated with the separation. net cash proceeds
from these transactions totaled $135. additionally, in 2005, the
company received $40 of cash proceeds related to a 2004 sale of
an equity affiliate to its partner.
the company indemnified koch against certain liabilities
primarily related to taxes, legal matters, environmental matters
and representations and warranties. see note19 for
additional information.
f-14
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
6.
provision for
income taxes
current tax expense (benefit):
u.s. federal
$
$
$
u.s. state and local
(1
)
international
1,361
deferred tax expense (benefit):
u.s. federal
(297
)
u.s. state and local
(24
)
(18
)
(13
)
international
(40
)
(300
)
(82
)
(1
)
(615
)
provision for income taxes
$
$
$
1,470
stockholders equity:
stock
compensation1
(25
)
(2
)
(40
)
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to
earnings2
(1
)
net unrealized (losses) gains on
securities2
(6
)
minimum pension
liability2
-
(20
)
pension benefits
net
losses3
(1,048
)
-
prior service
cost3
(51
)
-
other benefits
net
losses3
(391
)
-
net prior service
benefit3
(55
)
-
$
1,296
$
(589
)
$
1,403
represents deferred tax benefits
for certain stock compensation amounts that are deductible for
income tax purposes but do not affect net income.
represents deferred tax charges
(benefits) recorded as a component of accumulated other
comprehensive loss in stockholders equity. see
note20.
on december31, 2006, the
company adopted prospectively sfas158 and as required, the
company included in the ending balance of accumulated other
comprehensive loss, taxes associated with the gains and losses
and prior service costs and credits, that pursuant to
sfasno.87 and 106 prior to amendment by
sfas158 had not been recognized as components of net
periodic benefit cost.
f-15
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
deferred income taxes result from temporary differences between
the financial and tax basis of the companys assets and
liabilities. the tax effects of temporary differences and tax
loss/tax credit carryforwards/backs included in the deferred
income tax provision are as follows:
depreciation
$
(6
)
$
(12
)
$
(3
)
accrued employee benefits
(125
)
other accrued expenses
(329
)
inventories
(7
)
(52
)
(46
)
unrealized exchange (loss) gain
(38
)
(62
)
investment in subsidiaries and affiliates
(18
)
(7
)
amortization of intangibles
(18
)
(14
)
(45
)
other temporary differences
tax loss/tax credit carryforwards/backs
(22
)
(230
)
valuation allowancenet
(185
)
(108
)
$
(1
)
$
(615
)
$
the significant components of deferred tax assets and
liabilities at december31, 2007 and 2006, are as follows:
asset
liability
asset
liability
depreciation
$
-
$
1,392
$
-
$
1,380
accrued employee benefits
1,469
2,302
other accrued expenses
1,225
inventories
unrealized exchange gains
-
-
tax loss/tax credit carryforwards/backs
2,830
-
2,602
-
investment in subsidiaries and affiliates
amortization of intangibles
other
$
6,174
$
3,474
$
6,504
$
3,259
valuation allowance
(1,424
)
(1,467
)
$
4,750
$
5,037
current deferred tax assets of $564 and $656 at
december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively, are included in
the caption income taxes within current assets of the
consolidated balance sheets. in addition, deferred tax assets of
$1,523 and $1,430 are included in other assets at
december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. see note13.
deferred tax liabilities of $9 and $39 at december31, 2007
and 2006, respectively, are included in the caption income taxes
within current liabilities of the consolidated balance sheets.
f-16
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
an analysis of the companys effective income tax rate
(eitr) follows:
statutory u.s. federal income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
exchange
gains/losses1
(0.9
)
0.6
9.4
domestic operations
(3.2
)
0.1
(1.4
)
lower effective tax rates on international
operations-net
(7.5
)
(12.4
)
(6.8
)
tax settlements
(3.4
)
(10.4
)
(1.4
)
lower effective tax rate on export sales
-
(0.8
)
(1.0
)
the american jobs creation act of 2004
(ajca)2
-
(0.6
)
8.2
valuation allowance release
-
(5.6
)
(0.7
)
20.0
%
5.9
%
41.3
%
principally reflects the benefit of
non-taxable exchange gains resulting from remeasurement of
foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities.
further information about the companys foreign currency
hedging program is included in note23 under the heading
currency risk.
reflects the tax impact associated
with the repatriation of $9.1billion under the ajca.
income before income taxes and minority interests shown below is
based on the location of the corporate unit to which such
earnings are attributable. however, since such earnings are
often subject to taxation in more than one country, coupled with
the impact of exchange gains/losses, the income tax provision
shown above as united states or international does not
correspond to the earnings shown in the following table:
united states (including exports)
$
1,652
$
1,947
$
2,795
international
$
2,091
1,382
$
3,743
$
3,329
$
3,563
under the tax laws of various jurisdictions in which the company
operates, deductions or credits that cannot be fully utilized
for tax purposes during the current year may be carried forward
or back, subject to statutory limitations, to reduce taxable
income or taxes payable in future or prior years. at
december31, 2007, the tax effect of such
carryforwards/backs, net of valuation allowance approximated
$1,415. of this amount, $1,206 has no expiration date, $20
expires after 2007 but before the end of 2012 and $189 expires
after 2012.
at december31, 2007, unremitted earnings of subsidiaries
outside the united states totaling $9,644 were deemed to be
permanently reinvested. no deferred tax liability has been
recognized with regard to the remittance of such earnings. it is
not practical to estimate the income tax liability that might be
incurred if such earnings were remitted to the united states.
each year the company files hundreds of income tax returns in
the various national, state and local income taxing
jurisdictions in which it operates. these tax returns are
subject to examination and possible challenge by the taxing
authorities. positions challenged by the taxing authorities may
be settled or appealed by the company. as a result, there is an
uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the companys
financial statements in accordance with sfasno.109,
accounting for income taxes (sfas109). in
2006, the fasb issued fin48, which clarifies the
application of sfas109 by defining criteria that an
individual income tax position must meet for any part of the
benefit of that position to be recognized in an
enterprises financial statements and provides guidance on
measurement, derecognition, classification, accounting for
interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods,
disclosure, and transition.
in accordance with the transition provisions, the company
adopted fin48 effective january1, 2007. this
resulted in a $116 reduction in the previously accrued
liabilities and a corresponding $116 increase in reinvested
earnings at january1, 2007. in accordance with
fin48, the total amount of global unrecognized tax
benefits at december31, 2007 was $825. of the $825 of
unrecognized tax benefits, $443 relates to tax positions, which
if recognized would
f-17
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
reduce tax expense. the total gross accrued interest and penalty
during 2007 in the consolidated income statement was $25 and the
total gross accrued interest and penalties at december31,
2007 was $114. the company
and/or its
subsidiaries files income tax returns in the united states of
america (u.s.) federal jurisdiction, and various states and
non-u.s.jurisdictions.
with few exceptions, the company is no longer subject to
u.s.federal, state and local, or
non-u.s.income
tax examinations by tax authorities for years before 1999. it is
reasonably possible that changes to the companys global
unrecognized tax benefits could be significant, however due to
the uncertainty regarding the timing of completion of audits and
possible outcomes, a current estimate of the range of increases
or decreases that may occur within the next twelve months can
not be made. a reconciliation of the beginning and ending
amounts of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
total unrecognized tax benefits as of 1/1/2007
$
1,070
gross amounts of decreases in unrecognized tax benefits as a
result of tax positions taken during the prior period
(173
)
gross amounts of increases in unrecognized tax benefits as a
result of tax positions taken during the prior period
gross amounts of increases in unrecognized tax benefits as a
result of tax positions taken during the current period
amount of decreases in the unrecognized tax benefits relating to
settlements with taxing authorities
(209
)
reduction to unrecognized tax benefits as a result of a lapse of
the applicable statue of limitations
(16
)
exchange gain/(loss)
total unrecognized tax benefits as of 12/31/2007
$
total unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would
impact the effective tax rate
$
total amount of interest and penalties recognized in the
consolidated income statement
$
total amount of interest and penalties recognized in the
consolidated balance sheet
$
7.
earnings per
share of common stock
set forth below is a reconciliation of the numerator and
denominator for basic and diluted earnings per share
calculations for the periods indicated:
numerator:
net income
$
2,988
$
3,148
$
2,056
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
(10
)
net income available to common stockholders
$
2,978
$
3,138
$
2,046
denominator:
weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
basic
917,132,000
921,474,000
982,193,000
dilutive effect of the companys employee compensation
plans and accelerated share repurchase agreement
8,270,000
7,127,000
6,761,000
weighted average number of common shares outstanding
diluted
925,402,000
928,601,000
988,954,000
the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding in 2007
and 2006 declined as a result of the companys repurchase
and retirement of its common stock in connection with its
$5billion share buyback plan, which was authorized by the
board of directors in october 2005. see note20 for further
information.
f-18
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
the following average number of stock options are antidilutive
and therefore, are not included in the diluted earnings per
share calculation:
average number of stock options
23,252,000
63,294,000
52,958,000
the 40million decrease in the average number of stock
options that were antidilutive in 2007 compared to 2006 was
primarily due to the increase in the companys average
stock price. additionally, there were 12.8million stock
options that expired unexercised and were cancelled in january
2007, which were included in the average number of stock options
that were antidilutive in 2006.
8.
accounts and
notesreceivable
december 31,
accounts receivable-trade-net of allowances of $261 in 2007 and
$233 in 2006
$
4,649
$
4,335
other
1,034
$
5,683
$
5,198
accounts and notes receivable are carried at amounts that
approximate fair value and include amounts due from equity
affiliates of $27 for 2007, and $58 for 2006.
9.
inventories
december 31,
finished products
$
3,043
$
3,075
semifinished products
1,865
1,616
raw materials, stores and supplies
1,000
5,908
5,495
adjustment of inventories to a lifo basis
(630
)
(554
)
$
5,278
$
4,941
inventory values, before lifo adjustment, are generally
determined by the average cost method, which approximates
current cost. inventories, excluding seeds and stores and
supplies, are valued under the lifo method and comprised
80percent of consolidated inventories before lifo
adjustment for the periods ended december31, 2007 and
2006. seed inventories of $1,369 and $1,115 at december31,
2007 and 2006, respectively, were valued under the fifo method.
stores and supplies inventories of $259 and $281 at
december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively, were valued under
the average cost method.
10.
property, plant
and equipment
december 31,
buildings
$
4,111
$
4,081
equipment
20,537
20,058
land
construction
1,519
1,163
$
26,593
$
25,719
f-19
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
property, plant and equipment includes gross assets acquired
under capital leases of $55 and $61 at december31, 2007
and 2006, respectively. related amounts included in accumulated
depreciation were $33 at december31, 2007 and 2006.
11.
goodwill and
other intangible assets
goodwill
the following table summarizes changes in the carrying amount of
goodwill for the year ended december31, 2007, by
reportable segment:
balance
goodwill
balance
as of december31,
adjustments and
as of december31,
acquisitions
agriculture& nutrition
$
$
(1
)
$
coatings& color technologies
-
electronic& communication technologies
performance materials
(37
)
safety& protection
other
-
total
$
2,074
$
(34
)
$
2,108
changes in goodwill in 2007 resulted from purchase accounting
refinements and other acquisitions and divestitures. in 2007,
the company performed its annual impairment tests for goodwill
and determined that no goodwill impairments existed.
other intangible
assets
the following table summarizes the gross carrying amounts and
accumulated amortization of other intangible assets by major
class:
december31, 2007
december31, 2006
accumulated
accumulated
gross
amortization
net
gross
amortization
net
intangible assets subject to amortization (definite-lived)
purchased and licensed technology
$
2,410
$
(1,142
)
$
1,268
$
2,099
$
(1,253
)
$
patents
(56
)
(46
)
trademarks
(17
)
(14
)
other1
(237
)
(192
)
3,154
(1,452
)
1,702
2,829
(1,505
)
1,324
intangible assets not subject to amortization
(indefinite-lived)
trademarks/tradenames
-
-
pioneer
germplasm2
-
-
1,154
-
1,154
1,155
-
1,155
$
4,308
$
(1,452
)
$
2,856
$
3,984
$
(1,505
)
$
2,479
primarily consists of sales and
grower networks, customer lists, marketing and manufacturing
alliances and noncompetition agreements.
pioneer germplasm is the pool of
genetic source material and body of knowledge gained from the
development and delivery stage of plant breeding. the company
recognized germplasm as an intangible asset upon the acquisition
of pioneer. this intangible asset is expected to contribute to
cash flows beyond the foreseeable future and there are no legal,
regulatory, contractual, or other factors which limit its useful
life. prior to the adoption of sfasno.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets, the company
amortized germplasm on a straight-line basis over a period of
forty years, the maximum period previously allowed under
generally accepted accounting principles.
f-20
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
during 2007, the companys wholly-owned subsidiary, pioneer
hi-bred international, inc. (pioneer) entered into a business
agreement on corn herbicide tolerance and insect control trait
technologies with monsanto company. among other provisions,
modifications were made to the existing corn license agreements;
both parties agreed to exchange certain non-assert and other
intellectual property rights; and both parties obtained rights
to reference and access certain regulatory data and approvals in
which the other has certain interests.
the
yieldgard
mon810 corn license agreement has been modified to provide
pioneer with more favorable royalty terms and broader rights to
certain regulatory data and approvals for use in developing
products stacked with
yieldgard
mon810 corn. as part of the agreement, monsanto receives broader
rights and access to certain
herculex
insect control trait regulatory data and approvals for use in
developing products stacked with
herculex
insect control traits.
the agreement also modified the existing roundup
ready
corn 2 license to provide for specified annual royalty payments
from 2008 through 2015 versus the per unit royalty arrangement
in place for the same period. as a result of the change from a
per unit royalty payment to specified annual royalty payments,
the company recorded an intangible asset for licensed technology
and an associated liability with a net present value of $573 in
the year ended december31, 2007. the intangible asset is
subject to amortization, which will be reported in cost of goods
sold and other operating charges, over the life of the related
contract. interest expense associated with the liability will be
reported in cost of goods sold and other operating charges.
cumulative cash payments will be approximately $725 over this
eight-year period.
the aggregate pretax amortization expense for definite-lived
intangible assets was $213 for 2007, $227 for 2006, and $230 for
2005. the estimated aggregate pretax amortization expense for
2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 is $280, $290, $275, $260 and
$210, respectively, including amounts that will be reported in
cost of goods sold and other operating charges.
12.
summarized
financial information for affiliated companies
summarized combined financial information for affiliated
companies for which the equity method of accounting is used (see
note1)is shown on a 100percent basis. the most
significant of these affiliates at december31, 2007, are
dupont teijin films, dupont-toray company ltd. and
dupont-mitsui, all of which are owned 50percent by the
company. dividends received from equity affiliates were $88 in
2007, $61 in 2006 and $107 in 2005.
results of operations
net
sales1
$
3,414
$
3,491
$
3,789
earnings before income taxes
net
income2
duponts equity in (losses) earnings of affiliates:
partnerships-pretax3
(19
)
corporate joint ventures-after tax
write-down of
investment4
(165
)
-
-
$
(130
)
$
$
includes sales to dupont of $496 in
2007, $624 in 2006, and $631 in 2005.
includes losses of $25 in 2005 in
dupont photomasks, inc., an equity affiliate in which dupont had
approximately a 20percent ownership interest. dupont sold
its interest in dupont photomasks, inc. in april 2005.
income taxes are reflected in the
companys provision for income tax.
impairment charge of $165 to write
down the companys investment in a polyester films joint
venture in the performance materials segment. as a result, at
december31, 2007, dupont ceased using the equity method of
accounting for three legal entities within the joint venture.
f-21
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
financial position at december 31,
current assets
$
1,345
$
1,376
noncurrent assets
1,325
1,752
total assets
2,670
3,128
short-term
borrowings1
other current liabilities
long-term
borrowings1
other long-term liabilities
total liabilities
1,309
1,676
duponts investment in affiliates (includes advances)
$
$
the companys pro rata
interest in total borrowings was $246 in 2007 and $432 in 2006,
of which $48 in 2007 and $300 in 2006 were guaranteed by the
company. these amounts are included in the guarantees disclosed
in note 19.
13.
other
assets
december 31,
employee benefits pension (note21)
$
2,187
$
1,040
long-term investments in securities
deferred income taxes (note6)
1,523
1,430
miscellaneous
$
4,363
$
3,019
included within long-term investments in securities are
securities for which market values are not readily available
(cost investments) and securities classified as
available-for-sale. the companys cost investments totaled
$61 and $73 at december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
the companys available for sale securities totaled $29 and
$21 at december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
14.
accounts
payable
december 31,
trade payables
$
2,610
$
2,162
payables to banks
miscellaneous
$
3,172
$
2,711
trade payables includes $34 in 2007 and $47 for 2006 due to
equity affiliates. payables to banks represent checks issued on
certain disbursement accounts but not presented to the banks for
payment. the reported amounts shown above approximate fair value
because of the short-term maturity of these obligations.
f-22
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
15.
short-term
borrowings and capital lease obligations
december 31,
commercial paper
$
1,198
$
-
other loans-various currencies
long-term debt payable within one year
1,163
capital lease obligations
$
1,370
$
1,517
the estimated fair value of the companys short-term
borrowings, including interest rate financial instruments, based
on quoted market prices for the same or similar issues, or on
current rates offered to the company for debt of the same
remaining maturities, was $1,400 and $1,500 at december31,
2007 and 2006, respectively.
unused bank credit lines were approximately $4,300 and $3,500 at
december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. these lines are
available to support short-term liquidity needs and general
corporate purposes including letters of credit. as of
december31, 2007, the company had outstanding letters of
credit of $255 supporting commitments made in the ordinary
course of business.
the weighted-average interest rate on short-term borrowings
outstanding at december31, 2007 and 2006 was 4.3 and
5.4percent, respectively.
16.
other accrued
liabilities
december 31,
compensation and other employee-related costs
$
$
deferred revenue
employee benefits (note21)
discounts and rebates
miscellaneous
1,116
1,060
$
3,823
$
3,534
deferred revenue principally includes advance customer payments
related to businesses within the agriculture&
nutrition segment. miscellaneous other accrued liabilities
principally includes accrued plant and operating expenses,
accrued litigation costs, employee separation costs in
connection with the companys restructuring programs, the
estimated fair value of certain guarantees and accrued
environmental remediation costs.
f-23
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
17.
long-term
borrowings and capital lease obligations
december 31,
u.s. dollar:
industrial development bonds due
2026-20291
$
$
medium-term notes due
2013-20482
6.75%notes due 2007
3, 4
-
3.375%notes due 2007
3, 4
-
5.75%notes due 2009
5.88%notes due 2009
6.88%notes due 2009
4.125%notes due 2010
4.75%notes due 2012
5.00%notes due 2013
-
4.875%notes due 2014
5.25%notes due 2016
6.50%debentures due 2028
5.60%notes due 2036
other loans (average interest rate of 1.1percent)
foreign currency denominated loans
euro loans (average interest rate of 4.7percent)
3, 5
1,034
other loans (various
currencies)3
5,966
7,162
less short-term portion of long-term debt
1,163
5,945
5,999
capital lease obligations
total
$
5,955
$
6,013
average interest rates on
industrial development bonds for december31, 2007 and
2006, were 6.0percent.
average interest rates on
medium-term notes at december31, 2007 and 2006, were
5.1percent and 5.3percent, respectively.
includes long-term debt due within
one year.
the company has outstanding
interest rate swap agreements with notional amounts totaling
$1,150. over the remaining terms of the notes and debentures,
the company will receive fixed payments equivalent to the
underlying debt and pay floating payments based on usd libor.
the fair value of the swaps was an asset of $19 at
december31, 2007 and a liability of $24 at
december31, 2006.
subsidiary borrowings decreased in
2007 primarily due to the repayment of borrowings used to
support the repatriation of foreign subsidiary earnings under
ajca.
maturities of long-term borrowings are $1,522, $915, $14 and
$400 for the years 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012, respectively, and
$3,094 thereafter.
the estimated fair value of the companys long-term
borrowings, including interest rate financial instruments, based
on quoted market prices for the same or similar issues or on
current rates offered to the company for debt of the same
remaining maturities, was $6,000 at december31, 2007 and
2006.
f-24
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
18.
other
liabilities
december 31,
employee benefits
accrued other long-term benefit costs (note21)
$
3,481
$
4,045
accrued pension benefit costs (note21)
1,663
1,844
accrued environmental remediation costs
miscellaneous
1,838
1,534
$
7,255
$
7,692
miscellaneous includes asset retirement obligations, litigation
accruals, tax contingencies, royalty payables and certain
obligations related to divested businesses.
19.
commitments and
contingent liabilities
guarantees
product warranty
liability
the company warrants that its products meet standard
specifications. the companys product warranty liability as
of december31, 2007 and 2006 was $23 and $17,
respectively. estimates for warranty costs are based on
historical claims experience.
indemnifications
in connection with acquisitions and divestitures, the company
has indemnified respective parties against certain liabilities
that may arise in connection with these transactions and
business activities prior to the completion of the transaction.
the term of these indemnifications, which typically pertain to
environmental, tax and product liabilities, is generally
indefinite. in addition, the company indemnifies its duly
elected or appointed directors and officers to the fullest
extent permitted by delaware law, against liabilities incurred
as a result of their activities for the company, such as adverse
judgments relating to litigation matters. if the indemnified
party were to incur a liability or have a liability increase as
a result of a successful claim, pursuant to the terms of the
indemnification, the company would be required to reimburse the
indemnified party. the maximum amount of potential future
payments is generally unlimited. the carrying amounts recorded
for all indemnifications as of december31, 2007 and 2006
was $101 and $105, respectively. although it is reasonably
possible that future payments may exceed amounts accrued, due to
the nature of indemnified items, it is not possible to make a
reasonable estimate of the maximum potential loss or range of
loss. no assets are held as collateral and no specific recourse
provisions exist.
in connection with the sale of invista, the company indemnified
the purchasers, subsidiaries of koch, against certain
liabilities primarily related to taxes, legal and environmental
matters and other representations and warranties under the
purchase and sale agreement. koch has presented claims under
these indemnities which the companies are discussing; however,
dupont disagrees with kochs presentation. the estimated
fair value of the indemnity obligations under the purchase and
sale agreement is $70 and is included in the indemnifications
balance of $101 at december31, 2007. the fair value was
based on managements best estimate of the value expected
to be required to issue the indemnifications in a standalone,
arms length transaction with an unrelated party and, where
appropriate, by the utilization of probability weighted
discounted net cash flow models. under the purchase and sale
agreement, the companys total indemnification obligation
for the majority of the representations and warranties can not
exceed $1,400. the other indemnities are not subject to this
limit.
obligations for
equity affiliates& others
the company has directly guaranteed various debt obligations
under agreements with third parties related to equity
affiliates, customers, suppliers and other affiliated and
unaffiliated companies. at december31, 2007, the company
had directly guaranteed $583 of such obligations, and $121
relating to guarantees of historical obligations for divested
subsidiaries and affiliates. this represents the maximum
potential amount of future (undiscounted) payments that the
company could be required to make under the guarantees. the
company would be required
f-25
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
to perform on these guarantees in the event of default by the
guaranteed party. at december31, 2007, a liability of
$135had been recorded for these obligations, principally
related to obligations of the companys polyester films
joint venture which are guaranteed by the company. no additional
material loss is anticipated by reason of such agreements and
guarantees.
in certain cases, the company has recourse to assets held as
collateral, as well as personal guarantees from customers and
suppliers. assuming liquidation, these assets are estimated to
cover approximately 37percent of the $261 of guaranteed
obligations of customers and suppliers. set forth below are the
companys guaranteed obligations at december31, 2007:
short-term
long-term
total
obligations for customers, suppliers and other affiliated and
unaffiliated
companies1,
2:
bank borrowings (terms up to 5years)
$
$
$
revenue bonds (term 1year)
-
leases on equipment and facilities
(terms of 1 to 2years)
-
obligations for equity
affiliates2:
bank borrowings (terms up to 5years)
leases on equipment and facilities
(terms of 1 to 3years)
-
total obligations for customers, suppliers, other affiliated and
unaffiliated companies and equity affiliates
obligations for divested subsidiaries and
affiliates3:
conoco (terms of 1 to 19years)
-
consolidation coal sales company
(terms of 3 to 4years)
-
total obligations for divested subsidiaries and affiliates
-
$
$
$
existing guarantees for customers,
suppliers and other unaffiliated companies arose as part of
contractual agreements.
existing guarantees for equity
affiliates and other affiliated companies arose for liquidity
needs in normal operations.
the company has guaranteed certain
obligations and liabilities related to divested subsidiaries,
including conoco and its subsidiaries and affiliates and
consolidation coal sales company. the restructuring, transfer
and separation agreement between dupont and conoco requires
conoco to use its best efforts to have conoco, or any of its
subsidiaries, substitute for dupont. conoco and consolidation
coal sales company have indemnified the company for any
liabilities the company may incur pursuant to these guarantees.
operating
leases
the company uses various leased facilities and equipment in its
operations. the terms for these leased assets vary depending on
the lease agreement.
as of december31, 2007, the company had one master
operating lease program relating to short-lived equipment. in
connection with this master operating lease program, the company
had residual value guarantees in the amount of $104 at
december31, 2007. the guarantee amounts are tied to the
unamortized lease values of the assets under the program and are
due should the company decide neither to renew nor to exercise
its purchase option. at december31, 2007, the company had
no liabilities recorded for these obligations. any residual
value guarantee amounts paid to the lessor may be recovered by
the company from the sale of the assets to a third party.
future minimum lease payments (including residual value
guarantee amounts) under noncancelable operating leases are
$328, $179, $145, $118 and $91 for the years 2008, 2009, 2010,
2011 and 2012 respectively, and $159 for subsequent years and
are not reduced by noncancelable minimum sublease rentals due in
the future in the amount of $12. net rental expense under
operating leases was $322 in 2007, $282 in 2006, and $265 in
2005.
f-26
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
asset retirement
obligations
the company has recorded asset retirement obligations primarily
associated with closure, reclamation and removal costs for
mining operations related to the production of titanium dioxide
in coatings& color technologies. the companys
asset retirement obligation liabilities were $62 at
december31, 2007 and 2006.
litigation
benlate
in 1991, dupont began receiving claims by growers that use of
benlate
50 df fungicide had caused crop damage. dupont has since been
served with thousands of lawsuits, most of which have been
disposed of through trial, dismissal or settlement. the status
of
benlate
cases is indicated in the table below:
number
of cases
balance at january1, 2005
filed
-
resolved
(30
)
balance at december31, 2005
filed
-
resolved
(3
)
balance at december31, 2006
reinstated
resolved
(48
)
balance at december31, 2007
at december31, 2007, there were nine cases pending in
florida state court, involving allegations that
benlate
caused crop damage. plaintiffs appealed the courts 2006
dismissal of one of the nine cases for failure to prosecute. two
of the nine cases, involving twenty-seven costa rican fern
growers, were tried during the second quarter of 2006 resulting
in a $56 judgment against the company, which was reduced to $24
on duponts motion. at trial, the plaintiffs sought damages
in the range of $270 to $400. the plaintiffs and dupont have
appealed the verdict. dupont believes that the appeal will be
resolved in its favor and, therefore, has not established a
reserve relating to the judgment.
at december31, 2007, there was one case pending in florida
and one in hawaii in which the plaintiffs seek to reopen
settlements with the company by alleging that it committed fraud
and misconduct, as well as violations of federal and state
racketeering laws. in october 2007, the appeals court entered an
order precluding the judge from taking further action
effectively dismissing the case pending in florida. plaintiffs
are seeking a discretionary review by the florida supreme court.
in 2005, the case pending in hawaii was settled in part for
$1.2. in november 2007, the hawaii supreme court affirmed the
state courts dismissal of the remainder of the case.
however, plaintiffs may seek review by the u.s.supreme
court. during the second quarter 2007, the company settled five
cases that were pending in hawaii for $8.5. during the first
quarter 2007, the dismissal of the sixteen reopener cases
pending in florida was affirmed and the cases were closed.
at september30, 2007, there were two cases pending in
delaware state court, involving allegations that
benlate
caused birth defects to children exposed in utero. in the fourth
quarter 2007, the court approved and finalized the settlement of
$9 with the six plaintiffs in these two cases as well as
twenty-six other claimants represented by the same attorney.
dupont paid the settlement in the fourth quarter 2007 although
one parent has appealed the courts order approving the
settlement in one of the cases. therefore, at december31,
2007, one of the cases was still pending.
at december31, 2007, there were two shrimp cases in
florida pending against the company. these cases had been
decided in duponts favor, but in september 2007, the judge
granted plaintiffs motion for new trial thus reinstating
the cases. the company has appealed. the twenty-six other cases
involving damage to shrimp pending against the
f-27
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
company in state court in florida were settled for $2.5 during
the second quarter 2007. separately, plaintiffs filed a motion
seeking sanctions for alleged discovery defaults in all
twenty-eight of the cases. the court denied most of the
sanctions sought by plaintiffs, but did impose on dupont the
reasonable and necessary attorney fees incurred by plaintiffs in
moving for sanctions.
the company does not believe that
benlate
caused the damages alleged in each of these cases and denies the
allegations of fraud and misconduct. the company continues to
defend itself in ongoing matters. as of december31, 2007,
the company has incurred costs and expenses of approximately
$2billion associated with these matters. the company has
recovered approximately $275 of its costs and expenses through
insurance and does not expect additional insurance recoveries,
if any, to be significant. at december31, 2007, the
company does not have any remaining accruals related to
benlate.
pfoa
environmental
actions involving the washington works site and surrounding
area
in november 2006, dupont entered into an order on consent under
the safe drinking water act (sdwa) with the
u.s.environmental protection agency (epa) establishing a
precautionary interim screening level for pfoa (collectively,
perfluorooctanoic acids and its salts, including the ammonium
salt) of 0.5 parts per billion (ppb) in drinking water sources
in the area around the dupont washington works site located in
parkersburg, west virginia. as part of the order on consent,
dupont conducted a two-part survey and performed sampling and
analytical testing of certain public and private water systems
in the area. dupont is required under the agreement to offer to
install water treatment systems or an epa-approved alternative
if pfoa levels are detected at or above 0.5 ppb. pfoa was
detected at levels above 0.5 ppb in twenty-seven private water
wells, so the company is providing alternative or treated water
to these homes.
in late 2005 dupont and the epa entered into a memorandum of
understanding (epa mou) that requires dupont to monitor pfoa in
the soil, air, water and biota around the washington works site.
at december31, 2007, dupont has accruals of about $0.6 to
fund its activities under the epa mou and order on consent.
epa
administrative complaints
in july and december 2004, the epa filed administrative
complaints against dupont alleging that the company failed to
comply with the technical reporting requirements of the toxic
substances control act (tsca) and the resource conservation and
recovery act (rcra) regarding pfoa. under a 2005 agreement
settling the matter, the company paid civil fines of $10.25 and
will complete two supplemental environmental projects at a total
cost of $6.25.
actions:
drinking water
in august 2001, a class action, captioned leach v. dupont, was
filed in west virginia state court against dupont and the lubeck
public service district. dupont uses pfoa as a processing aid to
manufacture fluoropolymer resins and dispersions at various
sites around the world including its washington works plant in
west virginia. the complaint alleged that residents living near
the washington works facility had suffered, or may suffer,
deleterious health effects from exposure to pfoa in drinking
water. the relief sought included damages for medical
monitoring, diminution of property values and punitive damages
plus injunctive relief to stop releases of pfoa. dupont and
attorneys for the class reached a settlement agreement in 2004
and as a result, the company established accruals of $108 in
2004. the agreement was approved by the wood county circuit
court on february28, 2005 after a fairness hearing. the
settlement binds a class of approximately 80,000 residents. as
defined by the court, the class includes those individuals who
have consumed, for at least one year, water containing 0.05 ppb
or greater of pfoa from any of six designated public water
sources or from sole source private wells.
in july 2005, the company paid the plaintiffs
attorneys fees and expenses of $23 and made a payment of
$70, which class counsel has designated to fund a community
health project. the company is also funding a series of health
studies by an independent science panel of experts in the
communities exposed to pfoa to evaluate available scientific
evidence on whether any probable link exists between exposure to
pfoa and human disease. the independent science panel health
studies are estimated to cost approximately $20, of which $5 was
originally placed in an interest-bearing escrow account. at
present, the expected timeframe to complete the studies is three
to five years. in addition, the company is providing
state-of-the art water treatment systems designed to reduce the
level of
f-28
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
pfoa in water to six area water districts, including the little
hocking water association (lhwa), until the science panel
determines that pfoa does not cause disease or until applicable
water standards can be met without such treatment. the estimated
cost of constructing, operating and maintaining these systems is
about $20 of which $10 was originally placed in an
interest-bearing escrow account. in the fourth quarter 2007, the
water treatment system for the lhwa was brought online. at
december31, 2007, the reserve balance relating to the
funding of the independent science panel health study and the
water treatment systems was $21, including $6 in interest
bearing escrow accounts.
the settlement resulted in the dismissal of all claims asserted
in the lawsuit except for personal injury claims. if the
independent science panel concludes that no probable link exists
between exposure to pfoa and any diseases, then the settlement
would also resolve personal injury claims. if it concludes that
a probable link does exist between exposure to pfoa and any
diseases, then dupont would also fund up to $235 for a medical
monitoring program to pay for such medical testing. in this
event, plaintiffs would retain their right to pursue personal
injury claims. all other claims in the lawsuit would remain
dismissed by the settlement. dupont believes that it is remote
that the panel will find a probable link. therefore, at
december31, 2007, the company had not established any
accruals related to medical monitoring or personal injury
claims. however, there can be no assurance as to what the
independent science panel will conclude.
in june 2007, the lhwa notified dupont that it intends to file
suit under rcra alleging imminent and substantial
endangerment to health and or the environment based on
detection of pfoa in its wells. dupont denies any such
endangerment exists and intends to vigorously defend itself if a
lawsuit is filed.
in september 2007, lhwa refiled the suit it originally filed in
ohio state court and voluntarily dismissed in 2006. the suit
claims that perfluorinated compounds, including pfoa, allegedly
released from the washington works plant contaminated
lhwas well fields and underlying aquifer. lhwas
complaint seeks a variety of relief including compensatory and
punitive damages, and an injunction requiring dupont to provide
a new pristine well field and the infrastructure to
deliverit.
in the second quarter 2006, three purported class actions were
filed alleging that drinking water had been contaminated by pfoa
in excess of 0.05 ppb due to alleged releases from certain
dupont plants. one of these cases was filed in west virginia
state court on behalf of customers of the parkersburg city water
district, but was removed on duponts motion to the
u.s.district court for the southern district of west
virginia. the other two purported class actions were filed in
new jersey. one was filed in federal court on behalf of
individuals who allegedly drank water contaminated by releases
from duponts chambers works plant in deepwater, new
jersey. the second was filed in state court on behalf of
customers serviced primarily by the pennsville township water
department and was removed to new jersey federal district court
on duponts motion. the new jersey cases have been combined
for purposes of discovery and the complaints have been amended
to allege that drinking water had been contaminated by pfoa in
excess of 0.04 ppb. the company intends to defend itself
vigorously against these lawsuits alleging contamination of
drinking water sources.
while dupont believes that it is reasonably possible that it
could incur losses related to pfoa matters in addition to those
matters discussed above for which it has established accruals, a
range of such losses, if any, cannot be reasonably estimated at
this time.
f-29
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
consumer products
classactions
number
of cases
balance at january1, 2005
-
filed
resolved
-
balance at december31, 2005
filed
resolved
-
balance at december31, 2006
filed
resolved
-
balance at december31, 2007
as of december31, 2007, twenty-three intrastate class
actions have been filed on behalf of consumers who have
purchased cookware with
teflon
non-stick coating in federal district courts against dupont. the
actions were filed on behalf of consumers in colorado,
connecticut, delaware, the district of columbia, florida,
illinois, indiana, iowa, kentucky, massachusetts, michigan,
missouri, new jersey, new mexico, new york, ohio, oklahoma,
pennsylvania, south carolina, texas and west virginia. two of
the 23 actions were filed in california. by order of the
judicial panel on multidistrict litigation, all of these actions
have been combined for coordinated and consolidated pre-trial
proceedings in federal district court for the southern district
of iowa. under the courts latest case management order, a
ruling on whether these cases can proceed as class actions is
expected in 2008.
the actions allege that dupont violated state laws by engaging
in deceptive and unfair trade practices by failing to
disclose to consumers that products containing
teflon
were or are potentially harmful to consumers and that
dupont has liability based on state law theories of negligence
and strict liability. the actions allege that
teflon
contained or released harmful and dangerous substances;
including a chemical (pfoa) alleged to have been determined to
be likely to cause cancer in humans. the actions
seek unspecified monetary damages for consumers who purchased
cooking products containing
teflon,
as well as the creation of funds for medical monitoring and
independent scientific research, attorneys fees and other
relief. in december 2005, a motion was filed by a single named
plaintiff in the superior court for the province of quebec,
canada seeking authorization to institute a class action on
behalf of all quebec consumers who have purchased or used
kitchen items, household appliances or food-packaging containing
teflon
or
zonyl
non-stick coatings. a ruling on this motion is expected from the
court in 2008. damages are not quantified, but are alleged to
include the cost of replacement products as well as one hundred
dollars per class member as exemplary damages.
the company believes that the twenty-three class actions and the
motion filed in quebec are without merit and, therefore,
believes it is remote that it will incur losses related to these
actions. at december31, 2007, the company had not
established any accruals related to these matters.
elastomers
antitrust matters
since 2002, the u.s., european union (eu) and canadian antitrust
authorities have investigated the synthetic rubber markets for
possible violations. these investigations included dupont dow
elastomers, llc (dde), as a result of its participation in the
polychloroprene (pcp) and ethylene propylene diene monomer
(epdm) markets. dde was a joint venture between the dow chemical
company (dow) and dupont.
in april 2004, dupont and dow entered into a series of
agreements under which dupont obtained complete control over
directing ddes response to these investigations and the
related litigation and dupont agreed to a disproportionate share
of the ventures liabilities and costs related to these
matters. consequently, dupont bears any potential liabilities
and costs up to the initial $150. dow is obligated to indemnify
dupont for up to $72.5 by paying 15 to 30percent toward
liabilities and costs in excess of $150. on june30, 2005,
dde became a
f-30
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
wholly owned subsidiary of dupont and was renamed dupont
performance elastomers llc (dpe). in july 2007, dpe pled guilty
to conspiring to fix prices and paid a fine of cdn $4,
approximately $3.8 usd, resolving all criminal antitrust
allegations against it related to pcp in canada.
in late march 2007, the eu antitrust authorities issued a
statement of objections that makes antitrust allegations
regarding the pcp market against dpe, relating to the joint
ventures activities, and dupont, to which both have
responded. in december 2007, the eu antitrust authorities issued
their decision, including the imposition of fines against dpe,
dow and dupont totaling euro59.25 (approximately $87 usd).
the company will seek appellate review.
dde resolved all criminal antitrust allegations against it
related to pcp in the u.s.through a plea agreement with
the doj in january 2005 which was approved by the court on
march29, 2005. the agreement requires the subsidiary to
pay a fine of $84 which, at its election, is being paid in six
equal, annual installments. the annual installment payments for
2005, 2006 and 2007 have been made. the agreement also requires
the subsidiary to provide ongoing cooperation with the
dojs investigation.
as a result of its april 2004 agreements with dow, dupont
established accruals in 2004 of $268 and increased its accruals
by $65 in the first quarter 2007. as a result of the eu decision
in the fourth quarter 2007, the company reversed $44 of its
accruals related to this matter. at december31, 2007, the
company has accruals of approximately $130 related to this
matter and a receivable of $17 for the amount it expects to be
reimbursed by dow.
spelter, west
virginia
in september 2006, a west virginia state court certified a class
action against dupont that seeks relief including the provision
of remediation services and property value diminution damages
for 7,000 residential properties in the vicinity of a closed
zinc smelter in spelter, west virginia. the action also seeks
medical monitoring for an undetermined number of residents in
the class area. the smelter was owned and operated by at least
three companies between 1910 and 2001, including dupont between
1928 and 1950. dupont performed remedial measures at the request
of the epa in the late 1990s and in 2001 repurchased the
site to facilitate and complete the remediation. the october
2007 trial was conducted in four phases: liability, medical
monitoring, property and punitive damages. the jury found
against dupont in all four phases awarding $55.5 for property
remediation and $196.2 in punitive damages. no specific amount
was awarded in the medical monitoring phase although in post
trial motions, plaintiffs estimate medical monitoring at $130.
also, in post trial motions, plaintiffs attorneys seek
legal fees equivalent to one-third of the total award plus $8 in
expenses. the company believes it has a strong basis for appeal
and will seek the right to appeal all four phases. as of
december31, 2007, the company had recorded accruals of
$55, although given the uncertainties inherent in litigation,
there can be no assurance as to the final outcome.
general
the company is subject to various lawsuits and claims arising
out of the normal course of its business. these lawsuits and
claims include actions based on alleged exposures to products,
intellectual property and environmental matters and contract and
antitrust claims. management has noted a nationwide trend in
purported class actions against chemical manufacturers generally
seeking relief such as medical monitoring, property damages,
off-site remediation and punitive damages arising from alleged
environmental torts without claiming present personal injuries.
such cases may allege contamination from unregulated substances
or remediated sites. although it is not possible to predict the
outcome of these various lawsuits and claims, management does
not anticipate they will have a material adverse effect on the
companys consolidated financial position or liquidity.
however, the ultimate liabilities may be significant to results
of operations in the period recognized. the company accrues for
contingencies when the information available indicates that it
is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of
the liability can be reasonably estimated.
environmental
the company is also subject to contingencies pursuant to
environmental laws and regulations that in the future may
require the company to take further action to correct the
effects on the environment of prior disposal practices or
releases of chemical or petroleum substances by the company or
other parties. the company accrues for
f-31
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
environmental remediation activities consistent with the policy
set forth in note1. much of this liability results from
the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and
liability act (cercla, often referred to as superfund), the
resource conservation and recovery act (rcra) and similar state
laws. these laws require the company to undertake certain
investigative and remedial activities at sites where the company
conducts or once conducted operations or at sites where
company-generated waste was disposed. the accrual also includes
estimated costs related to a number of sites identified by the
company for which it is probable that environmental remediation
will be required, but which are not currently the subject of
cercla, rcra or state enforcement activities.
remediation activities vary substantially in duration and cost
from site to site. these activities, and their associated costs,
depend on the mix of unique site characteristics, evolving
remediation technologies, diverse regulatory agencies and
enforcement policies, as well as the presence or absence of
potentially responsible parties. at december31, 2007 and
2006, the consolidated balance sheet included a liability of
$357 and $349, respectively, relating to these matters and, in
managements opinion, is appropriate based on existing
facts and circumstances. the average time frame, over which the
accrued or presently unrecognized amounts may be paid, based on
past history, is estimated to be
15-20years.
considerable uncertainty exists with respect to these costs and,
under adverse changes in circumstances, potential liability may
range up to two to three times the amount accrued as of
december31, 2007.
other
the company has various purchase commitments incident to the
ordinary conduct of business. in the aggregate, such commitments
are not at prices in excess of current market.
20.
stockholders
equity
the companys board of directors authorized a
$2billion share buyback plan in june 2001. during 2007 and
2006, there were no purchases of stock under this program.
during 2005, the company purchased and retired 9.9million
shares at a total cost of $505. as of december31, 2007,
the company has purchased 20.5million shares at a total
cost of $962. management has not established a timeline for the
buyback of the remaining stock under this plan.
in addition to the plan described above, in october 2005 the
board of directors authorized a $5billion share buyback
plan. the company entered into an accelerated share repurchase
agreement with goldman sachs& co. (goldman sachs)
under which the company purchased and retired 75.7million
shares of duponts outstanding common stock from goldman
sachs on october27, 2005 at a price of $39.62 per share,
with goldman sachs purchasing an equivalent number of shares in
the open market over the following nine-month period.
on july27, 2006, goldman sachs completed its purchase of
75.7million shares of duponts common stock at a
volume weighted average price (vwap) of $41.99 per share. upon
the conclusion of the agreement in 2006, the company paid $180
in cash to goldman sachs to settle the agreement. the final
settlement price was based upon the difference between the vwap
per share for the nine-month period, which ended july27,
2006, and the purchase price of $39.62 per share. the amount
paid to settle the contract was recorded as a reduction to
additional paid-in capital during the third quarter 2006. in
addition, the company made open market purchases of its shares
in the third quarter 2006 for $100 at an average price of $42.27
per share.
during 2007, the company paid $1.7billion to purchase and
immediately retire 34.7million shares at an average price
of $48.85 per share. as of december31, 2007, the company
has completed the $5billion share buyback plan with the
purchase and retirement of 112.8million shares at an
average price of $44.33 per share.
common stock held in treasury is recorded at cost. when retired,
the excess of the cost of treasury stock over its par value is
allocated between reinvested earnings and additional paid-in
capital.
f-32
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
set forth below is a reconciliation of common stock share
activity for the three years ended december31, 2007:
shares of common stock
issued
held in treasury
balance january1, 2005
1,081,382,000
(87,041,000
)
issued
10,934,000
-
repurchased
-
(85,664,000
)
retired
(85,664,000
)
85,664,000
balance december31, 2005
1,006,652,000
(87,041,000
)
issued
4,823,000
-
repurchased
-
(2,366,000
)
retired
(2,366,000
)
2,366,000
balance december31, 2006
1,009,109,000
(87,041,000
)
issued
11,916,000
-
repurchased
-
(34,695,000
)
retired
(34,695,000
)
34,695,000
balance december31, 2007
986,330,000
(87,041,000
)
the pretax, tax and after-tax effects of the components of other
comprehensive income/(loss) are shown below:
pretax
tax
after-tax
cumulative translation adjustment
$
$
-
$
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
(15
)
pension benefits (note21)
1,028
(388
)
other benefits (note21)
(168
)
net unrealized gains on securities
(2
)
other comprehensive income
$
1,646
$
(573
)
$
1,073
cumulative translation adjustment
$
$
-
$
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
(9
)
minimum pension liability adjustment
(54
)
net unrealized gains on securities
(3
)
other comprehensive income
$
$
(66
)
$
cumulative translation adjustment
$
(109
)
$
-
$
(109
)
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
(3
)
(2
)
minimum pension liability adjustment
net unrealized losses on securities
(17
)
(11
)
other comprehensive loss
$
(122
)
$
$
(95
)
f-33
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
balances of related after-tax components comprising accumulated
other comprehensive loss are summarized below:
december 31,
cumulative translation adjustment
$
$
$
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
minimum pension liability adjustment
-
-
(594
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on securities
(5
)
pension benefits
net gains/(losses)
(1,395
)
(2,022
)
-
net prior service cost
(117
)
(130
)
-
other benefits
net gains/(losses)
(307
)
(720
)
-
net prior service benefit
-
$
(794
)
$
(1,867
)
$
(518
)
21.
employee
benefits
the company offers various long-term benefits to its employees.
where permitted by applicable law, the company reserves the
right to change, modify or discontinue the plans.
defined benefit
pensions
the company has both funded and unfunded noncontributory defined
benefit pension plans covering substantially all
u.s.employees. the benefits under these plans are based
primarily on years of service and employees pay near
retirement. the companys funding policy is consistent with
the funding requirements of federal laws and regulations.
pension coverage for employees of the companys
non-u.s.consolidated
subsidiaries is provided, to the extent deemed appropriate,
through separate plans. obligations under such plans are funded
by depositing funds with trustees, under insurance policies, or
remain unfunded.
other long-term
employee benefits
the parent company and certain subsidiaries provide medical,
dental and life insurance benefits to pensioners and survivors,
and disability and life insurance protection to employees. the
associated plans for retiree benefits are unfunded and the cost
of the approved claims is paid from company funds. essentially
all of the cost and liabilities for these retiree benefit plans
are attributable to the u.s.parent company plans. the
retiree medical plan is contributory with pensioners and
survivors contributions adjusted annually to achieve a
50/50 target sharing of cost increases between the company and
pensioners and survivors. in addition, limits are applied to the
companys portion of the retiree medical cost coverage.
employee life insurance and disability benefit plans are insured
in many countries. however, primarily in the u.s., such plans
are generally self-insured or are fully experience-rated.
obligations and expenses for self-insured and fully
experience-rated plans are reflected in the figures below.
f-34
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
summarized information on the companys pension and other
long-term employee benefit plans is as follows:
pension benefits
other benefits
obligations and funded status at december 31,
change in benefit obligation
benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
22,849
$
22,935
$
4,396
$
4,224
service cost
interest cost
1,228
1,192
plan participants contributions
actuarial loss (gain)
(728
)
(244
)
(565
)
benefits paid
(1,544
)
(1,506
)
(464
)
(481
)
amendments
-
(1
)
-
net effects of acquisitions/divestitures
-
benefit obligation at end of year
$
22,206
$
22,849
$
3,796
$
4,396
change in plan assets
fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
21,909
$
19,792
$
-
$
-
actual gain on plan assets
1,963
3,306
-
-
employer contributions
plan participants contributions
benefits paid
(1,544
)
(1,506
)
(464
)
(481
)
net effects of acquisitions/divestitures
-
-
-
fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
22,618
$
21,909
$
-
$
-
funded status
u.s. plans with plan assets
$
2,061
$
$
-
$
-
non-u.s.
plans with plan assets
(90
)
(317
)
-
-
all other plans
(1,559
)1
(1,515
)1
(3,796
)
(4,396
)
total
$
$
(940
)
$
(3,796
)
$
(4,396
)
amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheet consist of:
other assets (note13)
$
2,187
$
1,040
$
-
$
-
other accrued liabilities (note16)
(112
)
(136
)
(315
)
(351
)
other liabilities (note18)
(1,663
)
(1,844
)
(3,481
)
(4,045
)
net amount recognized
$
$
(940
)
$
(3,796
)
$
(4,396
)
includes pension plans maintained
around the world where funding is not permissible or customary.
the pretax amounts recognized in accumulated other comprehensive
loss are summarized below:
pension benefits
other benefits
december 31,
net loss
$
2,060
$
3,070
$
$
1,111
prior service cost / (benefit)
(1,118
)
(1,276
)
$
2,222
$
3,251
$
(643
)
$
(165
)
the accumulated benefit obligation for all pension plans was
$20,404 and $20,880 at december31, 2007, and 2006,
respectively.
f-35
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
information for pension plans with projected benefit
obligation in excess of plan assets
projected benefit obligation
$
3,183
$
4,630
accumulated benefit obligation
2,829
4,140
fair value of plan assets
1,408
2,650
information for pension plans with accumulated benefit
obligations in excess of plan assets
projected benefit obligation
$
2,463
$
4,018
accumulated benefit obligation
2,256
3,691
fair value of plan assets
2,113
pension benefits
components of net periodic benefit cost (credit) and
amounts recognized in other comprehensive income
net periodic benefit cost
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
1,228
1,192
1,160
expected return on plan assets
(1,800
)
(1,648
)
(1,416
)
amortization of loss
amortization of prior service cost
curtailment/settlement (gain) loss
-
(1
)
net periodic benefit cost
$
(54
)
$
$
changes in plan assets and benefit obligations recognized in
other comprehensive income
net gain
(893
)
-
-
amortization of loss
(117
)
-
-
amortization of prior service cost
(18
)
-
-
total recognized in other comprehensive income
$
(1,028
)
$
-
$
-
total recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other
comprehensive income
$
(1,082
)
$
$
f-36
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
other benefits
components of net periodic benefit cost (credit) and
amounts recognized in other comprehensive income
net periodic benefit cost
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
amortization of loss
amortization of prior service benefit
(156
)
(156
)
(155
)
net periodic benefit cost
$
$
$
changes in plan assets and benefit obligations recognized in
other comprehensive income
net gain
$
(564
)
$
-
$
-
amortization of loss
(72
)
-
-
prior service cost
-
-
amortization of prior service benefit
-
-
total recognized in other comprehensive income
$
(478
)
$
-
$
-
total recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other
comprehensive income
$
(286
)
$
$
the estimated pretax net loss and prior service cost for the
defined benefit pension plans that will be amortized from
accumulated other comprehensive loss into net periodic benefit
cost during 2008 are $57 and $18, respectively. the estimated
pretax net loss and prior service credit for the other long-term
employee benefit plans that will be amortized from accumulated
other comprehensive loss into net periodic benefit cost during
2008 are $32 and $(106), respectively.
pension benefits
other benefits
weighted-average assumptions used to
determine benefit obligations at december 31,
discount rate
6.01%
5.56%
6.25%
5.75%
rate of compensation increase
4.28%
4.32%
4.50%
4.50%
pension benefits
other benefits
weighted-average assumptions used to determine net periodic
benefit
cost for the years ended december 31,
discount rate
5.56%
5.43%
5.75
%
5.50
%
expected return on plan assets
8.74%
8.74%
-
-
rate of compensation increase
4.32%
4.31%
4.50
%
4.50
%
the discount rate and the rate of compensation increase used to
determine the benefit obligation in the u.s.were
6.25percent and 4.50percent, respectively, for 2007,
and 5.75percent and 4.50percent, respectively, for
2006. for determining u.s.plans net periodic benefit
costs, the discount rate, expected return on plan assets and the
rate of compensation increase were 5.75percent,
9.00percent and 4.50percent for 2007, and
5.50percent, 9.00percent and 4.50percent for
2006. the discount rate for determining the principal
u.s.pension plans net periodic benefit cost was
increased to 6.00percent as of august31, 2006 due to
remeasurement.
in august 2006, the company announced major changes to its
principal u.s.pension plan. effective january1,
2008, covered full service employees on the rolls as of
december31, 2006 will continue to accrue benefits in the
principal u.s.pension plan, but at a reduced rate of about
one-third of its previous level. in addition, company-paid
f-37
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
postretirement survivor benefits for these employees will not
continue to grow after december31, 2007. covered employees
hired after december31, 2006 will not participate in the
principal u.s.pension plan. as a result of this plan
amendment, the company was required to remeasure its pension
expense for the remainder of 2006, reflecting plan assets and
benefit obligations as of the remeasurement date. better than
expected return on plan assets and a higher discount rate of
6.00percent decreased pretax pension expense for 2006 by
$72. for 2007, the plan amendment resulted in a reduction in
pretax pension expense of about $40.
the company utilizes published long-term high quality corporate
bond indices to determine the discount rate at measurement date.
where commonly available, the company considers indices of
various durations to reflect the timing of future benefit
payments.
the long-term rate of return on assets in the u.s.was
selected from within the reasonable range of rates determined by
(a)historical real returns (net of inflation) for the
asset classes covered by the investment policy and
(b)projections of inflation over the long-term period
during which benefits are payable to plan participants. for
non-u.s.plans,
assumptions reflect economic assumptions applicable to each
country.
assumed health care cost trend rates at december 31,
health care cost trend rate assumed for next year
9%
10%
rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline (the
ultimate trend rate)
5%
5%
year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate
assumed health care cost trend rates have a modest effect on the
amount reported for the health care plan. a one-percentage point
change in assumed health care cost trend rates would have the
following effects:
1-percentage
1-percentage
point increase
point decrease
effect on total of service and interest cost
$
$
(4
)
effect on postretirement benefit obligation
(57
)
plan
assets
the strategic asset allocation targets of the companys
pension plans as of december31, 2007, and the weighted
average asset allocation of these plans at december31,
2007, and 2006, by asset category were as follows:
plan assets at
december31,
strategic
asset category
target
equity securities
57%
55%
57%
debt securities
30%
30%
29%
real estate
5%
5%
5%
other*
8%
10%
9%
total
100%
100%
100%
*
mainly private equity and private
debt.
essentially all pension plan assets in the u.s.are
invested through a single master trust fund. the strategic asset
allocation for this trust fund is selected by management,
reflecting the results of comprehensive asset liability
modeling. the general principles guiding investment of
u.s.pension assets are those embodied in the employee
retirement income security act of 1974 (erisa). these principles
include discharging the companys investment
responsibilities for the exclusive benefit of plan participants
and in accordance with the prudent expert standard
and other erisa rules and regulations. the company establishes
strategic asset allocation percentage targets and appropriate
benchmarks for significant asset classes with the aim of
achieving a prudent balance between return
f-38
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
and risk. strategic asset allocations in other countries are
selected in accordance with the laws and practices of those
countries. where appropriate, asset liability studies are
utilized in this process. u.s.plan assets and a
significant portion of
non-u.s.plan
assets are managed by investment professionals employed by the
company. the remaining assets are managed by professional
investment firms unrelated to the company. the companys
pension investment professionals have discretion to manage the
assets within established asset allocation ranges approved by
senior management of the company. plans invest in securities
from a variety of countries to take advantage of the investment
opportunities that a global portfolio presents and to increase
portfolio diversification. additionally, pension trust funds are
permitted to enter into certain contractual arrangements
generally described as derivatives. derivatives are
primarily used to reduce specific market risks, hedge currency
and adjust portfolio duration and asset allocation in a
cost-effective manner.
the companys pension plans directly held $440
(2percent of total plan assets) and $486 (2percent
of total plan assets) of dupont common stock at
december31, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
cash
flow
contributions
in 2007, the company contributed $277 to its pension plans. no
contributions were required or made to the principal
u.s.pension plan trust fund in 2007 and no contributions
are required or expected to be made to this plan in 2008. the
company will continue to monitor asset values during the year.
the pension protection act of 2006 (the act) was
signed into law in the u.s.in august 2006. the act
introduced new funding requirements for single-employer defined
benefit pension plans, provided guidelines for measuring pension
plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes,
introduced benefit limitations for certain underfunded plans and
raised tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement
plans. the new funding requirements are generally effective for
plan years beginning after december31, 2007. the company
does not anticipate that the act will have a material impact on
its required contributions. the company expects to contribute
approximately $250 in 2008 to its pension plans other than the
principal u.s.pension plan and also expects to make cash
payments of $315 in 2008 under its other long-term employee
benefit plans.
in 2006, the company made contributions of $280 to its pension
plans. no contributions were required or made to the principal
u.s.pension plan trust fund in 2006. in 2005, the company
made contributions of $1,253 to its pension plans, including a
$1,000 contribution to its principal u.s.pension plan.
estimated future
benefit payments
the following benefit payments, which reflect future service, as
appropriate, are expected to be paid:
pension
other
benefits
benefits
$
1,525
$
1,507
1,493
1,500
1,500
years 2013 2017
7,690
1,382
defined
contribution plan
the company sponsors several defined contribution plans, which
cover substantially all u.s.employees. the most
significant is the savings and investment plan (the plan). this
plan includes a non-leveraged employee stock ownership plan
(esop). employees are not required to participate in the esop
and those who do are free to diversify out of the esop. the
purpose of the plan is to provide additional retirement savings
benefits for employees and to provide employees an opportunity
to become stockholders of the company. the plan is a tax
qualified contributory profit sharing plan, with cash or
deferred arrangement and any eligible employee of the company
may participate. the company contributed an amount equal to
50percent of the first 6percent of the
employees
f-39
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
contribution election. as part of the retirement plan changes in
august 2006, the defined contribution benefits for most
u.s.parent company employees are in transition. effective
january1, 2007, for employees hired on that date or
thereafter and effective january1, 2008, for active
employees as of december31, 2006, the company will
contribute 100percent of the first 6percent of the
employees contribution election and also contribute
3percent of each eligible employees eligible
compensation regardless of the employees contribution. in
addition, the definition of eligible compensation has been
expanded to be similar to the definition of eligible
compensation in the pension plan.
the companys contributions to the u.s.parent
companys defined contribution plans were $57, $52 and $51
for the years ended december31, 2007, 2006 and 2005,
respectively. the companys matching contributions vest
immediately upon contribution. the 3percent automatic
company contribution also vests immediately for employees with
at least three-years of service. in addition, the company made
contributions of $42, $34 and $30 for the years ended
december31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively, to other
defined contribution plans. the company expects to contribute
about $230 to its defined contribution plans in 2008.
22.
compensation
plans
effective january1, 2006, the company adopted
sfas123r using the modified prospective application
transition method. because the company adopted the fair value
recognition provisions of sfas123, as amended,
prospectively on january1, 2003, the adoption of
sfas123r did not have a material impact on the
companys financial position or results of operations.
prior to adoption of sfas123r, the nominal vesting
approach was followed for all awards. upon adoption of
sfas123r on january1, 2006, the company began
expensing new stock-based compensation awards using a
non-substantive approach, under which compensation costs are
recognized over at least six months for awards granted to
employees who are retirement eligible at the date of the grant
or would become retirement eligible during the vesting period of
the grant. using the non-substantive vesting approach in lieu of
the nominal vesting approach would not have had a material
impact on the companys results of operations. prior to the
adoption of sfas123r, the company reported the tax benefit
of stock option exercises as operating cash flows. upon the
adoption of sfas123r, tax benefits resulting from tax
deductions in excess of compensation cost recognized for those
options or restricted stock units are reported as financing cash
flows.
the total stock-based compensation cost included in the
consolidated income statements was $144, $140 and $90 for 2007,
2006 and 2005, respectively. the income tax benefits related to
stock-based compensation arrangements were $48, $46 and $27 for
2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively.
on april25, 2007, the shareholders approved the dupont
equity and incentive plan (eip). the eip
consolidated several of the companys existing compensation
plans (the stock performance plan, variable compensation plan,
and equity awards of the stock accumulation and deferred
compensation plan for directors) into one plan providing for
equity-based and cash incentive awards to certain employees,
directors and consultants. currently, equity-based compensation
awards consist of stock options, time-vested and
performance-based restricted stock units, and stock appreciation
rights.
under the eip, the maximum number of shares reserved for the
grant or settlement of awards is 60million shares,
provided that each share in excess of 20million that is
issued with respect to any award that is not an option or stock
appreciation right will be counted against the 60million
share limit as four shares. at december31, 2007,
approximately 60million shares were authorized for future
grants under the companys eip. awards or grants made in
2007, prior to shareholder approval of the eip, were issued
under the companys previously existing compensation plans.
awards outstanding under each of these plans have not been
terminated. these awards remain outstanding and are administered
under the terms of the applicable existing plan. no further
awards will be made under the companys previously existing
compensation plans.
the companys compensation committee determines the
long-term incentive mix, including stock options, time-vested
and performance-based restricted stock units and may authorize
new grants annually.
f-40
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
stock
options
the purchase price of shares subject to option is equal to the
market price of the companys stock on the date of grant.
prior to 2004, options expired 10years from date of grant;
however, beginning in 2004, options serially vest over a
three-year period and carry a six-year option term. the plan
allows retirement eligible employees to retain any granted
awards upon retirement provided the employee has rendered at
least six months of service following grant date.
for purposes of determining the fair value of stock options
awards, the company uses the black-scholes option pricing model
and the assumptions set forth in the table below. the
weighted-average grant-date fair value of options granted in
2007, 2006 and 2005 was $9.47, $7.28 and $8.78, respectively.
dividend yield
2.9
%
3.8
%
2.9
%
volatility
21.11
%
25.02
%
23.35
%
risk-free interest rate
4.7
%
4.4
%
3.7
%
expected life (years)
4.5
4.5
4.5
the company determines the dividend yield by dividing the
current annual dividend on the companys stock by the
option exercise price. a historical daily measurement of
volatility is determined based on the expected life of the
option granted. the risk free interest rate is determined by
reference to the yield on an outstanding u.s.treasury note
with a term equal to the expected life of the option granted.
expected life is determined by reference to the companys
historical experience.
stock option awards as of december31, 2007, and changes
during the year then ended were as follows:
weighted
weighted
average
average
remaining
aggregate
number of
exercise price
contractual
intrinsic value
shares
(per share)
term (years)
(in thousands)
outstanding, december31, 2006
92,757
$
46.76
granted
6,167
$
51.01
exercised
(10,452
)
$
42.21
forfeited
(218
)
$
47.34
cancelled1
(13,717
)
$
52.70
outstanding, december31,
74,537
$
46.66
3.25
$
104,117
exercisable, december31, 2007
56,461
$
45.27
3.11
$
84,914
includes 12.8million options
granted on january29, 1997 that expired unexercised and
were cancelled on january28, 2007.
includes 10.4million options
outstanding from the 2002 corporate sharing program grants of
200shares to all eligible employees at an option price of
$44.50. these options are currently exercisable and expire
10years from date of grant.
the aggregate intrinsic values in the table above represent the
total pretax intrinsic value (the difference between the
companys closing stock price on the last trading day of
2007 and the exercise price, multiplied by the number of
in-the-money options) that would have been received by the
option holders had all option holders exercised their
in-the-money options at year end. the amount changes based on
the fair market value of the companys stock. total
intrinsic value of options exercised for 2007, 2006 and 2005
were $96, $22 and $143, respectively. in 2007, the company
realized a tax benefit of $32 from options exercised.
as of december31, 2007, $25 of total unrecognized
compensation cost related to stock options is expected to be
recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.59years.
f-41
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
time-vested and
performance-based restricted stock units
in 2004, the company began issuing time-vested restricted stock
units in addition to stock options. these restricted stock units
serially vest over a three-year period. a retirement eligible
employee retains any granted awards upon retirement provided the
employee has rendered at least six months of service following
the grant date. additional restricted stock units are also
granted from time to time to key senior management employees.
these restricted stock units generally vest over periods ranging
from two to five years.
the company also grants performance-based restricted stock units
to senior leadership. vesting occurs upon attainment of
pre-established (i)corporate revenue growth relative to
peer companies and (ii)return on invested capital
objectives relative to peer companies (for periods prior to
2007)or attainment of internal absolute targets (for
periods beginning in 2007). the actual award, delivered as
dupont common stock, can range from zero percent to
200percent of the original grant. during 2007, there were
368,300 performance-based restricted stock units granted at a
weighted average grant date fair value of $51.01. the fair value
of time-vested and performance-based restricted stock units is
based upon the market price of the underlying common stock as of
the grant date.
nonvested awards of time-vested and performance-based restricted
stock units as of december31, 2007 and 2006 are shown
below. the weighted-average grant-date fair value of time-vested
and performance-based restricted stock units granted during
2007, 2006, and 2005 was $51.00, $39.47, and $47.94,
respectively. the table also includes restricted stock units for
the board of directors that are settled in cash.
weighted
average
grant date
number of
fair value
shares
(per share)
nonvested, december31, 2006
3,478
$
41.94
granted
1,767
$
51.00
exercised
(1,234
)
$
42.71
forfeited
(138
)
$
45.40
nonvested, december31, 2007
3,873
$
45.67
as of december31, 2007, there was $43 unrecognized
stock-based compensation expense related to nonvested awards.
that cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average
period of 1.69years. the total fair value of shares vested
during 2007, 2006 and 2005 was $53, $23 and $15, respectively.
other cash-based
awards
cash awards under the eip plan may be granted to employees who
have contributed most to the companys success, with
consideration being given to the ability to succeed to more
important managerial responsibility. such awards were $163, $153
and $129 for 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. the amounts of
the awards are dependent on company earnings and are subject to
maximum limits as defined under the governing plans.
in addition, the company has other variable compensation plans
under which cash awards may be granted. these plans include
pioneers annual reward program and the companys
regional and local variable compensation plans. such awards were
$217, $178 and $159 for 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively.
23.
derivatives and
other hedging instruments
objectives and
strategies for holding derivative instruments
under procedures and controls established by the companys
financial risk management framework, the company enters into
contractual arrangements (derivatives) in the ordinary course of
business to reduce its exposure to foreign currency, interest
rate and commodity price risks. the framework has established a
variety of approved derivative instruments to be utilized in
each risk management program, as well as varying levels of
exposure coverage and time horizons based on an assessment of
risk factors related to each hedging program. derivative
instruments utilized during the period include forwards,
options, futures and swaps. the company has not designated any
nonderivatives as hedging instruments.
f-42
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
the framework sets forth senior managements financial risk
management philosophy and objectives through a corporate
financial risk management policy. in addition, the policy
establishes oversight committees and risk management guidelines
that authorize the use of specific derivative instruments and
further establishes procedures for control and valuation,
counterparty credit approval and routine monitoring and
reporting. the counterparties to these contractual arrangements
are major financial institutions and major commodity exchanges.
the company is exposed to credit loss in the event of
nonperformance by these counterparties. the company manages this
exposure to credit loss through the aforementioned credit
approvals, limits and monitoring procedures and, to the extent
possible, by restricting the period over which unpaid balances
are allowed to accumulate. the company does not anticipate
nonperformance by counterparties to these contracts and no
material loss would be expected from such nonperformance. market
and counterparty credit risks associated with these instruments
are regularly reported to management.
the company hedges foreign currency denominated monetary assets
and liabilities, certain business specific foreign currency
exposures and certain energy feedstock purchases. in addition,
the company enters into exchange traded agricultural commodity
derivatives to hedge exposures relevant to agricultural
feedstock purchases.
fair value
hedges
during the year ended december31, 2007, the company
maintained a number of interest rate swaps that involve the
exchange of fixed for floating rate interest payments which
allows the company to maintain a target range of floating rate
debt. all interest rate swaps qualify for the shortcut method of
hedge accounting, thus there is no ineffectiveness related to
these hedges. changes in the fair value of derivatives that
hedge interest rate risk are recorded in interest expense each
period. the offsetting changes in the fair values of the related
debt are also recorded in interest expense. the company
maintains no other fair value hedges.
cash flow
hedges
the company maintains a number of cash flow hedging programs to
reduce risks related to commodity price risk. commodity price
risk management programs serve to reduce exposure to price
fluctuations on purchases of inventory such as natural gas,
ethane, corn, soybeans and soybean meal. while each risk
management program has a different time maturity period, most
programs currently do not extend beyond the next two-year period.
hedges of inventory purchases are reported as a component of
cost of goods sold and other operating charges. cash flow hedge
results are reclassified into earnings during the same period in
which the related exposure impacts earnings. reclassifications
are made sooner if it appears that a forecasted transaction will
not materialize. cash flow hedge ineffectiveness reported in
earnings for 2007 was a pretax gain of $6. during 2007, there
were no pretax gains (losses) excluded from the assessment of
hedge effectiveness. the following table summarizes the effect
of cash flow hedges on accumulated other comprehensive loss for
2007:
pretax
tax
after-tax
beginning balance
$
$
(10
)
$
additions and revaluations of derivatives designated as cash
flow hedges
(22
)
clearance of hedge results to earnings
(30
)
(23
)
ending balance
$
$
(25
)
$
portion of ending balance expected to be reclassified into
earnings over the next twelve months
$
$
(16
)
$
hedges of net
investment in a foreign operation
during the year ended december31, 2007, the company did
not maintain any hedges of net investment in a foreign operation.
f-43
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
derivatives
not designated in hedging relationships
the company uses forward exchange contracts to reduce its net
exposure, by currency, related to foreign currency-denominated
monetary assets and liabilities. the netting of such exposures
precludes the use of hedge accounting. however, the required
revaluation of the forward contracts and the associated foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities results in
a minimal earnings impact, after taxes. in addition, the company
maintains a few small risk management programs for agricultural
commodities that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment.
currency
risk
the company routinely uses forward exchange contracts to offset
its net exposures, by currency, related to monetary assets and
liabilities of its operations that are denominated in currencies
other than the designated functional currency. the primary
business objective is to maintain an approximately balanced
position in foreign currencies so that exchange gains and losses
resulting from exchange rate changes, net of related tax
effects, are minimized.
from time to time, the company will enter into forward exchange
contracts to establish with certainty the functional currency
amount of future firm commitments denominated in another
currency. decisions regarding whether or not to hedge a given
commitment are made on a
case-by-case
basis, taking into consideration the amount and duration of the
exposure, market volatility and economic trends. forward
exchange contracts are also used to manage near-term foreign
currency cash requirements and to place foreign currency
deposits and marketable securities investments.
interest rate
risk
the company primarily uses interest rate swaps to manage the
interest rate mix of the total debt portfolio and related
overall cost of borrowing.
interest rate swaps involve the exchange of fixed for floating
rate interest payments that are fully integrated with underlying
fixed-rate bonds or notes to effectively convert fixed rate debt
into floating rate debt based on usd libor.
at december31, 2007, the company had entered into interest
rate swap agreements with total notional amounts of
approximately $1,150, whereby the company, over the remaining
terms of the underlying notes, will receive a fixed rate payment
equivalent to the fixed interest rate of the underlying note and
pay a floating rate of interest that is based on usd libor.
interest rate swaps did not have a material effect on the
companys overall cost of borrowing at december31,
2007 and 2006. see note17 for additional descriptions of
interest rate swaps.
commodity
price risk
the company enters into over-the-counter and exchange-traded
derivative commodity instruments to hedge the commodity price
risk associated with energy feedstock and agricultural commodity
exposures.
f-44
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
24.
geographic
information
net
net
net
net
net
net
sales1
property2
sales1
property2
sales1
property2
united states
$
11,277
$
7,698
$
11,123
$
7,479
$
11,129
$
7,333
europe
belgium
$
$
$
$
$
$
germany
2,045
1,826
2,040
france
1,039
italy
luxembourg
the netherlands
spain
united kingdom
other
3,162
2,708
2,312
total europe
$
8,829
$
1,754
$
7,921
$
1,708
$
7,696
$
1,690
asia pacific
china/hong kong
$
1,594
$
$
1,415
$
$
1,198
$
india
japan
1,187
1,103
1,107
taiwan
korea
singapore
other
total asia pacific
$
5,177
$
$
4,759
$
$
4,515
$
canada& latin america
brazil
$
1,485
$
$
1,191
$
$
1,055
$
canada
mexico
argentina
other
total canada& latin
america
$
4,095
$
$
3,618
$
$
3,299
$
total
$
29,378
$
10,860
$
27,421
$
10,498
$
26,639
$
10,309
net sales are attributed to
countries based on location of customer.
includes property, plant and
equipment less accumulated depreciation.
f-45
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
25.
segment
information
the company has six reportable segments. five of the segments
constitute the companys growth platforms:
agriculture& nutrition, coatings& color
technologies, electronic& communication technologies,
performance materials and safety& protection. the
sixth segment, pharmaceuticals, is limited to income from the
companys interest in two drugs,
cozaar
and
hyzaar.
major products by segment include: agriculture&
nutrition (hybrid seed corn and soybean seed, herbicides,
fungicides, insecticides, value enhanced grains and soy
protein); coatings& color technologies (automotive
finishes, industrial coatings and white pigments);
electronic& communication technologies
(fluorochemicals, fluoropolymers, photopolymers and electronic
materials); performance materials (engineering polymers,
packaging and industrial polymers, films and elastomers);
safety& protection (specialty and industrial
chemicals, nonwovens, aramids and solid surfaces); and
pharmaceuticals (representing the companys interest in the
collaboration relating to
cozaar/hyzaar
antihypertensive drugs, which is reported as other income). the
company operates globally in substantially all of its product
lines.
in general, the accounting policies of the segments are the same
as those described in the summary of significant accounting
policies. exceptions are noted as follows and are shown in the
reconciliations below. prior years data have been
reclassified to reflect the 2007 organizational structure.
segment sales include transfers. products are transferred
between segments on a basis intended to reflect, as nearly as
practicable, the market value of the products. segment pretax
operating income (ptoi) is defined as operating income before
income taxes, minority interests, exchange gains/(losses),
corporate expenses, interest and the cumulative effect of
changes in accounting principles. segment net assets includes
net working capital, net permanent investment and other
noncurrent operating assets and liabilities of the segment.
affiliate net assets (pro rata share) excludes borrowing and
other long-term liabilities. depreciation and amortization
includes depreciation on research and development facilities and
amortization of other intangible assets, excluding write-down of
assets which is discussed in note4. expenditures for
long-lived assets exclude investments in affiliates and include
payments for property, plant and equipment as part of business
acquisitions.
f-46
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
coatings &
electronic &
agriculture &
color
communication
performance
safety &
pharma-
nutrition
technologies
technologies
materials
protection
ceuticals
other
total
segment sales
$
6,842
$
6,609
$
3,797
$
6,630
$
5,641
$
-
$
$
29,697
less transfers
-
(53
)
(114
)
(43
)
(91
)
-
(18
)
(319
)
net sales
6,842
6,556
3,683
6,587
5,550
-
29,378
pretax operating income (loss)
1,199
(224
)
4,878
depreciation and amortization
-
1,198
equity in earnings of affiliates
(155
)
-
(14
)
(107
)
segment net assets
5,712
4,045
2,530
3,794
3,253
19,674
affiliate net assets
1,079
expenditures for long-lived assets
-
1,439
segment sales
$
6,008
$
6,290
$
3,573
$
6,179
$
5,496
$
-
$
$
27,726
less transfers
-
(49
)
(109
)
(46
)
(82
)
-
(19
)
(305
)
net sales
6,008
6,241
3,464
6,133
5,414
-
27,421
pretax operating income (loss)
1,080
(173
)
4,283
depreciation and amortization
-
1,209
equity in earnings of affiliates
(3
)
-
-
(8
)
segment net assets
5,812
3,959
2,476
4,112
3,032
19,724
affiliate net assets
1,249
expenditures for long-lived assets
-
1,378
segment sales
$
6,090
$
6,055
$
3,408
$
6,062
$
5,144
$
-
$
$
26,933
less transfers
-
(48
)
(99
)
(55
)
(73
)
-
(19
)
(294
)
net sales
6,090
6,007
3,309
6,007
5,071
-
26,639
pretax operating income (loss)
(90
)
4,139
depreciation and amortization
-
1,187
equity in earnings of affiliates
(3
)
-
segment net assets
5,692
3,567
2,296
3,941
2,689
18,558
affiliate net assets
1,270
expenditures for long-lived assets
-
1,208
f-47
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
reconciliation to
consolidated financial statements
ptoi to income before income taxes and minority interests
total segment ptoi
$
4,878
$
4,283
$
4,139
net exchange (losses)/gains (includes affiliates)
(85
)
(4
)
corporate expenses and interest
(1,050
)
(950
)
(1,021
)
income before income taxes and minority interests
$
3,743
$
3,329
$
3,563
segment net assets to total assets
total segment net assets
$
19,674
$
19,724
$
18,558
corporate
assets1
6,649
5,874
8,142
liabilities included in net assets
7,808
6,179
6,591
total assets
$
34,131
$
31,777
$
33,291
pension assets are included in
corporate assets. the balance at december31, 2007 and 2006
reflected the adoption of sfas158.
other items
segment totals
adjustments
consolidated totals
depreciation and amortization
$
1,198
$
$
1,371
equity in earnings of affiliates
(107
)
(23
)
(130
)
affiliate net assets
1,079
(261
)
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,439
1,585
depreciation and amortization
$
1,209
$
$
1,384
equity in earnings of affiliates
(17
)
affiliate net assets
1,249
(446
)
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,378
1,532
depreciation and amortization
$
1,187
$
$
1,358
equity in earnings of affiliates
affiliate net assets
1,270
(426
)
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,208
1,340
additional
segment details
2007included the following pretax benefits (charges):
performance
materials1,
$
(185
)
other3
(40
)
$
(225
)
included a net $20 charge for
existing litigation in connection with the elastomers antitrust
matter. see note19 for more details.
included a $165 impairment charge
to write-down the carrying value of the companys
investment in a polyester films joint venture.
included a $40 charge for existing
litigation relating to a former business. see note19 for
more details.
f-48
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
2006 includes the following pretax benefits (charges):
agriculture&
nutrition1,
$
(115
)
coatings& color
technologies1,
3, 4
electronic& communication
technologies1
performance
materials1,
(60
)
safety&
protection1,
3, 5
(14
)
$
(169
)
included a benefit of $61 of
insurance recoveries, net of fees, which related to asbestos
litigation expenses incurred by the company in prior periods.
pretax amounts by segment for the insurance recoveries were:
agriculture& nutrition $7;
coatings& color technologies $19;
electronic& communication technologies
$10; performance materials $12; and
safety& protection $13.
included a restructuring charge of
$194 in the following segments: agriculture&
nutrition $122 and performance materials
$72. see note4 for more details.
included insurance recoveries
relating to the damage suffered from hurricane katrina in 2005.
pretax amounts by segment were: coatings& color
technologies $123 and safety&
protection $20.
included a net restructuring charge
of $132 in the coatings& color technologies segment.
see note4 for more details.
included an asset impairment charge
of $47 associated with an underperforming industrial chemicals
asset held for sale within the safety& protection
segment.
2005included the following pretax benefits (charges):
coatings& color
technologies1
$
(116
)
electronic& communication
technologies2
performance
materials1
(17
)
safety&
protection1
(27
)
other3
$
(50
)
included charges of $160 for
damaged facilities, inventory write-offs,
clean-up
costs and other costs related to the 2005 hurricanes, in the
following segments: coatings& color
technologies $116; performance materials
$17; and safety& protection $27.
included a $48 gain from the sale
of the companys equity interest in dupont photomasks, inc.
reflects a net gain of $62 from the
disposition of four equity affiliates associated with the
separation of textiles& interiors, partly offset by
other separation costs.
f-49
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
26.
quarterly
financial data (unaudited)
for the quarter ended
march31,
june30,
september30,
december31,
net sales
$
7,845
$
7,875
$
6,675
$
6,983
cost of goods sold and other
expenses1
6,750
6,823
6,297
6,610
income before income taxes and minority interests
1,312
1,308
net income
basic earnings per share of common
stock2
1.02
1.05
0.57
0.60
diluted earnings per share of common
stock2
1.01
1.04
0.56
0.60
net sales
$
7,394
$
7,442
$
6,309
$
6,276
cost of goods sold and other
expenses1
6,500
6,464
5,895
6,334
income before income taxes and minority interests
1,050
1,255
net income
basic earnings per share of common
stock2
0.88
1.05
0.52
0.94
diluted earnings per share of common
stock2
0.88
1.04
0.52
0.94
excludes interest expense and
nonoperating items.
earnings per share for the year may
not equal the sum of quarterly earnings per share due to changes
in average share calculations.
included a net $52 charge for
existing litigation in the performance materials segment in
connection with the elastomers antitrust matter. see
note19 for more details.
included a $40 charge for existing
litigation in other relating to a former business. see
note19 under the heading spelter, west virginia, for more
details.
included an impairment charge of
$165 to write down the companys investment in a polyester
films joint venture in the performance materials segment. this
charge was partially offset by a net $32 benefit resulting from
the reversal of certain litigation accruals in the performance
materials segment established in prior periods for the
elastomers antitrust matter (see note19 for more details)
and a $6 benefit for the reversal of accrued interest associated
with the favorable settlement of certain prior year tax
contingencies.
included a benefit of $108 for the
reversal of income tax accruals associated with the favorable
settlement of certain prior year tax contingencies.
included a $135 restructuring
charge in the coatings& color technologies segment in
connection with the companys plans to close and
consolidate certain manufacturing and laboratory sites within
this segment (see note 4 for more details). this charge was
partially offset by a $7 benefit for the reversal of accrued
interest associated with the favorable settlement of certain
prior year tax contingencies.
included a benefit of $44 for the
reversal of income tax accruals associated with the favorable
settlement of certain prior year tax contingencies.
included a benefit of $31
associated with an increase in the deferred tax assets of a
european subsidiary for a tax basis investment loss recognized
on the local tax return.
included a $50 benefit resulting
from initial insurance recoveries relating to the damage
suffered from hurricane katrina in 2005.
included a $122 charge for a
restructuring program in the agriculture& nutrition
segment, a $72 charge for a restructuring program in the
performance materials segment and a $47 asset impairment charge
in the safety& protection segment. these charges were
partially offset by a $93 benefit resulting from insurance
recoveries relating to the damage suffered from hurricane
katrina in 2005, a benefit of $61 resulting from insurance
recoveries, net of fees, which related to asbestos litigation
expenses incurred by the company in prior periods and a $90
benefit for the reversal of accrued interest associated with the
favorable settlement of certain prior year tax contingencies.
included a benefit of $479 for
reversals of income tax accruals associated with the favorable
settlement of certain prior year tax contingencies and tax
valuation allowances, as well as the finalization of taxes
related to the companys repatriation of foreign earnings
under the ajca.
f-50
table of contents
information for
investors
corporate headquarters
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
1007 market street
wilmington, de 19898
telephone: 302
774-1000
e-mail:
find.info@usa.dupont.com
2008 annual meeting
the annual meeting of the shareholders will be held at
10:30a.m., wednesday, april30, in the dupont theatre
in the dupont building, 1007 market street, wilmington, delaware.
stock exchange
listings
dupont common stock (symbol dd)is listed on the new york
stock exchange, inc. (nyse) and on certain foreign exchanges.
quarterly high and low market prices are shown in item5 of
the
form10-k.
on may25, 2007, the company certified to the nyse that it
is not aware of any violations of the nyses corporate
governance listing standards. the company filed the required
certifications under section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act
with its annual report for the year ended december31,
2007, on
form10-k.
dupont preferred stock is listed on the new york stock exchange,
inc. (symbol ddpra for $3.50 series and symbol ddprb for $4.50
series).
dividends
holders of the companys common stock are entitled to
receive dividends when they are declared by the board of
directors. while it is not a guarantee of future conduct, the
company has continuously paid a quarterly dividend since the
fourth quarter 1904. dividends on common stock and preferred
stock are usually declared in january, april, july and october.
when dividends on common stock are declared, they are usually
paid mid march, june, september and december. preferred
dividends are paid on or about the 25thof january, april,
july and october.
shareholder services
inquiries from shareholders about stock accounts, transfers,
certificates, dividends (including direct deposit and
reinvestment), name or address changes and electronic receipt of
proxy materials may be directed to duponts stock transfer
agent:
computershare trustcompany,
n.a.
p.o.box43078
providence, ri
02940-3078
or call: in the united states and canada
888 983-8766
(toll-free)
other locations  781
575-2724
for the hearing impaired
tdd: 800
952-9245
(toll-free)
or visit computershares home page at
http://www.computershare.com
independent registered public
accounting firm
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
two commerce square, suite1700
2001 market street
philadelphia, pa 19103
investor relations
institutional investors and other representatives of financial
institutions should contact:
e. i. du pont de nemours and
company
dupont investor relations
1007 market street-d-11018
wilmington, de 19898
or call 302
774-4994
bondholder relations
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
dupont finance
1007 market street-d-8028
wilmington, de 19898
or call 302
774-8802
dupont on the internet
financial results, news and other information about dupont can
be accessed from the companys website at
http://www.dupont.com.
this site includes important information on products and
services, financial reports, news releases, environmental
information and career opportunities. the companys
periodic and current reports filed with the sec are available on
its website, free of charge, as soon as reasonably practicable
after being filed.
product information /
referral
from the united states and canada:
441-7515
(toll-free)
from other locations: 302
774-1000
e-mail:
find.info@usa.dupont.com
on the internet:
http://www.dupont.com
printed reports available to
shareholders
the following company reports may be obtained, without charge:
1.2007 annual report to the securities and exchange commission, filed on form10-k;
2.proxy statement for 2008 annual meeting of stockholders; and
3.quarterly reports to the securities and exchange commission, filed on form 10-q
requests should be addressed to:
dupont corporate information
center
crp705-gs38
p.o.box80705
wilmington, de
19880-0705
or call 302
774-5991
e-mail:
find.info@usa.dupont.com
services for
shareholders
online account access
registered shareholders may access their accounts and obtain
online answers to stock transfer questions by signing up for
internet account access. call toll-free 888
983-8766
(outside the united states and canada, call 781
575-2724) to
obtain by mail a temporary personal identification number and
information on viewing your account over the internet.
dividend reinvestment
plan
an automatic dividend reinvestment plan is available to all
registered shareholders. common or preferred dividends can be
automatically reinvested in dupont common stock. participants
also may add cash for the purchase of additional shares. a
detailed account statement is mailed after each investment. your
account can also be viewed over the internet if you have online
account access (see above). to enroll in the plan, please
contact computershare (listed above).
online delivery of proxy
materials
registered stockholders may request their proxy materials
electronically in 2008 by visiting
www.computershare.com/us/ecomms
and holders of shares in the u.s. employee benefit plans may
request their proxy materials electronically by visiting
www.econsent.com/dd. stockholders with brokerage accounts can
determine if their brokers offer electronic delivery by visiting
www.icsdelivery.com.
direct deposit of
dividends
registered shareholders who would like their dividends directly
deposited in a u.s.bank account should contact
computershare (listed above).
