10-k
w72619e10vk.htm
form 10-k
e10vk
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange
commission
washington, d.c.
form10-k
(mark one)
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2008
or
o
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
commission file number 1-815
e. i. du pont de nemours
and company
(exact name of registrant as
specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
51-0014090
(i.r.s. employer identification
no.)
1007 market street
wilmington, delaware 19898
(address of principal executive
offices)
registrants telephone number, including area code:
302-774-1000
securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act
(each class is registered on the
new york stock exchange, inc.):
title of each class
common stock ($.30par value)
preferred stock
(without par value-cumulative)
$4.50 series
$3.50 series
no securities are registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the
act.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a well-known
seasoned issuer (as defined in rule 405 of the securities
act).yesnoo
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is not required
to file reports pursuant to section 13 or section 15(d) of the
act.yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed
all reports required to be filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding
12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to
such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k is not contained
herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form 10-k or any amendment to this form
10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated
filer. see definition of accelerated filer and large
accelerated filer in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.
large accelerated filer
accelerated filer
o
non-accelerated filer
o
smaller reporting company
o
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell
company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the
act).yesono
the aggregate market value of voting stock held by
nonaffiliates of the registrant (excludes outstanding shares
beneficially owned by directors and officers and treasury
shares) as of june 30, 2008, was approximately $38.6 billion.
as of january 31, 2009, 902,530,000shares (excludes
87,041,000shares of treasury stock) of the companys
common stock, $.30par value, were outstanding.
documents incorporated by
reference
(specific pages incorporated
are indicated under the applicable item herein):
incorporated
by reference
in part no.
the companys proxy statement in connection with the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held on april29, 2009
iii
table of contents
[this page intentionally left blank]
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
form10-k
table of
contents
the terms dupont or the company as used
herein refer to e. i. du pont de nemours and company and its
consolidated subsidiaries, or to e. i. du pont de nemours and
company, as the context may indicate.
page
parti
item 1.
business
item 1a.
risk factors
item 1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
partii
item 5.
market for registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
item 9b.
other information
partiii
item 10.
directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions,
and director independence
item 14.
principal accountant fees and services
partiv
item 15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
ex-10.1
ex-10.12
ex-10.15
ex-12
ex-21
ex-23
ex-31.1
ex-31.2
ex-32.1
ex-32.2
note on
incorporation by reference
information pertaining to certain items in partiii of this
report is incorporated by reference to portions of the
companys definitive 2009 annual meeting proxy statement to
be filed within 120days after the end of the year covered
by this annual report on
form10-k,
pursuant to regulation14a (the proxy).
table of contents
parti
item1.business
dupont was founded in 1802 and was incorporated in delaware in
1915. dupont is a world leader in science and innovation across
a range of disciplines, including agriculture and industrial
biotechnology, chemistry, biology, materials science and
manufacturing. the company operates globally and offers a wide
range of innovative products and services for markets including
agriculture and food, building and construction, electronics and
communications, general industrial, and transportation. total
worldwide employment at december31, 2008, was
approximately 60,000people.
the company is strategically aligned into five market- and
technology-focused growth segments consisting of
agriculture& nutrition; coatings& color
technologies; electronic& communication technologies;
performance materials; and safety& protection. in
addition to the five growth segments, the companys
reportable segments include pharmaceuticals. the company
includes embryonic businesses not included in the growth
segments, such as applied biosciences and nonaligned businesses
in other.
information describing the business of the company can be found
on the indicated pages of this report:
item
page
segment reviews
introduction
agriculture& nutrition
coatings& color technologies
electronic& communication
technologies
performance materials
safety& protection
pharmaceuticals
other
geographic informationnet sales
and net property
f-45
segment sales, net sales, pre-tax operating
income and segment net assets
f-46
the company has operations in approximately 90 countries
worldwide and about 64percent of consolidated net sales
are made to customers outside the united states of america
(u.s.). subsidiaries and affiliates of dupont conduct
manufacturing, seed production, or selling activities and some
are distributors of products manufactured by the company.
sources of
supply
the company utilizes numerous suppliers as well as internal
sources to supply a wide range of raw materials, energy,
supplies, services and equipment. to ensure availability, the
company maintains multiple sources for fuels and many raw
materials, including hydrocarbon feedstocks. large volume
purchases are generally procured under competitively priced
supply contracts.
within agriculture& nutrition, the companys
wholly-owned subsidiary, pioneer hi-bred international, inc.
(pioneer), operates in the seed industry and has seed production
facilities located throughout the world. seed production is
performed directly by the company or contracted with independent
growers and conditioners. the companys ability to produce
seeds primarily depends upon weather conditions, contract
growers and the availability of preferred hybrids with desired
traits.
the major commodities, raw materials and supplies for the
companys reportable segments in 2008 include the following:
agriculture&
nutrition:
benzene and carbamic acid related intermediates; copper; insect
control products; natural gas; soybeans; soy flake; soy
lecithin; sulfonamides; corn and soybean seeds
table of contents
part i
item 1.business, continued
coatings&
color technologies:
chlorine; solvents; isocyanates; industrial gases; pigments;
resins; titanium ore
electronic&
communication technologies:
block co-polymers; chloroform; copper; fluorspar; hydrofluoric
acid; hydroxylamine; oxydianiline; perchloroethylene; polyester
film; precious metals; pyromellitic dianhydride
performance
materials:
adipic acid; butadiene; butanediol; dimethyl terephthalate;
ethane; ethylene glycol; fiberglass; hexamethylenediamine;
methanol; natural gas; purified terephthalic acid
safety&
protection:
alumina hydroxide; ammonia; benzene; high density polyethylene;
isophthaloyl chloride; metaphenylenediamine; methyl
methacrylate; natural gas; paraphenylenediamine; polyester
fiber; propylene; sulfur; terephthaloyl chloride; wood pulp
no commodities or raw materials are purchased for the
pharmaceutical segment. this segments revenues arise from
licensing arrangements for
cozaar
and
hyzaar
antihypertensive drugs, which are manufactured and distributed
by merck& co. (merck).
dupont has contracts with computer sciences corporation (csc)
and accenture llp (accenture) to provide certain services for
the company. csc operates a majority of the companys
global information systems and technology infrastructures and
provides selected applications and software services. csc is
contracted to provide these services through december 2014.
accenture provides selected applications, software services and
enterprise resource planning solutions designed to enhance the
companys manufacturing, marketing, distribution and
customer service. accenture is contracted to provide these
services through december 2011.
in november 2005, dupont contracted with convergys corporation
to provide the company with global human resources transactional
services including employee development, workforce planning,
compensation management, benefits administration and payroll. as
of december31, 2008, some of the services associated with
this contract are in place and are operating, including
preparation of payroll in the u.s.and puerto rico. all
services associated with this contract are scheduled to be
operating in 2010. convergys corporation is contracted to
provide services through 2018.
backlog
in general the company does not manufacture its products against
a backlog of orders and does not consider backlog to be a
significant indicator of the level of future sales activity.
production and inventory levels are based on the level of
incoming orders as well as projections of future demand.
therefore, the company believes that backlog information is not
material to understanding its overall business and should not be
considered a reliable indicator of the companys ability to
achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance.
intellectual
property
the company believes that its intellectual property estate
provides it with an important competitive advantage. it has an
established global network of attorneys, as well as branding,
advertising and licensing professionals, to procure, maintain,
protect, enhance and gain value from this estate.
the company has a large portfolio of and is licensed under
various patents. these definite-lived patents cover many
products, processes and product uses. these patents protect many
aspects of the companys significant research programs and
the goods and services it sells. the actual protection afforded
by these patents varies from country to country and depends upon
the scope of coverage of each individual patent as well as the
availability of legal remedies in each country. the company owns
approximately 21,000 worldwide patents and approximately 17,000
worldwide patent applications. in 2008, the company was granted
about 500 u.s.patents and about 1,500 international
patents. the companys rights under its patents and
licenses, as well as the products made and sold under them, are
important to the company as a whole, and to varying degrees,
importanttoeachreportable
table of contents
part i
item 1.business, continued
segment. for a discussion of the importance of patents to
pharmaceuticals, see the segment discussion on page33 of
this report.
the environment in which pioneer and the rest of the companies
within the seed industry compete is increasingly affected by new
patents, patent positions, patent lawsuits and the status of
various intellectual property rights. ownership of and access to
intellectual property rights, particularly those relating to
biotechnology and germplasm, are important to pioneer and its
competitors. no single patent owned by pioneer or its
competitors is essential to pioneers ability to compete.
however, pioneer will continue to address freedom to operate
issues by enforcing its own intellectual property rights,
challenging claims made by others and, where appropriate,
obtaining licenses to important technologies on commercially
reasonable terms. during 2007, pioneer entered into a business
agreement on corn herbicide tolerance and insect control trait
technologies with monsanto company. among other provisions,
modifications were made to the existing corn license agreements;
both parties agreed to exchange certain non-assert and other
intellectual property rights; and both parties obtained rights
to reference and access certain regulatory data and approvals in
which the other has certain interests. see the contractual
obligations table on page38 for more information.
the company has approximately 1,800 unique trademarks for its
products and services and approximately 17,000 worldwide
registrations and applications for these trademarks. ownership
rights in trademarks do not expire if the trademarks are
continued in use and properly protected. the company has many
trademarks that have significant recognition at the consumer
retail level
and/or
business to business level. significant trademarks at the
consumer retail level include the dupont oval and
duponttm
(the dupont brand trademarks);
pioneer
brand seeds;
teflon
fluoropolymers, films, fabric protectors, fibers and
dispersions;
corian
surfaces;
kevlar
high strength material; and
tyvek
protective material. the company actively pursues licensing
opportunities for selected trademarks at the retail level.
seasonality
sales of the companys products in agriculture&
nutrition are affected by seasonal patterns.
agriculture& nutritions sales and earnings
performance is strongest in the first half of the year. the
segment generally operates at a loss during the third and fourth
quarters of the year. as a result of the seasonal nature of its
seed business, agriculture& nutritions
inventory is at its highest level at the end of the calendar
year and is sold down in the first and second quarters. trade
receivables in agriculture& nutrition are at a low
point at year-end and increase through the selling season to
peak at the end of the second quarter.
in general, businesses in the remaining segments are not
significantly affected by seasonal factors.
marketing
with the exception of
pioneer
brand seeds and
solae
soy proteins, most products are marketed primarily through
duponts sales force, although in some regions, more
emphasis is placed on sales through distributors.
pioneer
brand products are promoted through multiple marketing channels
in north america. in the corn and soybean markets of the
u.s.corn belt, products are sold through a specialized
force of independent sales representatives. in other north
american markets,
pioneer
products are marketed through distributors and crop input
retailers.
pioneer
products outside of north america are marketed through a network
of subsidiaries, joint ventures and independent
producer-distributors.
solae
isolated and functional soy proteins are marketed using a
combination of outside distributors, joint ventures and direct
sales.
major
customers
the companys sales are not materially dependent on a
single customer or small group of customers. however,
collectively, coatings& color technologies and
performance materials have several large customers, primarily in
the motor vehicle original equipment manufacturer (oem) industry
supply chain. the company has long-standing relationships with
these customers and they are considered to be important to the
segments operating results.
table of contents
part i
item 1.business, continued
competition
as a science and technology based company, dupont competes on a
variety of factors such as product quality and performance or
specifications, continuity of supply, price, customer service
and breadth of product line, depending on the characteristics of
the particular market involved and the product or service
provided.
major competitors include diversified industrial companies
principally based in the u.s., western europe, japan, china,
korea and india. in the aggregate, these competitors offer a
wide range of products from agricultural, commodity and
specialty chemicals to plastics, fibers and advanced materials.
the company also competes in certain markets with smaller, more
specialized firms who offer a narrow range of products or
converted products that functionally compete with the
companys offerings.
agriculture& nutrition sells advanced plant genetics
through pioneer, principally for the global production of corn
and soybeans and thus directly competes with other seed and
plant biotechnology companies. agriculture& nutrition
also provides food safety equipment and soy-based food
ingredients in competition with other major grain and food
processors.
research and
development
the company conducts research in the u.s.at over 30 sites
at either dedicated research facilities or manufacturing plants.
the highest concentration of research is in the wilmington,
delaware area at several large research centers. among these,
the experimental station laboratories engage in investigative
and applied research, the chestnut run laboratories focus on
applied research and the stine-haskell research center conducts
agricultural product research and toxicological research to
assure the safe manufacture, handling and use of products and
raw materials.
other major research locations in the u.s.include marshall
lab in philadelphia, pennsylvania, and mt. clemens in mt.
clemens, michigan, both dedicated to coatings research; pioneer
research facilities in johnston, iowa; the solae company
facilities in st.louis, missouri; polymer research
facilities in richmond, virginia, and parkersburg, west
virginia; and electronic technology research facilities in
research triangle park, north carolina, towanda, pennsylvania,
and santabarbara, california.
dupont, reflecting the companys global interests, also
operates more than 20 additional research and development
facilities at locations outside the u.s., with major facilities
located in sao paulo, brazil; kingston, canada; shanghai, china;
meyrin, switzerland; seoul, korea; wuppertal, germany; and
utsunomiya, japan. a new research and development facility was
opened in hyderabad, india in 2008 to better serve the asia
pacific market.
the objectives of the companys research and development
programs are to create new technologies, processes and business
opportunities in relevant fields, as well as to improve existing
products and processes. each segment of the company funds
research and development activities that support its business
mission. recently, the company has broadened its sustainability
commitments beyond environmental footprint reduction to include
market-driven targets for research and development investment.
the company is expanding its offerings addressing safety,
environment, energy and climate challenges in the global
marketplace by developing and commercializing renewable,
bio-based materials; advanced biofuels; energy-efficient
technologies; enhanced safety and protection products; and
alternative energy products and technologies. the goals are tied
directly to business growth, specifically to the development of
safer and environmentally improved products that enhance the
environmental profile of its traditional businesses for
duponts key global markets, including transportation,
building and construction, agriculture and food and
communications.
the corporate research laboratories are responsible for
conducting research programs aligned with corporate strategy as
provided by the growth segments. all research and development
activities are administered by senior research and development
management to ensure consistency with the business and corporate
strategy. the future of the company is not dependent upon the
outcome of any single research program.
additional information with respect to research and development,
including the amount incurred during each of the last three
fiscal years, is included in item7, managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations, on page21 of this report.
table of contents
part i
item 1.business, continued
facility
security
see item7, managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations on page43
for a discussion of facility security.
environmental
matters
information related to environmental matters is included in
several areas of this report: (1)environmental proceedings
on page11, (2)managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations on
pages 24-25,
40-43 and
(3)notes1 and 19 to the consolidated financial
statements.
available
information
the company is subject to the reporting requirements under the
securities exchange act of 1934. consequently, the company is
required to file reports and information with the securities
exchange commission (sec), including reports on the following
forms: annual report on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
current reports on
form8-k,
and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934.
the public may read and copy any materials the company files
with the sec at the secs public reference room at
100fstreet, ne, washington, dc 20549. the public may
obtain information on the operation of the public reference room
by calling the sec at
1-800-sec-0330.
the sec also maintains an internet site at
http://www.sec.gov
that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and
other information regarding issuers that file electronically
with the sec.
the companys annual report on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
current reports on
form8-k
and amendments to those reports are also accessible on the
companys website at
http://www.dupont.com
by clicking on the tab labeled investor center and
then on sec filings. these reports are made
available, without charge, as soon as is reasonably practicable
after the company files or furnishes them electronically with
the securities and exchange commission.
item1a.risk
factors
the companys operations could be affected by various
risks, many of which are beyond its control. based on current
information, the company believes that the following identifies
the most significant risk factors that could affect its
businesses. past financial performance may not be a reliable
indicator of future performance and historical trends should not
be used to anticipate results or trends in future periods.
price increases
for energy and raw materials could have a significant impact on
the companys ability to sustain and grow
earnings.
the companys manufacturing processes consume significant
amounts of energy and raw materials, the costs of which are
subject to worldwide supply and demand as well as other factors
beyond the control of the company. significant variations in the
cost of energy, which primarily reflect market prices for oil
and natural gas and raw materials affect the companys
operating results from period to period. when possible, the
company purchases raw materials through negotiated long-term
contracts to minimize the impact of price fluctuations.
additionally, the company enters into over-the-counter and
exchange traded derivative commodity instruments to hedge its
exposure to price fluctuations on certain raw material
purchases. the company has taken actions to offset the effects
of higher energy and raw material costs through selling price
increases, productivity improvements and cost reduction
programs. success in offsetting higher raw material costs with
price increases is largely influenced by competitive and
economic conditions and could vary significantly depending on
the market served. if the company is not able to fully offset
the effects of higher energy and raw material costs, it could
have a significant impact on the companys financial
results.
failure to
develop and market new products could impact the companys
competitive position and have an adverse effect on the
companys financial results.
the companys operating results are largely dependent on
its ability to renew its pipeline of new products and services
and to bring those products and services to market. this ability
could be adversely affected by difficulties or
table of contents
part i
item1a.risk factors, continued
delays in product development such as the inability to identify
viable new products, successfully complete research and
development, obtain relevant regulatory approvals, obtain
intellectual property protection, or gain market acceptance of
new products and services. because of the lengthy development
process, technological challenges and intense competition, there
can be no assurance that any of the products the company is
currently developing, or could begin to develop in the future,
will achieve substantial commercial success. sales of the
companys new products could replace sales of some of its
current products, offsetting the benefit of even a successful
product introduction.
the
companys results of operations could be adversely affected
by litigation and other commitments and contingencies.
the company faces risks arising from various unasserted and
asserted litigation matters, including, but not limited to,
product liability, patent infringement, antitrust claims, and
claims for third party property damage or personal injury
stemming from alleged environmental torts. the company has noted
a nationwide trend in purported class actions against chemical
manufacturers generally seeking relief such as medical
monitoring, property damages, off-site remediation and punitive
damages arising from alleged environmental torts without
claiming present personal injuries. various factors or
developments can lead to changes in current estimates of
liabilities such as a final adverse judgment, significant
settlement or changes in applicable law. a future adverse ruling
or unfavorable development could result in future charges that
could have a material adverse effect on the company. an adverse
outcome in any one or more of these matters could be material to
the companys financial results.
in the ordinary course of business, the company may make certain
commitments, including representations, warranties and
indemnities relating to current and past operations, including
those related to divested businesses and issue guarantees of
third party obligations. if the company were required to make
payments as a result, they could exceed the amounts accrued,
thereby adversely affecting the companys results of
operations.
as a result of
the companys current and past operations, including
operations related to divested businesses, the company could
incur significant environmental liabilities.
the company is subject to various laws and regulations around
the world governing the environment, including the discharge of
pollutants and the management and disposal of hazardous
substances. as a result of its operations, including its past
operations and operations of divested businesses, the company
could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs. the
costs of complying with complex environmental laws and
regulations, as well as internal voluntary programs, are
significant and will continue to be so for the foreseeable
future. the ultimate costs under environmental laws and the
timing of these costs are difficult to predict. the
companys accruals for such costs and liabilities may not
be adequate because the estimates on which the accruals are
based depend on a number of factors including the nature of the
matter, the complexity of the site, site geology, the nature and
extent of contamination, the type of remedy, the outcome of
discussions with regulatory agencies and other potentially
responsible parties (prps) at multi-party sites and the number
and financial viability of other prps.
the
companys ability to generate sales from genetically
enhanced products, particularly seeds and other agricultural
products, could be adversely affected by market acceptance,
government policies, rules or regulations and
competition.
the company is using biotechnology to create and improve
products, particularly in its agriculture& nutrition
segment. demand for these products could be affected by market
acceptance of genetically modified products as well as
governmental policies, laws and regulations that affect the
development, manufacture and distribution of products, including
the testing and planting of seeds containing biotechnology
traits and the import of crops grown from those seeds.
the company competes with major global companies that have
strong intellectual property estates supporting the use of
biotechnology to enhance products, particularly in the
agricultural products and production markets. speed in
discovering and protecting new technologies and bringing
products based on them to market is a significant competitive
advantage. failure to predict and respond effectively to this
competition could cause the companys existing or candidate
products to become less competitive, adversely affecting sales.
table of contents
part i
item1a.risk factors, continued
changes in
government policies and laws could adversely affect the
companys financial results.
sales outside the u.s.constitute more than half of the
companys revenue. the company anticipates that
international sales will continue to represent a substantial
portion of its total sales and that continued growth and
profitability will require further international expansion,
particularly in emerging markets. the companys financial
results could be affected by changes in trade, monetary and
fiscal policies, laws and regulations, or other activities of
u.s.and
non-u.s.governments,
agencies and similar organizations. these conditions include but
are not limited to changes in a countrys or regions
economic or political conditions, trade regulations affecting
production, pricing and marketing of products, local labor
conditions and regulations, reduced protection of intellectual
property rights in some countries, changes in the regulatory or
legal environment, restrictions on currency exchange activities,
burdensome taxes and tariffs and other trade barriers.
international risks and uncertainties, including changing social
and economic conditions as well as terrorism, political
hostilities and war, could lead to reduced international sales
and reduced profitability associated with such sales.
economic factors,
including inflation and fluctuations in currency exchange rates,
interest rates and commodity prices could affect the
companys financial results.
the company is exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange
rates, interest rates and commodity prices. because the company
has significant international operations, there are a large
number of currency transactions that result from international
sales, purchases, investments and borrowings. the company
actively manages currency exposures that are associated with
monetary asset positions, committed currency purchases and sales
and other assets and liabilities created in the normal course of
business. failure to successfully manage these risks could have
an adverse impact on the companys financial position,
results of operations and cash flows.
conditions in the
global economy and global capital markets may adversely affect
the companys results of operations, financial condition,
and cash flows.
the companys business and operating results have been and
will continue to be affected by the global recession, including
the credit market crisis, declining consumer and business
confidence, fluctuating commodity prices, volatile exchange
rates, and other challenges currently affecting the global
economy. the companys customers may experience
deterioration of their businesses, cash flow shortages, and
difficulty obtaining financing. as a result, existing or
potential customers may delay or cancel plans to purchase
products and may not be able to fulfill their obligations in a
timely fashion. further, suppliers may be experiencing similar
conditions, which could impact their ability to fulfill their
obligations to the company. if the global recession continues
for significant future periods or deteriorates significantly,
the companys results of operations, financial condition
and cash flows could be materially adversely affected.
business
disruptions could seriously impact the companys future
revenue and financial condition and increase costs and
expenses.
business disruptions, including supply disruptions, increasing
costs for energy, temporary plant
and/or power
outages and information technology system and network
disruptions, could seriously harm the companys operations
as well as the operations of its customers and suppliers.
although it is impossible to predict the occurrences or
consequences of any such events, they could result in reduced
demand for the companys products, make it difficult or
impossible for the company to deliver products to its customers
or to receive raw materials from suppliers, and create delays
and inefficiencies in the supply chain. the company actively
manages the risks within its control that could cause business
disruptions to mitigate any potential impact from business
disruptions regardless of cause including acts of terrorism or
war, and natural disasters. despite these efforts, the impact
from business disruptions could significantly increase the cost
of doing business or otherwise adversely impact the
companys financial performance.
inability to
protect and enforce the companys intellectual property
rights could adversely affect the companys financial
results.
intellectual property rights are important to the companys
business. the company endeavors to protect its intellectual
property rights in jurisdictions in which its products are
produced or used and in jurisdictions into which its products
are imported. however, the company may be unable to obtain
protection for its intellectual property in key jurisdictions.
additionally, the company has designed and implemented internal
controls to restrict
table of contents
part i
item1a.risk factors, continued
access to and distribution of its intellectual property,
including confidential information and trade secrets. despite
these precautions, it is possible that unauthorized parties may
access and use such property. when misappropriation is
discovered, the company reports such situations to the
appropriate governmental authorities for investigation and takes
measures to mitigate any potential impact.
item1b.unresolved
staff comments
none.
table of contents
part i
item2.properties
the companys corporate headquarters are located in
wilmington, delaware. the companys manufacturing,
processing, marketing and research and development facilities,
as well as regional purchasing offices and distribution centers
are located throughout the world.
information regarding research and development facilities is
incorporated by reference to item1, business-research and
development. additional information with respect to the
companys property, plant and equipment and leases is
contained in notes10, 19 and 24 to the consolidated
financial statements
the company has investments in property, plant and equipment
related to global manufacturing operations. collectively there
are over 300 sites in total. the more significant sites are
listed by their applicable segment(s) as set forth below:
agriculture&
nutrition
u.s.
mobile, al; valdosta, ga; elpaso, il; gibson city, il;
pryor, ok; manati, puerto rico; memphis, tn; laporte, tx
asia pacific
shanghai, china; salvi, india
europe
ieper, belgium; aahrus, denmark; cernay, france; asturias, spain
latin america
camacari, brazil; esteio, brazil; lerma, mexico
coatings&
color technologies
u.s.
edgemoor, de; starke, fl; mount clemens, mi; delisle, ms; new
johnsonville, tn; houston, tx; front royal, va
asia pacific
changchun, china; jiading, china; kuan yin, taiwan
europe
mechelen, belgium; wuppertal, germany
latin america
sao paulo, brazil; altamira, mexico
electronic&
communication technologies
u.s.
el dorado, ak; santabarbara, ca; fortmadison, ia;
louisville, ky; fayetteville, nc; research triangle park, nc;
deepwater, nj; parlin, nj; buffalo, ny; rochester, ny;
circleville, oh; dayton, oh; towanda, pa; manati, puerto rico;
bayport, tx; corpus christi, tx; laporte, tx; logan, ut;
parkersburg, wv
asia pacific
changshu, china; shenzhen, china; madurai, india; chiba, japan;
shimizu, japan; hsinchu, taiwan; taoyuan, taiwan
europe
luxembourg; mechelen, belgium; neu isenburg, germany; dordrecht,
the netherlands; bristol, uk; east kilbride, uk; ruabon, uk
performance
materials
u.s.
newark, de; laplace, la; fayetteville, nc; deepwater, nj;
ashland, oh ; charleston, sc; florence, sc; chattanooga, tn;
beaumont, tx; laporte, tx; orange, tx; victoria, tx; hopewell,
va; richmond, va; parkersburg, wv
asia pacific
shenzen, china; salvi, india; chiba, japan; gifu, japan;
ibaraki, japan; utsunomiya, japan; ulsan, korea; singapore
europe
antwerp, belgium; mechelen, belgium; uentrop, germany;
luxembourg; dordrecht, the netherlands
latin america
berazategui, argentina
table of contents
part i
item
2.properties,
continued
safety&
protection
u.s.
red lion, de; stratco, ks; wurtland, ky; burnside, la; laplace,
la; pascagoula, ms; belco, nj; deepwater, nj; linden, nj;
buffalo, ny; niagara falls, ny; forthill, oh; memphis, tn;
old hickory, tn; baytown, tx; beaumont, tx; elpaso, tx;
james river, va; richmond, va; belle, wv
asia pacific
guangzhou, china; ulsan, korea
europe
villers-st. paul, france; luxembourg; asturias, spain; sudbury,
uk
canada
thetford mines
the companys plants and equipment are well maintained and
in good operating condition. sales as a percent of capacity were
78, 83, and 84percent in 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively. properties are primarily owned by the company;
however, certain properties are leased. no title examination of
the properties has been made for the purpose of this report and
certain properties are shared with other tenants under long-term
leases.
item3.legal
proceedings
litigation
pfoa:
environmental and litigation proceedings
for purposes of this report, the term pfoa means collectively
perfluorooctanoic acid and its salts, including the ammonium
salt and does not distinguish between the two forms. information
related to this matter is included in note19 to the
consolidated financial statements under the heading pfoa.
elastomers
antitrust matters
information related to this matter is included in note19
to the consolidated financial statements under the heading
elastomers antitrust matters.
environmental
proceedings
belle spent acid
plant new source review notice of violation
on august2, 2007, the u.s.environmental protection
agency (epa) issued a notice and finding of violation to dupont
and lucite international (lucite) regarding the spent acid
regeneration unit at the belle plant in south charleston, west
virginia. dupont sold the unit to imperial chemical industries,
plc (ici)in 1993, who sold it to lucite in 1999. dupont
has operated the unit since it was built in 1964, including
after the sale to ici, through the present. the notice alleges 5
projects in the time period 1988 to 1996 should have triggered
the new source review or new source performance standard
requirements of the clean air act (caa) and, therefore, required
the unit be shut down or retrofitted to best
available technology. lucite, dupont, epa and
u.s.department of justice (doj) have reached an agreement
in principle that requires the unit be shut down by april 2010
and a penalty of $2million. dupont believes that lucite
should bear the costs of any shutdown and penalty. lucite has
notified the company that it will seek indemnity for such costs
from dupont.
tsca voluntary
audit
dupont voluntarily undertook a self-audit concerning reporting
of inhalation studies pursuant to toxic substances control act
(tsca) section8(e). dupont voluntarily reported the
results of that audit to the epa. the epa has reviewed the
information submitted under this self-audit and has indicated
potential violations exist with respect to some of the submitted
studies. based upon communications with the epa, the company
believes the epa will seek a penalty.
west virginia
department of environmental protection
on july31, 2008, the west virginia department of
environmental protection (wvdep) notified dupont that it was
seeking a penalty for alleged violations of the solid waste
management and water pollution control acts from 2004 to present
at duponts washington works site and two landfills in wood
county, west virginia. the alleged violations include
exceedances of discharge permit parameters, releases to the
environment reported to the agency, and failing to comply with
construction and operation permit requirements at one of the
landfills. an agreement in
table of contents
part i
item3.legal
proceedings,
continued
principle has been reached to settle this matter for a penalty
of $1.1million and supplemental environmental projects
involving expenditures of $500,000.
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
table of contents
part i
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders,
continued
executive
officers of the registrant
the following is a list, as of february12, 2009, of the
companys executive officers:
executive
age
officer since
chief executive officer:
ellen j. kullman
other executive officers:
james c. borel,
group vice president  dupont agriculture
thomas m. connelly, jr.,
executive vice president and chief innovation officer
richard r. goodmanson,
executive vice president and chief operating officer
w. donald johnson
senior vice president  dupont human resources
jeffrey l. keefer,
executive vice president and chief financial officer
thomas l. sager
senior vice president and general counsel
the companys executive officers are elected or appointed
for the ensuing year or for an indefinite term and until their
successors are elected or appointed.
ellen j. kullman joined dupont in 1988 as marketing
manager and progressed through various roles as global business
director and was named vice president and general manager of
white pigment& mineral products in 1995. in 2000,
ms.kullman was named group vice president and general
manager of several businesses and new business development. she
became group vice president-dupont safety& protection
in 2002. in june 2006, ms.kullman was named executive vice
president and assumed leadership of marketing& sales
along with safety and sustainability. she was appointed
president on october1, 2008 and became chief executive
officer on january1, 2009.
james c. boreljoined dupont in 1978, and held a
variety of product and sales management positions for
agricultural products. in 1993, he transferred to tokyo, japan
with agricultural products as regional manager, north asia and
was appointed regional director, asia pacific in 1994. in 1997,
he was appointed regional director, north america and was
appointed vice president and general manager-dupont crop
protection later that year. in january 2004, he was named senior
vice president-dupont global human resources. in february 2008,
mr.borel was named group vice president-dupont with
responsibility for production agriculture.
thomas m. connelly,jr. joined dupont in 1977 as a
research engineer. since then, mr.connelly has served in
various research and plant technical leadership roles, as well
as product management and business director roles.
mr.connelly served as vice president and general
manager-dupont fluoroproducts from 1999 until september 2000,
when he was named senior vice president and chief science and
technology officer. in june 2006, mr.connelly was named
executive vice president and chief innovation officer.
richard r. goodmanson joined dupont in 1999 as executive
vice president and chief operating officer. prior to joining
dupont, mr.goodmanson was president and chief executive
officer of america west airlines from 1996 to 1999. he was
senior vice president of operations for frito-lay inc. from 1992
to 1996, and he was a principal at mckinsey& company,
inc. from 1980 to 1992.
table of contents
part i
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders,
continued
w. donald johnson joined dupont in 1974 and has held a
variety of technical and manufacturing assignments in fibers. in
1997 he was appointed vice president and general manager-dupont
advanced fiber systems and dupont nylon and in 1999 he became
the group vice president for nylon worldwide. from 2001 until
2006 when he was transferred to japan, he had responsibilities
for dupont operations and engineering. he was named to senior
vice president-dupont human resources in february 2008.
jeffrey l. keefer joined dupont in 1976 as a financial
analyst in corporate finance. in 1982, he accepted a field sales
assignment and was appointed customer service manager in 1985.
he advanced through various sales and management assignments and
in february 1999 he was named vice president and general
managerdupont titanium technologies. in january 2004, he
was named group vice presidentdupont performance
materials. in june 2006, he was named executive vice
presidentdupont finance and chief financial officer.
thomas l. sager joined dupont in 1976 as an attorney in
the labor and securities group. in 1998 he was named chief
litigation counsel and assumed oversight responsibility for all
company litigation matters. he was named vice president and
assistant general counsel in 1999. in july 2008, he was
appointed senior vice president and general counsel.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities
market for
registrants common equity and related stockholder
matters
the companys common stock is listed on the new york stock
exchange, inc. (symbol dd)and certain
non-u.s.exchanges.
the number of record holders of common stock was 87,729 at
january31, 2009.
holders of the companys common stock are entitled to
receive dividends when they are declared by the board of
directors. while it is not a guarantee of future conduct, the
company has continuously paid a quarterly dividend since the
fourth quarter 1904. dividends on common stock and preferred
stock are usually declared in january, april, july and october.
when dividends on common stock are declared, they are usually
paid mid march, june, september and december. preferred
dividends are paid on or about the 25thof january, april,
july and october. the stock transfer agent and registrar is
computershare trustcompany, n.a.
the companys quarterly high and low trading stock prices
and dividends per common share for 2008 and 2007 are shown below.
market prices
per share
dividend
high
low
declared
fourth quarter
$
41.15
$
21.32
$
0.41
third quarter
48.22
39.45
0.41
second quarter
52.49
42.36
0.41
first quarter
48.08
41.26
0.41
fourth quarter
$
50.42
$
42.25
$
0.41
third quarter
53.90
45.75
0.37
second quarter
53.25
48.44
0.37
first quarter
53.67
47.58
0.37
issuer purchases
of equity securities
there were no purchases of the companys common stock
during the three months ended december31, 2008.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities,
continued
stock performance
graph
the following graph presents the cumulative five-year total
return for the companys common stock compared with the
s&p 500 stock index and a self-constructed peer group of
companies. recognizing that strong science capabilities are the
driving force behind the companys transformation over the
past decade, management chose a new peer group for 2008 that
includes more research intensive companies with a scientific
focus versus commodity-based chemical companies. the peer group
companies for the year ended december31, 2008 are 3m
company; abbott laboratories; air products&
chemicals, inc.; baxter international inc.; the boeing company;
caterpillar inc.; eastman kodak company; emerson electric co.;
hewlett-packard company; honeywell international inc.;
ingersoll-rand company limited; johnson& johnson;
johnson controls, inc.; kimberly-clark corporation;
merck& company, inc.; monsanto company; motorola
inc.; the procter& gamble company; rohm and haas
company; and united technologies corporation. for comparison,
the companys old peer group companies were 3m company,
alcoa inc.; basf corporation; the dow chemical company; eastman
kodak company; ford motor company; general electric company;
hewlett-packard company; monsanto company; motorola, inc.; ppg
industries, inc.; rohm and haas company; and united technologies
corporation.
stock performance
graph
12/31/2003
12/31/2004
12/31/2005
12/31/2006
12/31/2007
12/31/2008
dupont
$
$
$
$
$
$
s&p 500 index
$
$
$
$
$
$
new peer group
$
$
$
$
$
$
old peer group
$
$
$
$
$
$
the graph assumes that the value of dupont common stock, the
s&p 500 stock index and the peer group of companies was
each $100 on december31, 2003 and that all dividends were
reinvested. the peer group is weighted by market capitalization.
table of contents
partii
item6.selected
financial data
(dollars in millions, except per share)
summary of operations
net sales
$
30,529
$
29,378
$
27,421
$
26,639
$
27,340
income before income taxes and minority interests
$
2,391
$
3,743
$
3,329
$
3,563
$
1,442
provision for (benefit from) income taxes
$
$
$
$
1,470
$
(329
)
net income
$
2,007
$
2,988
$
3,148
$
2,056
$
1,780
basic earnings per share of common stock
$
2.21
$
3.25
$
3.41
$
2.08
$
1.78
diluted earnings per share of common stock
$
2.20
$
3.22
$
3.38
$
2.07
$
1.77
financial position at year-end
working capital
$
5,601
$
4,619
$
4,930
$
4,986
$
7,272
total assets
$
36,209
$
34,131
$
31,777
$
33,291
$
35,632
borrowings and capital lease obligations
short-term
$
2,012
$
1,370
$
1,517
$
1,397
$
long-term
$
7,638
$
5,955
$
6,013
$
6,783
$
5,548
stockholders equity
$
7,125
$
11,136
$
9,422
$
8,962
$
11,377
general
for the year
purchases of property, plant& equipment and
investments in affiliates
$
2,033
$
1,698
$
1,563
$
1,406
$
1,298
depreciation
$
1,169
$
1,158
$
1,157
$
1,128
$
1,124
research and development (r&d) expense
$
1,393
$
1,338
$
1,302
$
1,336
$
1,333
average number of common shares outstanding (millions)
basic
diluted
1,003
dividends per common share
$
1.64
$
1.52
$
1.48
$
1.46
$
1.40
at year-end
employees (thousands)
closing stock price
$
25.30
$
44.09
$
48.71
$
42.50
$
49.05
common stockholders of record (thousands)
on december31, 2006, the
company adopted sfasno.158, employers
accounting for defined benefit pension and other postretirement
plans, an amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and
132(r). total assets and stockholders equity were
reduced by $2,159million and $1,555million,
respectively, as a result of such adoption.
includes borrowings and capital
lease obligations classified as liabilities held for sale.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
cautionary
statements about forward-looking statements
this report contains forward-looking statements which may be
identified by their use of words like plans,
expects, will, anticipates,
intends, projects, estimates
or other words of similar meaning. all statements that address
expectations or projections about the future, including
statements about the companys strategy for growth, product
development, market position, expenditures and financial results
are forward-looking statements.
forward-looking statements are based on certain assumptions and
expectations of future events. the company cannot guarantee that
these assumptions and expectations are accurate or will be
realized. for some of the important factors that could cause the
companys actual results to differ materially from those
projected in any such forward-looking statements see the risk
factors discussion set forth under parti, item1a
beginning on page6.
overview
long-term growth strategiesdupont
strives to grow shareholder value over the long term by
executing its three growth
strategiesputting science to work,
leveraging the power of one dupont and going where the growth
is. dupont science and innovation is focused on delivering
solutions for some of the worlds toughest challenges such
as the need for increased food production, renewable energy and
raw materials, energy efficiency, and greater safety and
protection. the initiatives employed to achieve the strategies
are:#1 grow in the areas of agriculture, biosciences,
safety and protection and polymer science by delivering
science-based solutions.#2 expand the companys
position in emerging markets.#3 extend cost and capital
productivity gains. over the long term, dupont continues to see
the potential for attractive earnings growth from these
initiatives. in addition to its growth strategies, duponts
financial discipline principles are critical to delivering
shareholder value over time. the principles are first to
maintain a strong balance sheet and second to return excess cash
to shareholders unless there is a compelling opportunity to
invest for growth. the companys strong balance sheet
supports liquidity and a low cost of borrowing and is a direct
result from the disciplined execution of these principles.
global economic conditionsthe year 2008
was challenging due to a global economic recession with demand
weakness in north american and western european motor vehicle
and construction related markets and dramatic escalation of
global raw material, energy and transportation costs. despite
these challenges, the company delivered 4percent sales
growth and strong performances from the agriculture&
nutrition segment, pharmaceuticals, and most businesses in
emerging markets. early in the fourth quarter 2008 a financial
crisis spreading globally triggered unprecedented market
volatility and depressed economic growth. the fourth quarter of
2008 was the clear pivot point in the economic environment with
a steep decline in demand becoming pervasive across a broader
range of end markets and geographies. reflecting these
conditions, the companys full year sales volume dropped
5percent versus the prior year.
response to challenging global market
conditionsin december 2008, dupont
announced plans to address rapidly deteriorating market
conditions and strengthen the companys future
competitiveness. plans are focused on generating cash by better
aligning cost, working capital and property, plant and equipment
expenditures to the revised demand signals of the fourth
quarter. these plans include a restructuring program with an
associated fourth quarter pre-tax charge of $535million,
with expected pre-tax savings of about $130million for
2009, and about $250million annual savings thereafter. the
restructuring will reduce about 2,500employee positions,
primarily those associated with motor vehicle and construction
related businesses in western europe and the u.s.in
addition to the expected $130million cost savings in 2009
from restructuring, the company detailed plans to deliver an
additional $600million cost reduction in 2009. these plans
include fixed cost productivity improvements, as well as
immediate cost reductions implemented across the company such as
significantly reducing discretionary spending, temporarily
idling over 100 sites, reducing about 4,000 contractors and
continuing productivity projects for streamlining and leveraging
opportunities across operations, supply chain and support
functions. the company also outlined 2009 plans to achieve a
$1billion net working capital reduction, and a 10 to
20percent reduction in capital spending.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
analysis of
operations
(dollars in millions)
net sales
$
30,529
$
29,378
$
27,421
2008 versus 2007consolidated net sales
for 2008 were $30.5billion, up 4percent. this
reflects 10percent sales growth through september30,
partly offset by a 17percent year-over-year sales decline
in the fourth quarter, precipitated by a significant decline in
demand. full year sales reflect a 7percent increase in
local selling prices and 3percent favorable currency
exchange, partly offset by 5percent lower volume and a
1percent reduction from portfolio changes. worldwide sales
volumes reflect a modest increase outside the u.s.driven
by growth in emerging markets, more than offset by significantly
lower volumes in the companys major polymer, chemical,
material, and electronic product lines sold in the u.s.and
western europe.
the table below shows a regional breakdown of 2008 consolidated
net sales based on location of customers and percentage
variances from prior year:
percent change due to:
percent
change vs.
local
currency
(dollars in billions)
net sales
price
effect
volume
portfolio
worldwide
$
30.5
(5
)
(1
)
united states
11.0
(2
)
-
(10
)
-
europe
9.5
(4
)
-
asia pacific
5.5
-
(2
)
canada& latin america
4.5
(3
)
(1
)
2007 versus 2006consolidated net sales
for 2007 were $29.4billion, up 7percent. this growth
was principally the result of an 11percent increase in
sales outside of the u.s., reflecting in part the benefit of a
weaker u.s.dollar (usd), which added 3percent to
worldwide sales. worldwide volumes and local selling prices each
increased 2percent. sales in the u.s.increased
1percent reflecting 3percent higher selling prices,
partially offset by 2percent lower volume. the decrease in
u.s.sales volume was primarily due to lower demand for the
companys products related to construction and motor
vehicle production markets. sales in canada and latin america
increased 15percent, primarily due to a 10percent
volume increase reflecting a substantial increase in sales of
seed and crop protection products in south america.
the table below shows a regional breakdown of 2007 consolidated
net sales based on location of customers and percentage
variances from prior year:
percent change due to:
percent change vs.
(dollars in billions)
net sales
local price
currency effect
volume
worldwide
$
29.4
united states
11.3
-
(2
)
europe
8.8
asia pacific
5.2
canada& latin america
4.1
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
(dollars in millions)
other income, net
$
1,307
$
1,275
$
1,561
2008 versus 2007other income, net,
increased $32million versus 2007. the increase was
attributable to an increase of $211million in equity in
earnings of affiliates, primarily due to the absence of the 2007
impairment charge described below, and a favorable
$51million litigation settlement in 2008. the increases
are partially offset by additional net pre-tax exchange losses
of $154million and a decrease of $86million in asset
sales.
2007 versus 2006other income, net,
decreased $286million versus 2006. this reduction is
primarily due to an impairment charge of $165million to
write down the companys investment in a polyester films
joint venture in the performance materials segment, a decrease
of $81million in net pre-tax exchange gains and a decrease
in miscellaneous items of $231million offset by higher
cozaar/hyzaar
income of $128million (see page33 for
pharmaceuticals segment information and note3 to the
consolidated financial statements).
the decrease in miscellaneous items resulted from the absence of
2006 benefits of $90million for the reversal of accrued
interest related to the favorable settlement of certain
prior-year tax contingencies and $76million of insurance
recoveries from its insurance carriers as part of asbestos
litigation matters. of the $76million, $61million
related to costs, including outside counsel fees and expenses
and settlements paid over the past twenty years. during this
twenty year period, dupont has been served with thousands of
lawsuits alleging injury from exposure to asbestos on dupont
premises. most of these claims have been disposed of through
trial, dismissal or settlement. management believes it is remote
that the outcome of remaining or future asbestos litigation
matters will have a material adverse effect on the
companys consolidated financial position or liquidity.
these asbestos related insurance recoveries were reflected in
cash provided by operating activities within the companys
consolidated statements of cash flows. the remaining
$15million is part of a total recovery of
$143million relating to insurance recoveries associated
with damages to the companys facilities suffered as a
result of hurricane katrina in 2005. the majority of the
hurricane katrina recovery was included in cost of goods sold
and other operating charges in the consolidated income
statements. no amounts were received from insurance carriers for
damages suffered by the company as a result of hurricane rita.
additional information related to the companys other
income, net is included in note3 to the consolidated
financial statements.
(dollars in millions)
cost of goods sold and other operating charges
$
24,083
$
21,746
$
20,636
as a percent of net sales
%
%
%
2008 versus 2007cost of goods sold and
other operating charges (cogs) for the year 2008 were
$24.1billion, versus $21.7billion in 2007, an
increase of 11percent. cogs was 79percent of net
sales for 2008 versus 74percent for the year 2007. the
5percentage point increase principally reflects a
$535million charge for restructuring as discussed below, a
$227million charge for hurricane-related cleanup and
repair, and significant increases in raw material, energy and
freight costs.
in 2008, the company initiated a global restructuring program in
response to the decline in the motor vehicle and construction
markets, as well as the global economic recession. the program
was established to reduce costs and improve profitability across
the companys businesses. the program includes the
elimination of approximately 2,500 positions principally located
in western europe and the u.s.primarily supporting the
motor vehicle and construction markets.
a resulting charge of $535million has been reflected in
cogs. this charge includes costs of $287million related to
employee severance costs and $248million attributable to
asset shut-downs, asset impairments and other non-personnel
charges. additional details related to this program are
contained in the individual segment reviews and in note5
to the consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
essentially all employee terminations related to this program
will begin during the first quarter of 2009. the program is
estimated to be substantially complete in 2010. there were no
cash payments related to this program in 2008.
expected pre-tax cost savings of approximately $250million
per year are associated with the program when complete.
approximately $130million of this savings is expected to
be realized in 2009.
2007 versus 2006cogs for the year 2007
were $21.7billion, versus $20.6billion in 2006, an
increase of 5percent. cogs was 74percent of net
sales for 2007 versus 75percent for the year 2006. the
1percentage point reduction principally reflects the
absence of 2006 charges for restructuring, the effects of the
companys productivity initiatives and a current year
benefit from the weaker u.s.dollar due to currency
exchange rate changes which increased sales at a higher rate
than the rate they increased cogs. partly offsetting these
factors were increases in raw material and finished product
distribution costs, as well as the absence of a 2006 benefit of
$128million in insurance recoveries.
the 2006 restructuring programs included the elimination of
approximately 3,200 positions and redeployment of about 650. the
company recorded a net charge of $326million in 2006
related to employee separation costs and asset impairment
charges. this included $184million to provide severance
benefits for approximately 2,800employees involved in
manufacturing, marketing and sales, administrative and technical
activities. at december31, 2008, the 2006 restructuring
programs are essentially complete. additional details related to
these programs are contained in the segment reviews and in
note5 to the consolidated financial statements.
payments from operating cash flows to terminated employees as a
result of the 2006 plans totaled $47million,
$77million, and $32million during 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively. annual pre-tax cost savings of about
$125million per year are associated with the
coatings& color technologies program, approximately
$53million of which is reflected in cogs. cumulative
savings of approximately 100percent, 80percent and
35percent was realized in 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively.
(dollars in millions)
selling, general and administrative expenses
$
3,593
$
3,396
$
3,255
as a percent of net sales
%
%
%
selling, general and administrative expenses (sg&a) as a
percent of sales remained constant over the three year period.
higher sg&a is primarily due to increased global
commissions, selling and marketing investments related to the
companys seed products and an unfavorable foreign currency
impact.
(dollars in millions)
research and development expense
$
1,393
$
1,338
$
1,302
as a percent of net sales
%
%
%
research and development expense (r&d) as a percent of
sales remained constant over the three year period. higher
r&d in 2008 and 2007 relates to the accelerated
biotechnology trait research and development in the
agriculture& nutrition segment. the 2007 increase was
partially offset by a decrease in r&d in the
coatings& color technologies segment as a result of
consolidating research facilities as a part of its 2006 business
transformation plan.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
(dollars in millions)
interest expense
$
$
$
interest expense decreased $54million in 2008 compared to
2007. the decrease in interest expense is due to lower average
interest rates, partially offset by higher average borrowings.
interest expense decreased $30million in 2007 versus 2006.
this decrease was primarily due to lower average borrowing
levels and higher capitalized interest, partially offset by
slightly higher average interest rates.
(dollars in millions)
provision for income taxes
$
$
$
effective income tax rate
15.9
%
20.0
%
5.9
%
in 2008, the company recorded a tax provision of
$381million (see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements).
in 2007, the company recorded a tax provision of
$748million which included a benefit of $108million
related to tax settlements offset by net tax expense in other
operating results (see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements).
in 2006, the company recorded a tax provision of
$196million which included a benefit of $272million
related to tax settlements and a $186million benefit for
reversal of tax valuation allowances related to the net deferred
tax assets of certain foreign subsidiaries due to the sustained
improved business performance in these subsidiaries. these tax
benefits were offset by net tax expense in other operating
results (see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements).
the companys current estimate of the 2009 effective income
tax rate is about 26percent, excluding tax effects of
exchange gains and losses which can not be reasonably estimated
at this time. see note6 for additional detail on items
that significantly impact the companys effective tax rates.
(dollars in millions)
net income
$
2,007
$
2,988
$
3,148
2008 versus 2007net income for 2008
decreased $981million, or 33percent versus 2007. the
decrease in net income is attributable to a substantial decline
in sales volume, primarily occurring during the fourth quarter
2008, and higher fixed costs including restructuring and
hurricane-related charges recorded in the fourth quarter 2008.
2007 versus 2006net income for 2007
decreased 5percent versus 2006, primarily due to the
higher effective tax rate, as well as the decrease in other
income. these decreases were partially offset by a
7percent increase in net sales, the absence of the
restructuring charges taken in 2006 and a favorable foreign
currency exchange impact.
corporate
outlook
for the year 2009, the companys earnings outlook is a
range of $2.00 to $2.50 per share, anticipating that the global
economic recession will adversely affect the companys
results. favorable global agriculture market and competitive
conditions are expected to support continued sales and earnings
growth for the agriculture& nutrition segment.
however, lower demand for the companys major polymer,
chemical, material, and electronic product lines and the impact
of currency are expected to limit the companys overall
revenue growth. the company plans to continue its appropriate
level of support for businesses expected to have above-average
growth rates and margins. in addition, cash-generating actions
have been implemented including spending reductions and
restructuring to better align capital expenditures and costs
with anticipated continuing lower global demand. for 2009, the
company has set targets for capital expenditures of about
$1.6billion, and fixed cost and working capital reductions
of about $730million and $1billion respectively.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
accounting
standards issued not yet adopted
in december 2007, the financial accounting standards board
(fasb) issued statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)
no.141 (revised 2007)business
combinations (sfas141r) which replaces
sfasno.141. sfas141r addresses the recognition
and measurement of identifiable assets acquired, liabilities
assumed, and non-controlling interests in business combinations.
sfas141r also requires disclosure that enables users of
the financial statements to better evaluate the nature and
financial effect of business combinations. sfas141r
applies prospectively to business combinations for which the
acquisition date is on or after the beginning of the first
annual reporting period beginning on or after december15,
2008. sfas141r will be adopted by the company on
january1, 2009. the company does not believe that at the
time of adoption sfas141r will have a material impact on
its consolidated financial statements. this standard requires
significantly different accounting treatment for business
combinations than current requirements. thus, accounting for
potential future business combinations after adoption may
produce a significantly different result and financial statement
impact than under current standards.
in december 2007, the fasb issued sfasno.160,
noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial
statementsan amendment of accounting research
bulletinno.51 (sfas160)which
changes the accounting and reporting for minority interests and
for the deconsolidation of a subsidiary. it also clarifies that
a third-party, non-controlling interest in a consolidated
subsidiary is an ownership interest in the consolidated entity
that should be reported as equity in the consolidated financial
statements. sfas160 also requires disclosure that clearly
identifies and distinguishes between the interests of the parent
and the interests of the non-controlling owners. sfas160
is effective for fiscal years beginning after december15,
2008. sfas160 will be adopted by the company on
january1, 2009. the company does not believe that at the
time of adoption sfas160 will have a material impact on
its consolidated financial statements.
in march 2008, the fasb issued sfasno.161,
disclosures about derivative instruments and hedging
activities, an amendment of fasb statement no.133
(sfas161). effective for fiscal years and interim periods
beginning after november15, 2008, the new standard
requires enhanced disclosures about derivative and hedging
activities that are intended to better convey the purpose of
derivative use and the risks managed. sfas161 will not
affect the companys financial position or results of
operations. the new standard solely affects the disclosure of
information.
in december 2008, fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp)
fas132(r)-1, employers disclosures about
postretirement benefit plan assets, which is effective for
fiscal years ending after december15, 2009. the new
standard expands disclosures for assets held by employer pension
and other postretirement benefit plans. fsp fas132(r)-1
will not affect the companys financial position or results
of operations. the new standard solely affects the disclosure of
information.
critical
accounting estimates
the companys significant accounting policies are more
fully described in note1 to the consolidated financial
statements. management believes that the application of these
policies on a consistent basis enables the company to provide
the users of the financial statements with useful and reliable
information about the companys operating results and
financial condition.
the preparation of the consolidated financial statements in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the
unites states of america (gaap) requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts,
including, but not limited to, receivable and inventory
valuations, impairment of tangible and intangible assets,
long-term employee benefit obligations, income taxes,
restructuring liabilities, environmental matters and litigation.
managements estimates are based on historical experience,
facts and circumstances available at the time and various other
assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. the company
reviews these matters and reflects changes in estimates as
appropriate. management believes that the following represents
some of the more critical judgment areas in the application of
the companys accounting policies which could have a
material effect on the companys financial position,
liquidity or results of operations.
long-term
employee benefits
accounting for employee benefit plans involves numerous
assumptions and estimates. discount rate and expected return on
plan assets are two critical assumptions in measuring the cost
and benefit obligation of the companys
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
pension and other long-term employee benefit plans. management
reviews these two key assumptions annually as of
december31st. these and other assumptions are updated
periodically to reflect the actual experience and expectations
on a plan specific basis as appropriate. as permitted by gaap,
actual results that differ from the assumptions are accumulated
on a plan by plan basis and to the extent that such differences
exceed 10percent of the greater of the plan obligations or
the applicable plan assets, the excess is amortized over the
average remaining working life of current employees.
about 80percent of the companys benefit obligation
for pensions and essentially all of the companys other
long-term employee benefit obligations are attributable to the
benefit plans in the u.s.the company utilizes published
long-term high quality bond indices to determine the discount
rate at the balance sheet date. where commonly available, the
company considers indices of various durations to reflect the
timing of future benefit payments.
within the u.s., the company establishes strategic asset
allocation percentage targets and appropriate benchmarks for
significant asset classes with the aim of achieving a prudent
balance between return and risk. strategic asset allocations in
other countries are selected in accordance with the laws and
practices of those countries. where appropriate, asset-liability
studies are also taken into consideration. the long-term
expected return on plan assets in the u.s.is based upon
historical real returns (net of inflation) for the asset classes
covered by the investment policy and projections of inflation
over the long-term period during which benefits are payable to
plan participants.
in determining annual expense for the principal
u.s.pension plan, the company uses a market-related value
of assets rather than their fair market value. the
market-related value of assets is calculated by averaging market
returns over 36months. accordingly, there may be a lag in
recognition of changes in market valuation. as a result, changes
in the fair market value of assets are not immediately reflected
in the companys calculation of net pension cost. the
following table shows the market-related value and fair market
value of plan assets for the principal u.s.pension plan:
(dollars in billions)
market-related value of assets
$
16.2
$
19.3
fair market value of plan assets
$
13.5
$
19.1
market-related value of plan assets decreased during 2008 due to
recent adverse conditions in the global capital markets.
for plans other than the principal u.s.pension plan,
pension expense is typically determined using the fair market
value of assets. the fair market value of assets in all pension
plans was $16.2billion at december31, 2008, and the
related projected benefit obligations were $21.5billion.
in addition, obligations under the companys unfunded other
long-term employee benefit plans were $4.1billion at
december31, 2008.
the following table highlights the potential impact on the
companys pre-tax earnings due to changes in certain key
assumptions with respect to the companys pension and other
long-term employee benefit plans, based on assets and
liabilities at december31, 2008:
1/2percentage point
1/2percentage point
(dollars in millions)
increase
decrease
discount rate
$66
$(68
)
expected rate of return on plan assets
(92
)
additional information with respect to pension and other
long-term employee benefits expenses, liabilities and
assumptions is discussed under long-term employee
benefits beginning on page39.
environmental
matters
dupont accrues for remediation activities when it is probable
that a liability has been incurred and a reasonable estimate of
the liability can be made. the companys estimates are
based on a number of factors, including the
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
complexity of the geology, the nature and extent of
contamination, the type of remedy, the outcome of discussions
with regulatory agencies and other potentially responsible
parties (prps) at multiparty sites and the number of and
financial viability of other prps. the company has recorded a
liability of $379million on the consolidated balance sheet
as of december31, 2008; these accrued liabilities exclude
claims against third parties and are not discounted.
considerable uncertainty exists with respect to environmental
remediation costs and, under adverse changes in circumstances,
the potential liability may range up to two to three times the
amount accrued. much of this liability results from the
comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability
act (cercla, often referred to as the superfund), the resource
conservation and recovery act (rcra) and similar state laws.
these laws require the company to undertake certain
investigative and remedial activities at sites where the company
conducts or once conducted operations or at sites where
company-generated waste was disposed. the accrual also includes
a number of sites identified by the company for which it is
probable that environmental remediation will be required, but
which are not currently the subject of cercla, rcra or state
enforcement activities. federal and state authorities may seek
fines and penalties for violation of the various laws and
governmental regulations and could, among other things, impose
liability on the company for cleaning up the damage resulting
from company-generated waste disposal. over the next two
decades, the company could incur significant costs under both
cercla and rcra.
remediation activities vary substantially in duration and cost
from site to site. these activities and their associated costs,
depend on the mix of unique site characteristics, evolving
remediation technologies, diverse regulatory agencies and
enforcement policies, as well as the presence or absence of
prps. therefore, it is difficult to develop precise estimates of
future site remediation costs.
legal
contingencies
the companys results of operations could be affected by
significant litigation adverse to the company, including product
liability claims, patent infringement and antitrust claims, and
claims for third party property damage or personal injury
stemming from alleged environmental torts. the company records
accruals for legal matters when the information available
indicates that it is probable that a liability has been incurred
and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated.
management makes adjustments to these accruals to reflect the
impact and status of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice
of counsel and other information and events that may pertain to
a particular matter. predicting the outcome of claims and
lawsuits and estimating related costs and exposure involves
substantial uncertainties that could cause actual costs to vary
materially from estimates. in making determinations of likely
outcomes of litigation matters, management considers many
factors. these factors include, but are not limited to, the
nature of specific claims including unasserted claims, the
companys experience with similar types of claims, the
jurisdiction in which the matter is filed, input from outside
legal counsel, the likelihood of resolving the matter through
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms and the matters
current status. considerable judgment is required in determining
whether to establish a litigation accrual when an adverse
judgment is rendered against the company in a court proceeding.
in such situations, the company will not recognize a loss if,
based upon a thorough review of all relevant facts and
information, management believes that it is probable that the
pending judgment will be successfully overturned on appeal. a
detailed discussion of significant litigation matters is
contained in note19 to the consolidated financial
statements.
income
taxes
the breadth of the companys operations and the global
complexity of tax regulations require assessments of
uncertainties and judgments in estimating the ultimate taxes the
company will pay. the final taxes paid are dependent upon many
factors, including negotiations with taxing authorities in
various jurisdictions, outcomes of tax litigation and resolution
of disputes arising from federal, state and international tax
audits. the resolution of these uncertainties may result in
adjustments to the companys tax assets and tax
liabilities. it is reasonably possible that changes to the
companys global unrecognized tax benefits could be
significant, however, due to the uncertainty regarding the
timing of completion of audits and the possible outcomes, a
current estimate of the range of increases or decreases that may
occur within the next twelve months cannot be made.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
deferred income taxes result from differences between the
financial and tax basis of the companys assets and
liabilities and are adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax
laws when changes are enacted. valuation allowances are recorded
to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not
that a tax benefit will not be realized. significant judgment is
required in evaluating the need for and magnitude of appropriate
valuation allowances against deferred tax assets. the
realization of these assets is dependent on generating future
taxable income, as well as successful implementation of various
tax planning strategies. for example, changes in facts and
circumstances that alter the probability that the company will
realize deferred tax assets could result in recording a
valuation allowance, thereby reducing the deferred tax asset and
generating a deferred tax expense in the relevant period. in
some situations these changes could be material.
at december31, 2008, the company had a deferred tax asset
balance of $6,524million, net of valuation allowance of
$1,693million. realization of these assets is expected to
occur over an extended period of time. as a result, changes in
tax laws, assumptions with respect to future taxable income and
tax planning strategies could result in adjustments to these
assets.
valuation of
assets
assessment of the potential impairment of property, plant and
equipment, goodwill, other intangible assets and investments in
affiliates is an integral part of the companys normal
ongoing review of operations. testing for potential impairment
of these assets is significantly dependent on numerous
assumptions and reflects managements best estimates at a
particular point in time. the dynamic economic environments in
which the companys businesses operate, and key economic
and business assumptions with respect to projected selling
prices, market growth and inflation rates, can significantly
affect the outcome of impairment tests. estimates based on these
assumptions may differ significantly from actual results.
changes in factors and assumptions used in assessing potential
impairments can have a significant impact on the existence and
magnitude of impairments, as well as the time in which such
impairments are recognized. future changes in the environment
and the economic outlook for the assets being evaluated could
also result in additional impairment charges. based on the
results of the companys annual impairment test in 2008, no
impairments exist at this time. however, due to the global
recession, there has been a reduction in the fair values in
excess of book value of net assets within goodwill and other
indefinite-lived intangible assets. the company believes the
current assumptions and estimates utilized are both reasonable
and appropriate. future changes in the environment and the
economic outlook for the assets being evaluated could result in
an increase or decrease of excess fair values of book value, or
impairment charges. information with respect to the
companys significant accounting policies on long-lived
assets is included in note1 to the consolidated financial
statements.
segment
reviews
segment sales include transfers. segment pre-tax operating
income (ptoi) is defined as operating income before income
taxes, minority interests, exchange gains (losses), corporate
expenses and net interest. a reconciliation of segment sales to
consolidated net sales and segment ptoi to income before income
taxes and minority interests for 2008, 2007 and 2006 is included
in note25 to the consolidated financial statements.
as described in note5 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company initiated a global restructuring program
during 2008 to reduce costs and improve profitability across its
businesses. the program charge reduced 2008 segment ptoi as
follows: agriculture&
nutrition$18million;
coatings& color
technologies$236million;
electronic& communication
technologies$55million; performance
materials$94million; safety&
protection$101million; and
other$31million.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
agriculture&
nutrition
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
8.0
$
1,087
$
6.8
$
$
6.0
$
agriculture& nutrition leverages the companys
technology, customer relationships and industry knowledge to
improve the quantity, quality and safety of the global food
supply. land available for worldwide agricultural production is
increasingly limited. therefore, increases in production will
need to be achieved principally through improving crop yields
and productivity rather than through increases in planted
acreage. agriculture& nutrition delivers a broad
portfolio of products and services that are specifically
targeted to achieve gains in crop yields and productivity,
including
pioneer
brand seed products and well-established brands of insecticides,
fungicides and herbicides. the segment operates across the food
value chain from inputs for producing agriculture products to
global production and distribution of soy-based food ingredients
to food quality diagnostic testing equipment. research and
development focuses on leveraging technology to increase grower
productivity and enhance the value of grains and soy through
improved seed traits, superior germplasm and the effective use
of insecticides, herbicides and fungicides.
agriculture& nutrition includes the companys
wholly owned subsidiary, pioneer hi-bred international, inc.
(pioneer), which is also the worlds leading seed brand and
a world leader in improving crop yields with hybrid and varietal
seeds that improve grower yields and provide insect protection
and herbicide tolerance. the principal products of pioneer are
hybrid seed corn and soybean seed. in 2008, pioneer benefited
from the global launch of approximately 30 new soybean varieties
and 60 new
pioneer
brand corn hybrids that include new combinations of corn borer,
corn rootworm and weed management traits highlighted by the
expansion of the
herculex1
family of traits.
agriculture& nutrition also serves the global
production agriculture industry with crop protection products in
the grain and specialty crop sectors, forestry and vegetation
management. principal crop protection products are herbicides,
fungicides, insect control products and plant growth regulators.
the segment continued to expand its presence in fruit and
vegetable specialty markets and continues to expand product
offerings in the professional pest control market. additionally,
the segment operates within the specialty food ingredients
market, including soy proteins and lecithins through its
majority-owned venture with bunge limited, the solae company.
2008 versus 2007sales of
$8billion were 16percent higher reflecting
14percent higher usd selling prices and 3percent
higher volume, partially offset by a 1percent reduction
from portfolio changes. the volume growth reflects higher corn
seed sales in europe and brazil, record soybean seed sales in
north america and brazil due to market share gains and increased
acreage shift from corn, and strong demand for corn and cereal
herbicides and cereal fungicides in europe. the higher usd
selling prices reflect higher value product mix, pricing actions
to offset the increases of raw materials costs and favorable
currency impacts in europe, latin america and canada.
ptoi for 2008 was $1.1billion, up 22percent versus
$894million in 2007, principally driven by increased sales
and higher value product mix, partially offset by continued
funding of strategic growth investments in research and
development and sales and marketing.
2007 versus 2006sales of
$6.8billion were 14percent higher reflecting
9percent higher usd selling prices and a 5percent
increase in volume. higher usd selling prices reflected a richer
mix of corn and soybean seed, and crop protection herbicides and
fungicides. volume increases were driven by corn seed sales in
north america, herbicides in europe and fungicides in latin
america, partially offset by a decrease in the sale of soybean
seed on lower planting acreage in north america.
1registered
trademark of dow agrosciences llc
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
2007ptoi was $894million versus $604million in
2006. 2006 ptoi included a $122million restructuring
charge. in addition, 2007 ptoi benefited from sales volume and
price gains, partially offset by higher production costs across
most of the segment and the growth investment in the seed
business.
outlookin 2009, the segment
anticipates continued growth through increased pioneer corn
value offerings, including stacked traits and seed treatments in
the u.s.and canada. pioneer will continue to build on its
north american product offerings with the addition of 26 new
soybean varieties and 96 new
pioneer
brand corn hybrids. pioneer anticipates price increases from
higher value product mix and continued market share gains in key
soybean and corn markets including the u.s., canada and brazil.
the segments introduction of new crop protection products
is projected to drive volume gains, particularly in europe and
latin america. higher production and raw material costs and
negative currency impacts will be moderating factors in the
underlying results.
coatings&
color technologies
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
6.6
$
$
6.6
$
$
6.3
$
coatings& color technologies is one of the
worlds leading motor vehicle coatings suppliers and the
worlds largest manufacturer of titanium dioxide products.
products offered include high performance liquid and powder
coatings for motor vehicle original equipment manufacturers
(oems), the motor vehicle aftermarket, and general industrial
applications, such as coatings for heavy equipment, pipes and
appliances and electrical insulation. the company markets its
refinish products using the
duponttm,
standox,
spies
hecker
and
nason
brand names.
standox
and spies
hecker
are focused on the high-end motor vehicle aftermarkets, while
nason
is primarily focused on economy coating applications. the
segments broad line of
duponttm
ti-pure
titanium dioxide products, in both slurry and powder form, serve
the coatings, plastic and paper industries.
the segments titanium tetrachloride business has moved
from a startup to an established, growing business, shipping
product globally. in 2008, construction was completed and
operations began at a $30million titanium tetrachloride
facility at its titanium dioxide plant in tennessee.
the key markets in which coatings& color technologies
operates continued to grow for most of the year, with growth in
the emerging regions, offset by significant decline in demand
across the segment during the last four months of 2008 as the
industry supply chains destocked worldwide in response to the
global economic recession.
global demand for titanium dioxide products was down in 2008
with global market volumes down 5percent from 2007. sales
for refinish products increased in all regions, except the
u.s.the oem market realized growth in latin america and
asia pacific, however this was more than offset by significant
declines in europe, u.s., and canada as a result of lower builds
of automobiles and light trucks in 2008. industrial coatings
sales increased in most regions outside the u.s.and
canada, with larger increases in asia pacific and latin america.
in december 2008, as part of the companys restructuring
plan, the segment recorded a charge of $236million that
included costs for employee separations and asset related
charges and will cover the elimination of approximately 1,600
positions and the closure of certain manufacturing units. the
plan is expected to be completed in 2010 and will result in cost
savings of approximately $50million in 2009, with an
annual savings rate of approximately $140million.
2008 versus 2007sales of
$6.6billion were flat when compared to 2007, reflecting
8percent higher usd selling prices, offset by an
8percent volume decline. the higher usd selling prices
primarily reflect favorable currency impacts in europe and latin
america and pricing actions to offset the increases of raw
materials costs. the decrease in volume was primarily due to
lower sales of products sold to oems in north america and europe
and lower demand for titanium dioxide, partially offset by
strong sales in emerging markets.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
2008ptoi was $326million as compared to
$840million in 2007. year-over-year decline in ptoi
reflects the restructuring charge described above, as well as
the impact of higher raw material costs and lower volumes,
partially offset by higher prices and strong sales in emerging
markets.
2007 versus 2006sales of
$6.6billion were up 5percent, reflecting about
4percent higher usd selling prices for the segment, as
well as a 1percent increase in volume. usd selling prices
were higher across a majority of the segments products.
the increase in volume was primarily attributable to the sales
of titanium dioxide, particularly in europe and asia pacific.
this increase was partially offset by declines in volume for
products sold to oem producers, primarily in north america and
europe. volumes for sales of refinish products were relatively
flat as compared to 2006.
ptoi in 2007 of $840million increased from
$817million in 2006. the ptoi improvement was primarily
the result of higher revenue driven by higher usd selling prices
and benefits realized from the 2006 restructuring program,
partially offset by higher raw material and transportation
costs. ptoi in 2006 included a net charge of $132million
for restructuring and $30million primarily for accelerated
depreciation related to the transformation plan that was
initiated in the first quarter 2006 (see note5 to the
consolidated financial statements). these charges were partially
offset by $142million in insurance proceeds, primarily
related to the hurricane damages incurred in 2005.
outlooksales in 2009 are expected to
decrease, reflecting continued weakness due to the global
recession. industry demand for titanium dioxide is expected to
be lower in 2009, with continued weakness in north american and
european construction and motor vehicle markets. conditions in
the global coatings industry will continue to provide a
challenging operating environment in 2009. modest declines are
expected for refinish markets in mature economies while modest
growth is expected in emerging markets. profitability of
coatings sold to oem producers is highly dependent upon volume
at specific plants the company services. global motor vehicle
industry builds in 2009 are expected to be down from 2008 with
all regions showing declines. lower raw material cost, fixed
cost benefits from the companys 2008 restructuring program
and productivity initiatives are expected to partially offset
the impact of lower volumes.
electronic&
communication technologies
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
4.0
$
$
3.8
$
$
3.6
$
electronic& communication technologies provides a
broad range of advanced materials for the electronics industry,
inks and flexographic printing systems, and a wide range of
fluoropolymer and fluorochemical products. the segment also
continues to pursue development activities related to displays
and alternative energy.
in the electronics industry, dupont is a leading supplier of
electronic and advanced display materials. the company offers a
broad portfolio of ceramic, flexible and rigid organic circuit
materials; materials for semiconductor fabrication and
packaging; and a wide range of products for advanced displays.
the segments products enable increased functionality and
lower costs for electronic and communication devices.
electronic& communication technologies is the market
leader in flexographic printing and black pigmented ink serving
the packaging and commercial printing industries. its offerings
include
duponttm
cyrel
and
cyrel
fast flexographic printing systems. dupont is the
worlds leading supplier of solvent-free thermal
flexographic platemaking technologies, with a broad array of
patented products and equipment.
the segment also includes a portfolio of industrial and
specialty fluorochemicals and fluoropolymers that are sold into
the refrigeration, insulation, aerosol propellants, fire
extinguishants, telecommunications, aerospace, automotive,
electronics, chemical processing and housewares industries.
electronic& communication technologies leverages
duponts strong materials and technology base to target
growth opportunities in electronics, fluoropolymers,
fluorochemicals, packaging graphics, ink-jet and photovoltaic
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
materials. in semiconductor fabrication, packaging and
interconnects, the segment is extending and broadening its
portfolio of materials to address critical needs in the
industry, e.g., chemical mechanical planarization and cleaners
for semiconductor manufacture; flex circuitry, advanced
dielectric films and embedded passives enabling miniaturization.
in the growing market for flat panel displays, the segment
continues to be a leading materials supplier for plasma
displays. in addition, the segment is developing new innovative
technologies for liquid crystal displays, such as alternative
backlighting materials and display films, while continuing to
invest in developing materials technologies for organic
light-emitting diode (oled). in fluoropolymers and
fluorochemicals, the segment continues to pursue product renewal
innovations such as next generation refrigerants. in the fast
growing photovoltaics market, the segment continues to be a
leading supplier of conductors and fluoropolymer films for
crystalline silicon cell and module manufacturers and is adding
new products to serve the emerging thin film photovoltaic module
market. in packaging graphics, products such as
cyrelfast
have rapidly grown, solidifying the segments market
leadership position. dupont is also expanding its leadership
position in black pigmented inks, and investing in color
pigmented inks for network printing applications.
2008 versus 2007sales of
$4billion were up 5percent, reflecting
7percent higher usd selling prices, 3percent volume
decline and a 1percent increase from portfolio changes.
the higher usd selling prices mainly reflect pricing actions to
offset the increases of raw materials costs and favorable
currency impacts in europe and asia pacific. the lower volumes
reflect decreased demand for products across the segment key
markets, mostly towards the end of 2008, partially offset by
increased demand for photovoltaic products and higher sales in
emerging markets.
ptoi was $436million as compared to $594million in
2007. this decline was mainly driven by higher raw materials
cost, lower sales volumes and the impact of the $55million
charge for the 2008 restructuring program. 2007 ptoi also
includes a benefit of $53million related to a gain on a
land sale and inventory valuation adjustments.
2007 versus 2006sales of
$3.8billion were up 6percent versus 2006, reflecting
5percent volume growth and 1percent higher usd
selling prices. the volume growth was primarily due to increased
demand for fluoroproducts and packaging graphics. sales growth
was strongest outside the u.s.
ptoi in 2007 was $594million, an increase of
3percent compared to 2006. this increase reflects
5percent sales volume growth, as well as the benefit of
$53million related to a gain on a land sale and inventory
valuation adjustments. these increases were partially offset by
higher ingredient and transportation costs as well as increased
fixed cost from growth initiatives.
outlookfor 2009, sales for electronic
materials, fluoroproducts, and packaging graphics products will
be impacted by the global recession. continued growth in the
photovoltaics market, cost control initiatives and benefits from
the 2008 restructuring program will partially offset the effect
of lower volumes. this segment manufactures products that could
be affected by uncertainties associated with pfoa matters. see
the discussion on page43 under the subheading pfoa.
performance
materials
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
6.4
$
$
6.6
$
$
6.2
$
performance materials provides productive, higher performance
polymers, elastomers, films, parts, and systems and solutions
which improve the uniqueness, functionality and profitability of
its customers offerings. performance materials delivers a
broad range of polymer-based high performance materials in its
product portfolio, including thermoplastic and thermoset
engineering polymers and elastomers which are used by customers
to fabricate components for mechanical, chemical and electrical
systems, as well as specialized resins and films used in
packaging and industrial applications, sealants and adhesives,
sporting goods and interlayers for laminated safety glass. key
brands include
duponttm
zytel
nylon resins,
delrin
acetal resins,
hytrel
polyester thermoplastic elastomer resins,
vespel
parts and shapes,
tynex
filaments,
surlyn
resins,
vamac
ethylene acrylic elastomer,
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
sentryglas
plus and
butacite
laminate interlayers,
mylar
and
melinex
polyester films,
kalrez
perfluoroelastomer and
viton
fluoroelastomers.
the key markets served by the segment include the automotive oem
and associated after-market industries, as well as electrical,
electronics, packaging, construction, oil, photovoltaics,
aerospace, chemical processing and consumer durable goods.
the segments core competencies include global market
knowledge and access in key growth industries, local technical
support in all major regions to help customers solve their
problems, world class polymer science, material science and
applications development, scientists working to solve customer
problems, world class manufacturing which provides high quality
reliable products, and a broad, tested, product portfolio which
successfully substitutes traditional materials with solutions
which offer performance, total systems cost reductions,
sustainability, durability, aesthetics and weight reduction
advantages. other areas of focus include new applications and
processing materials into innovative parts and systems. a recent
example of this core innovation capability is the introduction
of
hytrel
resins based on renewable resources which have the performance
attributes of high performance engineering resins but are based
on plant feedstock.
2008 versus 2007sales of
$6.4billion were 3percent lower, driven by a
13percent decrease in volume and a 1percent
reduction from portfolio changes, which more than offset
11percent higher usd selling prices. sales volume declines
were more pronounced beginning late in the third quarter, with
continued and accelerated deterioration through the fourth
quarter, and occurred in all major regions and end-use market
segments. the decline reflects a broad industry movement to
reduce inventory and improve cash positions to manage through
what is projected to be a protracted period of weak global
economic demand. volumes were also negatively impacted by
extended operating unit shutdowns related to the time taken to
implement facility repairs stemming from damages associated with
hurricanes gustav and ike. operating units outages associated
with the hurricanes were of varying lengths depending on the
level of damage incurred and the ability to obtain utilities and
ingredients to enable a restart.
2008ptoi was $128million compared to
$626million in 2007. 2008 ptoi includes charges related to
hurricane damages of $216million. in addition, as part of
the companys restructuring program, the segment recorded a
charge of $94million to cover employee termination costs
and other assets related charges. the decline in ptoi was also
influenced by charges associated with low capacity utilization
of production units to reduce inventories due to the decreased
demand. the decrease in ptoi in 2008 was partially offset by the
absence of a $165million impairment charge in 2007 to
write down the companys investment in a polyester films
joint venture.
2007 versus 2006sales of
$6.6billion were 7percent higher than 2006
reflecting 8percent higher usd selling prices, partly
offset by 1percent lower volume. sales volume declines
reflect the impact of ingredients shortages, temporary operating
unit shutdowns and softness in north america, principally in the
automotive markets, partly offset by volume improvements in
latin america, europe and asia pacific.
2007ptoi increased 12percent to $626million.
2007 ptoi included an impairment charge of $165million to
write down the companys investment in a polyester films
joint venture. the impairment resulted from several factors,
including adverse changes in market conditions and the rapid
rise in oil-related raw material costs, which have had a
negative impact on the profitability on the ventures
operations in north america and europe. improvement in 2007 ptoi
was driven by improved pricing, which reflected both the offset
of the ingredient cost increases seen during the year and
improved product sales mix, and positive currency benefits,
offset in part by the weaker volume. the segment is involved in
the elastomers antitrust matters and recorded a net
$20million charge in 2007 related to these matters (see
note19 to the consolidated financial statements).
outlookglobal motor vehicle industry
builds in 2009 are expected to decline. most of the markets
served by the segment are expected to remain soft in 2009. the
2009 outlook also assumes a softening from a weak petrochemical
cycle. revenue is also expected to decline in part due to lower
production capacity and negative currency impacts, partially
offset by higher local currency average selling prices. ptoi is
expected to decline, as benefits from lower average ingredient
prices, improved fixed cost performance, benefits from the
companys 2008
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
restructuring program and customer-driven innovations for
products and processes are projected to be offset by soft global
demand.
safety&
protection
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
5.7
$
$
5.6
$
1,199
$
5.5
$
1,080
safety& protection satisfies the growing global needs
of businesses, governments and consumers for solutions that make
life safer, healthier and more secure. by uniting market-driven
science with the strength of highly regarded brands such as
kevlar,
tyvek,
nomex
and
corian,
safety& protection has built a unique presence in the
marketplace since its inception in 2002.
the segments businesses serve customers in diverse markets
that include construction, transportation, communications,
industrial chemicals, oil and gas, electric utilities,
automotive, manufacturing, defense, homeland security and safety
consulting.
in addition to serving its existing customer base,
safety& protection is investing in the future by
expanding into emerging markets. over the past two years the
segment has achieved strong double-digit growth in greater
china, india, eastern europe and latin america.
safety& protection is focusing its efforts globally
on four major value propositions where it has a distinct
competitive advantage: protecting lives, safe and durable
buildings, protecting critical processes and protecting the
environment.
duponttm
kevlar
and
nomex
hold strong positions in life protection markets due to
continued demand for body armor and personal protective gear for
the military, law enforcement personnel, firefighters and other
first responders, as well as for workers in the oil and gas
industry and in emerging regions. global demand for products
that prevent disease and improve productivity in the food,
health care and industrial markets continue to create growth
opportunities for the segments clean and disinfect
offerings. additionally, the surfaces protection businesses
continue to offer new products that meet demand for sustainable
solutions.
safety& protection continues to strengthen the
building envelope and building interiors with offerings that
improve comfort, energy efficiency, air quality and protection
from the elements. in 2008, new products introductions from the
corian
and
tyvek
product families solidified the segments market position
globally, while enhancing the presence on commercial
construction and remodeling markets.
in the consulting services market, safety& protection
continued to help organizations worldwide reduce workplace
injuries and fatalities while improving operating costs,
productivity and quality. dupont is a leader in the safety
consulting field, selling training products, as well as
consulting services. additionally, safety& protection
is dedicated to clean air, clean fuel, and clean water with
offerings that help reduce sulfur and other emissions, formulate
cleaner fuels, or dispose of liquid waste. its goal is to help
maintain business continuity and environmental compliance for
companies in the refining and petrochemical industries, as well
as for government entities.
in 2007, dupont announced a $500million investment at its
cooper river site near charleston, south carolina and
$50million at its spruance site in richmond, virginia, to
significantly expand production of
duponttm
kevlar
brand fiber for industrial and military uses as well as
investments in related polymer production. the company also
announced a multi-product, multi-region expansion plan to
increase worldwide capacity of
duponttm
nomex.
the company expects to invest more than $100million in the
three-part expansion plan for
nomex.
the second phase was completed in 2008.
2008 versus 2007sales of
$5.7billion were 2percent higher than last year, due
to 9percent higher usd selling prices, offset by a
5percent decline in volume and a 2percent reduction
from a divested business. decreased volume primarily reflects
lower sales to the u.s.residential and construction
markets and the automotive industry, which accelerated and
spread to other key markets during the fourth quarter. the
higher usd selling prices primarily
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
reflect pricing actions to offset the increases of raw materials
costs and positive currency impact in europe and latin america.
2008ptoi was $829million compared to
$1,199million in 2007. the decreased earnings were
primarily due to higher production costs and the impact of lower
volumes related to the global recession. in addition, 2008 ptoi
includes a charge of $101million to cover employee
separation costs and other asset related charges as part of the
company restructuring program.
2007 versus 2006sales of
$5.6billion were 3percent higher than 2006, due to
higher usd selling prices across all businesses within the
segment. sales volumes remained relatively flat as higher sales
of
kevlar
and
nomex
were offset by decreased sales of products for
u.s.residential construction markets.
ptoi in 2007 was $1,199million, an increase of
11percent over the prior year. the increased earnings were
primarily due to higher sales of
kevlar
and
nomex.
2006 ptoi included a $47million asset impairment charge
related to an industrial chemical asset held for sale, partially
offset by a $33million benefit from insurance proceeds.
outlookfor 2009, sales will be
affected by the impact of the global recession. demand for
kevlar
and
nomex
is expected to increase moderately with public sector sales
growth offset by continued weakening in the motor vehicle and
personal protection markets. the building envelope market
segments are expected to decline due to global market weakness
and continued volume declines in the u.s.and european
residential construction markets. earnings in 2009 will include
benefits from the restructuring actions announced in 2008.
pharmaceuticals
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
-
$
1,025
$
-
$
$
-
$
on october1, 2001, dupont pharmaceuticals was sold to the
bristol-myers squibb company. dupont retained its interest in
cozaar
(losartan potassium) and
hyzaar
(losartan potassium with hydrochlorothiazide). these drugs were
discovered by dupont and developed in collaboration with merck
and are used in the treatment of hypertension. the
u.s.patents covering the compounds, pharmaceutical
formulation and use for the treatment of hypertension, including
approval for pediatric use, will expire in 2010. dupont has
exclusively licensed worldwide marketing and manufacturing
rights for
cozaar
and
hyzaar
to merck. pharmaceuticals receives royalties and net proceeds as
outlined below. merck is responsible for manufacturing,
marketing and selling
cozaar
and
hyzaar.
pharmaceuticals
cozaar/hyzaar
income is the sum of two parts derived from a royalty on
worldwide contract net sales linked to the exclusivity term in a
particular country, and a share of the profits from north
american sales and certain markets in europe, regardless of
exclusivity term. patents and exclusivity have already started
to expire and the u.s.exclusivity for
cozaar
ends in april 2010. the worldwide agreement terminates when the
following conditions are met: (i)the canadian exclusivity
ends in 2013, and (ii)north american sales fall below a
certain level. therefore, absent any major changes in the
markets, the company expects its income to take its first
significant step-down in 2010, and from that year on, continue
to step-down each year to zero when the contract ends, which is
expected to be after 2013. the company cannot predict the
magnitude of the earnings step-down in each year. in general,
management expects a traditional sales, earnings and cash
decline for a drug going off patent in the pharmaceutical
industry.
outlookdupont and merck continue to
support
cozaar
and
hyzaar
with clinical studies designed to identify additional
therapeutic benefits for patients with hypertension and
co-morbid conditions. the company expects the ongoing
cozaar/hyzaar
collaboration to continue to be an important contributor to
earnings and cash until the u.s.patents expire in 2010.
significant declines are expected thereafter as outlined above.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
other
the company includes embryonic businesses not included in the
growth segments, such as applied biosciences and nonaligned
businesses in other. the potential viability of each embryonic
business depends on a number of factors including successful
product development, market acceptance and production ramp up
capabilities. using these factors and others, management
periodically assesses the potential and fit of these businesses
and may make investment adjustments based on such assessments.
applied biosciences is focused on the development of
biotechnology solutions using biology, chemistry, materials
science and engineering in an integrated fashion to serve our
customers. specific global growth projects across the company
are consolidated within applied biosciences to capitalize on the
market opportunities and technology needs in this high-growth
industry, including biomaterial and biospeciality products and
technologies and advanced biofuels.
applied biosciences will provide advantaged products for
agricultural energy crops, feedstock processing and advanced
biofuels through two businesses: one to commercialize non-food,
cellulosic ethanol and the second to commercialize biobutanol.
to accelerate commercialization, dupont has formed a joint
venture with danisco, dupont danisco cellulosic ethanol llc, for
the cellulosic ethanol technology. for biobutanol, a partnership
was created in 2006 with bp p.l.c.
dupont partnered with tate& lyle plc to produce
1,3-propanediol
(bio-pdotm)
using a proprietary fermentation and purification process based
on corn sugar.
bio-pdotm
is the key building block for
duponttm
sorona
polymer and
duponttm
cerenoltm
polyols, two new families of renewably sourced products. under
the
zemea
propanediol and
susterra
propanediol brands, it is also being marketed for use as an
ingredient in nearly a dozen direct applications ranging from
industrial to personal care uses. the first commercial-scale
plant to manufacture
bio-pdotm
began production in november 2006, marking the beginning of
commercial availability of the companys bio-based pipeline.
nonaligned businesses include activities and costs associated
with
benlate
fungicide and other discontinued businesses and, since january
2005, activities related to the remaining assets of the former
textiles& interiors segment. in 2004, the company
sold a majority of the net assets of textiles and interiors to
subsidiaries of koch industries, inc. (invista). in 2005, the
company completed the transfer of three equity affiliates to
invista and sold its interest in another equity affiliate. in
january 2006, the company completed the sale of its interest in
an equity affiliate to its equity partner for proceeds of
$14million thereby completing the sale of all the net
assets of textiles& interiors.
in the aggregate, sales in other for 2008, 2007 and 2006
represent less than 1percent of total segment sales.
ptoi in 2008 was a loss of $181million compared to a loss
of $224million in 2007. the improvement for the year was
mainly due to a benefit of $51million from a litigation
settlement in 2008 and the absence of a $69million charge
recorded in 2007 for litigation related to a discontinued
business.
ptoi in 2007 was a loss of $224million compared to a loss
of $173million in 2006. the 29percent increase in
the pre-tax loss was primarily due to higher inventory, freight
and business development costs. ptoi in 2007 included litigation
charges for former businesses of $69million. ptoi in 2006
included a charge of $27million to write down certain
specialty resins manufacturing assets to estimated fair value.
liquidity&
capital resources
despite the global economic recession and adverse conditions in
the global capital markets, management believes the
companys ability to generate cash from operations, coupled
with cost reduction initiatives and access to capital markets,
will be adequate to meet anticipated cash requirements to fund
working capital, capital spending, dividend payments, debt
maturities and other cash needs. the companys liquidity
needs can be met through a variety of sources, including: cash
provided by operating activities, cash and cash equivalents,
marketable securities, commercial paper, syndicated credit
lines, bilateral credit lines, equity and long-term debt markets
and asset sales. the companys current strong financial
position, liquidity and credit ratings have not been materially
impacted by the current credit environment. in addition, cash
generating actions have been implemented including spending
reductions and restructuring to better align capital
expenditures and costs with anticipated continuing lower global
demand. however, there can be no assurance that the cost or
availability of future borrowings will not be impacted by
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
the ongoing credit market instability. the company will continue
to monitor the financial markets in order to respond to changing
conditions.
pursuant to its cash discipline policy, the company seeks first
to maintain a strong balance sheet and second, to return excess
cash to shareholders unless the opportunity to invest for growth
is compelling. cash and cash equivalents and marketable
securities balances of $3.7billion as of december31,
2008, provide primary liquidity to support all short-term
obligations. the company has access to approximately
$2.7billion in credit lines with several major financial
institutions, as additional support to meet short term liquidity
needs. these credit lines are primarily multi-year facilities.
the $1.6billion decrease from the $4.3billion in
credit lines at december31, 2007 is primarily due to the
expiration of credit lines obtained to support the
companys cash repatriation program under the american jobs
creation act of 2004 (ajca).
the company continually reviews its debt portfolio and
occasionally may rebalance it to ensure adequate liquidity and
an optimum maturity debt schedule.
the companys long term and short term credit ratings are
as follows:
long term
short term
outlook
standard& poor
a
a-1
negative
moodys investors service
a2
p-1
negative
fitch ratings
a
f1
stable
moodys investors service and standard&
poors recently affirmed the companys a2/a long term
and p-1/a-1 short term ratings, respectively. additionally, they
revised their outlooks to negative from stable. the company does
not expect these actions to impact liquidity or cost of debt.
(dollars in millions)
cash provided by operating activities
$
3,129
$
4,290
$
3,736
the companys cash provided by operating activities was
$3.1billion in 2008, a $1.2billion decrease from the
$4.3billion generated in 2007. the decrease is primarily
due to lower earnings and the impact of the stronger dollar on
working capital items, which was hedged by forward exchange
contracts in investing activities.
the companys cash provided by operating activities was
$4.3billion in 2007, a $554million increase from the
$3.7billion generated in 2006. the increase is primarily
due to higher earnings after adjusting for noncash items. net
income for 2006 included noncash tax benefits totaling
$615million (see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements).
(dollars in millions)
cash used for investing activities
$
(1,610
)
$
(1,750
)
$
(1,345
)
in 2008, cash used for investing activities totaled
$1.6billion compared to $1.8billion used in 2007.
the $140million decrease was mainly due to higher proceeds
from forward exchange contract settlements, partially offset by
increased capital expenditures, lower proceeds from asset sales
and higher expenditures for businesses acquired.
in 2007, cash used for investing activities totaled
$1.8billion compared to $1.3billion used in 2006.
the $405million increase was mainly due to the settlement
of forward exchange contracts and a slight increase in capital
spending, partially offset by higher proceeds from sales of
assets. due to the impact of a weakening usd, the settlement of
forward exchange contracts issued to hedge the companys
net exposure, by currency, related to monetary assets and
liabilities resulted in the payment of $285million in 2007
versus the receipt of $45million in 2006. the forward
exchange contract settlements were largely offset by the
revaluation of the items being hedged, which are reflected in
the appropriate categories in the consolidated statements of
cash flows.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
purchases of property, plant and equipment totaled
$2.0billion, $1.6billion and $1.5billion in
2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. this incremental spending is
primarily based on the companys previously announced
investments in
kevlar
and
nomex.
the company expects 2009 purchases of plant, property and
equipment to be $1.6billion.
(dollars in millions)
cash provided by (used for) financing activities
$
$
(3,069)
$
(2,323)
the $3.9billion increase in cash provided by financing
activities in 2008 compared to 2007 was primarily due to the
increase in the net proceeds from borrowings and the absence of
the purchase of common stock, which were partly offset by the
decrease in the proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
during the fourth quarter of 2008, interest rate swaps were
terminated with a combined notional amount of $1.25billion
for cash proceeds of $226million, which are classified
within financing cash flows in the consolidated statements of
cash flows. this gain will be amortized to earnings as a
reduction to interest expense over the remaining life of the
debt, through 2018.
the $746million increase in cash used for financing
activities in 2007 compared to 2006 was primarily due to the
companys share repurchase activity, partially offset by
the increase in proceeds from stock options exercised.
total debt at december31, 2008 was $9.7billion, a
$2.4billion increase from december31, 2007. the
proceeds from the increased borrowings were invested in cash
equivalents and used for general corporate purposes.
total debt at december31, 2007 was $7.3billion, a
$205million decrease from december31, 2006. this
decrease was primarily due to the repayment of borrowings
related to the 2005 ajca cash repatriation program, partially
offset by the issuance of $750million in 5year notes
in december 2007.
dividends paid to common and preferred shareholders were
$1.5billion in 2008, and $1.4billion in 2007 and
2006. dividends per share of common stock were $1.64, $1.52 and
$1.48 in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the common dividend
declared in the first quarter 2009 was the companys
418thconsecutive dividend since the companys first
dividend in the fourth quarter 1904.
the companys board of directors authorized a
$2billion share buyback plan in june 2001. during 2005,
the company purchased and retired 9.9million shares at a
total cost of $505million. during 2008, 2007 and 2006,
there were no purchases of stock under this program. as of
december31, 2008, the company has purchased
20.5million shares at a total cost of $962million.
management has not established a timeline for the buyback of the
remaining shares of stock under this plan.
in october 2005, the board of directors authorized a
$5billion share buyback plan. in october 2005, the company
repurchased 75.7million shares of its common stock under
an accelerated share repurchase agreement and paid
$3.0billion for the repurchase. upon the conclusion of the
agreement in 2006, the company paid $180million in cash to
goldman, sachs& co. to settle the agreement.
additionally, in 2006, the company made open market purchases of
its shares for $100million. in 2007, the company purchased
34.7million shares for $1.7billion, thereby,
completing this program. see note20 to the consolidated
financial statements for a reconciliation of shares activity.
cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities
cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled
$3.7billion at december31, 2008, $1.4billion
at december31, 2007 and $1.9billion at
december31, 2006. the $2.3billion increase from 2007
to 2008 is primarily due to net increase in borrowings. the
$457million decrease from 2006 to 2007 is primarily due to
the companys share repurchase activity, as well as cash
used to meet other business requirements.
off-balance sheet
arrangements
certain guarantee
contracts
indemnifications
in connection with acquisitions and divestitures, the company
has indemnified respective parties against certain liabilities
that may arise in connection with acquisitions and divestitures
and related business activities prior to the
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
completion of the transaction. the term of these
indemnifications, which typically pertain to environmental, tax
and product liabilities, is generally indefinite. in addition,
the company indemnifies its duly elected or appointed directors
and officers to the fullest extent permitted by delaware law,
against liabilities incurred as a result of their activities for
the company, such as adverse judgments relating to litigation
matters. if the indemnified party were to incur a liability or
have a liability increase as a result of a successful claim,
pursuant to the terms of the indemnification, the company would
be required to reimburse the indemnified party. the maximum
amount of potential future payments is generally unlimited. the
carrying amounts recorded for all indemnifications as of
december31, 2008 and 2007 were $110million and
$101million, respectively. although it is reasonably
possible that future payments may exceed amounts accrued, due to
the nature of indemnified items, it is not possible to make a
reasonable estimate of the maximum potential loss or range of
loss. no assets are held as collateral and no specific recourse
provisions exist.
in connection with the 2004 sale of the majority of the net
assets of textiles and interiors, the company indemnified
invista against certain liabilities primarily related to taxes,
legal and environmental matters and other representations and
warranties under the purchase and sale agreement. the estimated
fair value of the indemnity obligations under the purchase and
sale agreement is $70million and is included in the
indemnifications balance of $110million at
december31, 2008. under the purchase and sale agreement,
the companys total indemnification obligation for the
majority of the representations and warranties cannot exceed
$1.4billion. the other indemnities are not subject to this
limit. in march 2008, invista filed suit in the southern
district of new york alleging that certain representations and
warranties in the purchase and sale agreement were breached and,
therefore, that dupont is obligated to indemnify it. dupont
disagrees with the extent and value of invistas claims.
dupont has not changed its estimate of its total indemnification
obligation under the purchase and sale agreement as a result of
the lawsuit.
obligations for
equity affiliates and others
the company has directly guaranteed various debt obligations
under agreements with third parties related to equity
affiliates, customers, suppliers and other affiliated and
unaffiliated companies. at december31, 2008, the company
had directly guaranteed $605million of such obligations,
plus $121million relating to guarantees of obligations for
divested subsidiaries. this represents the maximum potential
amount of future (undiscounted) payments that the company could
be required to make under the guarantees. the company would be
required to perform on these guarantees in the event of default
by the guaranteed party. at december31, 2008 and 2007, a
liability of $121million and $135million,
respectively, was recorded for these obligations, representing
the amount of payment/performance risk which the company deems
probable. this liability is principally related to obligations
of the companys polyester films joint venture which are
guaranteed by the company.
existing guarantees for customers, suppliers and other
unaffiliated companies arose as part of contractual agreements.
existing guarantees for equity affiliates and other affiliated
companies arose for liquidity needs in normal operations. in
certain cases, the company has recourse to assets held as
collateral as well as personal guarantees from customers and
suppliers.
the company has guaranteed certain obligations and liabilities
of its divested subsidiaries including conoco and consolidation
coal sales company. conoco and consolidation coal sales company
have indemnified the company for any liabilities the company may
incur pursuant to these guarantees. no material loss is
anticipated by reason of such agreements and guarantees. at
december31, 2008, the company had no significant
liabilities recorded for these obligations.
additional information with respect to the companys
guarantees is included in note19 to the consolidated
financial statements. historically, the company has not had to
make significant payments to satisfy guarantee obligations;
however, the company believes it has the financial resources to
satisfy these guarantees.
master operating
leases
at december31, 2008, the company has one master operating
lease program relating to miscellaneous short-lived equipment
with an unamortized value of approximately $106million.
lease payments for these assets totaled $55million in
2008, $59million in 2007 and $58million in 2006, and
were reported as operating expenses in the consolidated income
statements. the leases under this program are considered
operating leases and accordingly
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
the related assets and liabilities are not recorded on the
consolidated balance sheets. furthermore, the lease payments
associated with this program vary based on one month usd libor.
in november 2008, the lessor notified the company that the
program will terminate by november 2009. prior to that time, the
company may either purchase the assets for their unamortized
value or arrange for the sale of the assets and remit the
proceeds to the lessor. if the assets are sold and the proceeds
are less than the unamortized value, the company must pay to the
lessor the difference between the proceeds and the unamortized
value, up to the residual value guarantee, which totaled
$92million at december31, 2008.
contractual
obligations
information related to the companys significant
contractual obligations is summarized in the following table:
payments due in
total at december31,
2014 and
(dollars in millions)
beyond
long-term and short-term
debt1
$
9,194
$
1,563
$
$
2,158
$
4,524
expected cumulative cash requirements for interest payments
through maturity
3,137
1,382
capital
leases1
operating leases
1,074
purchase
obligations2
information technology infrastructure& services
raw material obligations
utility obligations
invista-related
obligations3
1,811
human resource services
other4
-
-
total purchase obligations
3,373
other
liabilities1,5
workers compensation
asset retirement obligations
environmental remediation
legal settlements
-
license
agreement6
other7
total other long-term liabilities
1,277
total contractual
obligations8
$
18,065
$
3,381
$
3,356
$
4,202
$
7,126
included in the consolidated
financial statements.
represents enforceable and legally
binding agreements in excess of $1million to purchase
goods or services that specify fixed or minimum quantities;
fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate
timing of the agreement.
includes raw material supply
obligations of $1.7billion and contract manufacturing
obligations of $67million.
primarily represents obligations
associated with distribution, health care/benefit
administration, research and development and other professional
and consulting contracts.
pension and other postretirement
benefit obligations have been excluded from the table as they
are discussed below within long-term employee benefits.
represents remaining expected
payments under a license agreement between pioneer hi-bred
international, inc. and monsanto company.
primarily represents
employee-related benefits other than pensions and other
postretirement benefits.
due to uncertainty regarding the
completion of tax audits and possible outcomes, the estimate of
obligations related to unrecognized tax benefits cannot be made.
see note6 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional detail.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
the company expects to meet its contractual obligations through
its normal sources of liquidity and believes it has the
financial resources to satisfy these contractual obligations
should unforeseen circumstances arise.
long-term
employee benefits
the company has various obligations to its employees and
retirees. the company maintains retirement-related programs in
many countries that have a long-term impact on the
companys earnings and cash flows. these plans are
typically defined benefit pension plans, as well as medical,
dental and life insurance benefits for pensioners and survivors
and disability and life insurance protection for employees.
approximately 80percent of the companys worldwide
benefit obligation for pensions and essentially all of the
companys worldwide other long-term employee benefit
obligations are attributable to the u.s.benefit plans.
pension coverage for employees of the companys
non-u.s.consolidated
subsidiaries is provided, to the extent deemed appropriate,
through separate plans. the company regularly explores
alternative solutions to meet its global pension obligations in
the most cost effective manner possible as demographics, life
expectancy and country-specific pension funding rules change.
where permitted by applicable law, the company reserves the
right to change, modify or discontinue its plans that provide
pension, medical, dental, life insurance and disability benefits.
benefits under defined benefit pension plans are based primarily
on years of service and employees pay near retirement.
pension benefits are paid primarily from trust funds established
to comply with applicable laws and regulations. unless required
by law, the company does not make contributions that are in
excess of tax deductible limits. the actuarial assumptions and
procedures utilized are reviewed periodically by the plans
actuaries to provide reasonable assurance that there will be
adequate funds for the payment of benefits. no contributions are
required to be made to the principal u.s.pension plan in
2009 and no contributions are currently anticipated.
contributions beyond 2009 are not determinable since the amount
of any contribution is heavily dependent on the future economic
environment, investment returns on pension trust assets, and
pending regulation. u.s.pension benefits that exceed
federal limitations are covered by separate unfunded plans and
these benefits are paid to pensioners and survivors from
operating cash flows.
funding for each pension plan is governed by the rules of the
sovereign country in which it operates. thus, there is not
necessarily a direct correlation between pension funding and
pension expense. in general, however, improvements in plans
funded status tends to moderate subsequent funding needs. the
company contributed $252million in 2008 and anticipates
that it will make approximately $300million in
contributions in 2009 to pension plans other than the principal
u.s.pension plan.
the pension protection act of 2006 (the act) was
signed into law in the u.s.in august 2006. the act
introduces new funding requirements for single-employer defined
benefit pension plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension
plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes,
introduces benefit limitations for certain underfunded plans and
raises tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement
plans. the new funding requirements are generally effective for
plan years beginning after december31, 2007. the
implementation of the provisions of this act did not have a
material impact on the companys required contributions.
in august 2006, the company announced major changes to the
pension and defined contribution benefits that cover the
majority of its u.s.employees. effective january1,
2007, for such employees hired on that date or thereafter, and
effective january1, 2008, for such active employees on the
rolls as of december31, 2006, the company contributes
100percent of the first 6percent of the
employees contribution election. additionally, for such
employees, the company contributes 3percent of each
eligible employees compensation regardless of the
employees contribution election. the definition of
eligible compensation has also been expanded to be similar to
the definition of eligible compensation used in determining
pension benefits. such full service employees on the rolls as of
december31, 2006 will also accrue additional benefits in
the pension plan, but the annual rate of pension accrual is
about one-third of the previous rate. in addition, company-paid
postretirement survivor benefits for such employees do not
continue to grow after december31, 2007. such employees
hired in the u.s.after december31, 2006 do not
participate in the pension and post-retirement medical, dental
and life insurance plans.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
as a result of the amendment to the principal u.s.pension
plan, the company was required to re-measure its pension expense
for the remainder of 2006, reflecting plan assets and benefit
obligations as of the re-measurement date. as a result of better
than expected return on plan assets and a higher discount rate
of 6percent as of the re-measurement date, pre-tax pension
expense decreased by $72million for 2006. for 2007, the
plan amendment resulted in a reduction in pension expense of
about $40million. for 2008, the plan amendment resulted in
a reduction of about $40million in combined pension and
defined contribution plans expense. additional information
related to these changes in the plans noted above is included in
note21 to the consolidated financial statements.
on december31, 2006, the company adopted sfas158 and
recorded a $1,555million after-tax charge to
stockholders equity primarily due to reclassifying
unrecognized actuarial losses and prior service costs related to
the pension plans.
medical, dental, life insurance and disability plans are
unfunded and the cost of the approved claims is paid from
operating cash flows. pre-tax cash requirements to cover actual
net claims costs and related administrative expenses were
$326million, $315million and $335million for
2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. this amount is expected to be
about $330million in 2009. changes in cash requirements
reflect the net impact of higher per capita health care costs,
demographic changes and changes in participant premiums, co-pays
and deductibles.
the companys income can be significantly affected by
pension and defined contribution benefits as well as retiree
medical, dental and life insurance benefits. the following table
summarizes the extent to which the companys income over
each of the last 3years was affected by pre-tax charges
and credits related to long-term employee benefits.
(dollars in millions)
defined benefit plan (benefits)/charges
$
(362
)
$
(54
)
$
defined contribution plan charges
other long-term employee benefit charges
net amount
$
$
$
includes an accrual of
$16million for company match and contribution based on
compensation paid in 2009 for 2008 service.
the above (benefits)/charges for pension and other long-term
employee benefits are determined as of the beginning of each
year. the decrease in pension expense in 2008 primarily reflects
favorable returns on pension assets during 2007. the decrease in
pension expense in 2007 reflects favorable returns on pension
assets during 2006, plan amendments and changes in demographics
and discount rates. the increase in 2007 other long-term
employee benefit charges principally reflects changes in
demographics, discount rates and higher than expected health
care costs.
the companys key assumptions used in calculating its
pension and other long-term employee benefits are the expected
return on plan assets, the rate of compensation increases and
the discount rate (see note21 to the consolidated
financial statements). for 2009, lower pension assets and higher
health care cost are expected to result in an increase in
long-term employee benefits expense of about $565million.
environmental
matters
dupont operates global manufacturing, product handling and
distribution facilities that are subject to a broad array of
environmental laws and regulations. company policy requires that
all operations fully meet or exceed legal and regulatory
requirements. in addition, dupont implements voluntary programs
to reduce air emissions, eliminate the generation of hazardous
waste, decrease the volume of waste water discharges, increase
the efficiency of energy use and reduce the generation of
persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic materials. management has
noted a global upward trend in the amount and complexity of
proposed chemicals regulation. the costs to comply with complex
environmental laws and regulations, as well as internal
voluntary programs and goals, are significant and will continue
for the foreseeable future. while these costs may increase in
the future, they are not expected to have a material impact on
the companys financial position, liquidity or results of
operations.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
pre-tax environmental expenses charged to current operations
totaled $628million in 2008 compared with
$576million in 2007 and $521million in 2006. these
expenses include the remediation accruals discussed below;
operating, maintenance and depreciation costs for solid waste,
air and water pollution control facilities and the costs of
environmental research activities. the company expects expenses
related to environmental research activities to become
proportionally greater as the company increases its
participation in businesses for which environmental assessments
are required during product development. about 75percent
of total annual environmental expenses resulted from operations
in the u.s.
in 2008, dupont spent approximately $104million on
environmental capital projects either required by law or
necessary to meet the companys internal environmental
goals. the company currently estimates expenditures for
environmental-related capital projects to be approximately
$98million in 2009. in the u.s., significant capital
expenditures are expected to be required over the next decade
for treatment, storage and disposal facilities for solid and
hazardous waste and for compliance with the clean air act (caa).
until all caa regulatory requirements are established and known,
considerable uncertainty will remain regarding future estimates
for capital expenditures. total caa capital costs over the next
two years are currently estimated to range from $40million
to $70million.
registration
the goal of the u.s.toxic substances control act (tsca) is
to prevent unreasonable risks of injury to health or the
environment associated with the manufacture, processing,
distribution in commerce, use, or disposal of chemical
substances. under tsca, the epa has established reporting,
record-keeping, testing and control-related requirements for new
and existing chemicals. in 1998, the epa challenged the
u.s.chemical industry to voluntarily conduct screening
level health and environmental effects testing on nearly 3,000
high production volume (hpv) chemicals or to make equivalent
information publicly available. an hpv chemical is a chemical
listed on the 1990 inventory update rule with annual
u.s.cumulative production and imports of one million
pounds or more. the company expects to complete its commitments
regarding the hpv chemicals it volunteered to sponsor within the
next two years. approximately 500 chemicals in commerce have
attained hpv status since 1990. the extended hpv (ehpv) program
is an expansion of the voluntary hpv program aimed at fulfilling
the same goals on these 500 chemicals. dupont committed to
conduct testing on ten of these ehpv chemicals in 2008 and
testing is underway and expected to be completed in the next two
years.
in december 2006, the european union adopted a new regulatory
framework concerning the registration, evaluation and
authorization of chemicals. this regulatory framework known as
reach entered into force on june1, 2007. one of its main
objectives is the protection of human health and the
environment. reach requires manufacturers and importers to
gather information on the properties of their substances that
meet certain volume or toxicological criteria and register the
information in a central database to be maintained by a chemical
agency in finland. the regulation also contains a mechanism for
the progressive substitution of the most dangerous chemicals
when suitable alternatives have been identified. dupont met the
deadline of december1, 2008 for the pre-registration of
those chemicals manufactured in, or imported into the european
economic area in quantities of 1 metric ton or more that were
not otherwise exempted. complete registrations containing
extensive data on the characteristics of the chemical will be
required in three phases, depending on production usage or
tonnage imported per year, and the toxicological criteria of the
chemical. the first registrations are required in 2010;
subsequent registrations are due in 2013 and 2018. the
toxicological criteria considered for registration
determinations are carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, reproductive
toxicity (category 1 and 2), and aquatic toxicity. by
june1, 2013, the commission will review whether substances
with endocrine disruptive properties should be authorized if
safer alternatives exist. by june1, 2019, the commission
will determine whether to extend the duty to warn from
substances of very high concern to those that could be dangerous
or unpleasant. management does not expect that the costs to
comply with reach will be material to its operations and
consolidated financial position.
climate
change
dupont believes that climate change is an important global issue
that will present numerous risks and opportunities to business
and society at large. since the early 1990s when dupont began
taking action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the company
has achieved major global reductions in emissions. voluntary
emissions reductions implemented by dupont and other companies
are valuable but alone will not be sufficient to effectively
address
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
a problem of this scale. the kyoto protocol to the united
nations framework convention on climate change entered into
force in february 2005 and, while not ratified by the u.s., has
spurred policy action by many other countries and regions around
the world including the european union. considerable
international attention is now focused on development of a
post-2012 international policy framework to guide international
action to address climate change when the kyoto protocol expires
in 2012. proposed and existing legislative efforts to control or
limit greenhouse gas emissions could affect the companys
energy source and supply choices as well as increase the cost of
energy and raw materials derived from fossil fuels. however, the
successful negotiation and implementation of sensible national,
regional, and international climate change policies could
provide the business community with greater certainty for the
regulatory future, help guide investment decisions, and drive
growth in demand for low-carbon and energy-efficient products,
technologies, and services.
the company actively manages the potential risks that climate
change could present, including those associated with the
companys physical assets, as well as regulatory and
economic issues. dupont looks for opportunities to make its
overall portfolio less energy intensive, and energy use is one
factor that is weighed when investments or divestitures are
considered. dupont is committed to continuing to bring to market
more products and services to meet new and expanded demands of a
low-carbon economy.
remediation
expenditures
the rcra extensively regulates and requires permits for the
treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. rcra
requires that permitted facilities undertake an assessment of
environmental contamination at the facility. if conditions
warrant, companies may be required to remediate contamination
caused by prior operations. in contrast to cercla, the costs of
the rcra corrective action program are typically borne solely by
the company. the company anticipates that significant ongoing
expenditures for rcra remediation activities may be required
over the next two decades. annual expenditures for the near
term, however, are not expected to vary significantly from the
range of such expenditures experienced in the past few years.
longer term, expenditures are subject to considerable
uncertainty and may fluctuate significantly. the companys
expenditures associated with rcra and similar remediation
activities were approximately $51million, $47million
and $44million in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
from time to time, the company receives requests for information
or notices of potential liability from the epa and state
environmental agencies alleging that the company is a prp under
cercla or similar state statutes. cercla is often referred to as
the superfund and requires companies to undertake certain
investigative and research activities at sites where it conducts
or once conducted operations or where company generated waste
has been disposed. the company has also, on occasion, been
engaged in cost recovery litigation initiated by those agencies
or by private parties. these requests, notices and lawsuits
assert potential liability for remediation costs at various
sites that typically are not company owned, but allegedly
contain wastes attributable to the companys past
operations.
as of december31, 2008, the company had been notified of
potential liability under cercla or state laws at 394 sites
around the u.s., with active remediation under way at 151 of
these sites. in addition, the company has resolved its liability
at 160 sites, either by completing remedial actions with other
prps or by participating in de minimis buyouts with
other prps whose waste, like the companys, represented
only a small fraction of the total waste present at a site. the
company received notice of potential liability at five new sites
during 2008 compared with six similar notices in 2007 and 2006.
the companys expenditures associated with cercla and
similar state remediation activities were approximately
$17million, $20million and $19million in 2008,
2007 and 2006, respectively.
for nearly all superfund sites, the companys potential
liability will be significantly less than the total site
remediation costs because the percentage of waste attributable
to the company versus that attributable to all other prps is
relatively low. other prps at sites, where the company is a
party, typically have the financial strength to meet their
obligations and, where they do not, or where prps cannot be
located, the companys own share of liability has not
materially increased. there are relatively few sites where the
company is a major participant and the cost to the company of
remediation at those sites and at all cercla sites in the
aggregate, is not expected to have a material impact on the
financial position, liquidity or results of operations of the
company.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
total expenditures for previously accrued remediation activities
under cercla, rcra and similar state laws were $81million,
$68million and $64million in 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively.
remediation
accruals
at december31, 2008, the consolidated balance sheets
included an accrued liability of $379million compared to
$357million at december31, 2007. considerable
uncertainty exists with respect to environmental remediation
costs and, under adverse changes in circumstances, potential
liability may range up to two to three times the amount accrued
as of december31, 2008. of the $379million accrued
liability, approximately 8percent was reserved for
non-u.s.facilities.
approximately 69percent of the reserve balance was
attributable to rcra and similar remediation liabilities, while
about 23percent was attributable to cercla liabilities.
remediation accruals of $103million, $76million and
$71million were added to the reserve in 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively.
facility
security
dupont recognizes that the security and safety of its operations
are critical to its employees, neighbors and, indeed, to the
future of the company. as such, the company has merged chemical
site security into its safety core value where it serves as an
integral part of its long standing safety culture. physical
security measures have been combined with process safety
measures (including the use of inherently safer technology),
administrative procedures and emergency response preparedness
into an integrated security plan. the company has conducted
vulnerability assessments at operating facilities in the
u.s.and high priority sites worldwide and identified and
implemented appropriate measures to protect these facilities
from physical or cyber attacks. dupont is partnering with
carriers, including railroad, shipping and trucking companies,
to secure chemicals in transit.
in april 2007, the department of homeland security (dhs) issued
an interim final rule (rule) that establishes risk-based
performance standards for the security of u.s.chemical
facilities. covered chemical facilities are required to prepare
security vulnerability assessments that identify facility
security vulnerabilities and to develop and implement site
security plans that include measures satisfying the identified
risk-based performance standards. the rule contains associated
provisions addressing inspections and audits, recordkeeping, and
the protection of information that constitutes
chemical-terrorism vulnerability information. dhs can seek
compliance through the issuance of orders, including orders
assessing civil penalty and orders for the cessation of
operations.
in november of 2007, dhs finalized the list of chemicals
regulated by the rule and required facilities that have those
chemicals in specified quantities to register with dhs.
duponts u.s.facilities have submitted this
information and in june of 2008 dhs notified those facilities
that were determined to be covered by the rules security
requirements. dupont facilities that were notified by dhs
conducted and submitted security vulnerability assessments to
dhs. once dhs has reviewed and approved those assessments, it
will work with the company to establish security expectations
specific to each facility. dupont has already devoted
substantial effort and resources in assessing security
vulnerabilities and taking steps to reinforce security at its
chemical manufacturing facilities. until each facility develops
and receives dhs approval for its site security plan, specific
requirements can not be determined and considerable uncertainty
exists regarding estimates for future capital expenditures.
however, based on guidance issued by dhs regarding its
risk-based performance standards, it is expected that new
security measures will need to be implemented at the regulated
facilities and that capital costs to implement such measures
over the next three years will be about $50million.
pfoa
dupont manufactures fluoropolymer resins and dispersions as well
as fluorotelomers, marketing many of them under the
teflon,
capstone
tm
and
zonyl
brands. the fluoropolymer resins and dispersions businesses are
part of the electronic& communication technologies
segment; the fluorotelomers business is part of the
safety& protection segment.
fluoropolymer resins and dispersions are high-performance
materials with many end uses including architectural fabrics,
telecommunications and electronic wiring insulation, automotive
fuel systems, computer chip processing
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
equipment, weather-resistant/breathable apparel and non-stick
cookware. fluorotelomers are used to make soil, stain and grease
repellants for paper, apparel, upholstery and carpets as well as
firefighting foams and coatings.
a form of pfoa (collectively, perfluorooctanoic acid and its
salts, including the ammonium salt) is used as a processing
agent to manufacture fluoropolymer resins and dispersions. for
over 50years, dupont purchased its pfoa needs from a third
party, but beginning in the fall of 2002, it began producing
pfoa to support the manufacture of fluoropolymer resins and
dispersions. pfoa is not used in the manufacture of
fluorotelomers; however, it is an unintended by-product present
at trace levels in some fluorotelomer-based products.
dupont performance elastomers, llc (dpe) uses pfoa in the
manufacture of raw materials to manufacture
kalrez
perfluoroelastomer parts. pfoa is also used in the manufacture
of some fluoroelastomers marketed by dpe under the
viton
trademark. the wholly owned subsidiary is a part of the
performance materials segment.
pfoa is bio-persistent and has been detected at very low levels
in the blood of the general population. as a result, the epa
initiated a process to enhance its understanding of the sources
of pfoa in the environment and the pathways through which human
exposure to pfoa is occurring. in 2005, the epa issued a draft
risk assessment on pfoa stating that cancer data for pfoa may be
best described as suggestive evidence of carcinogenicity,
but not sufficient to assess human carcinogenic potential
under the epas guidelines for carcinogen risk assessment.
at the epas request, the science advisory board (sab)
reviewed and commented on the scientific soundness of this
assessment. in its may 2006 report, the sab set forth the view,
based on laboratory studies in rats, that the human carcinogenic
potential of pfoa is more consistent with the guidelines
descriptor of likely to be carcinogenic. however,
the report stated that additional data should be considered
before the epa finalizes its risk assessment of pfoa. the epa
has acknowledged that it will consider additional data,
including new research and testing, and has indicated that
another sab review will be sought after the epa makes its risk
assessment. dupont disputes the cancer classification
recommended in the sab report. although the epa has stated that
there remains considerable scientific uncertainty regarding
potential risks associated with pfoa, it also stated that it
does not believe that there is any reason for consumers to stop
using any products because of concerns about pfoa.
dupont respects the epas position raising questions about
exposure routes and the potential toxicity of pfoa and dupont
and other companies have outlined plans to continue research,
emission reduction and product stewardship activities to help
address the epas questions. in january 2006, dupont
pledged its commitment to the epas
2010/15 pfoa
stewardship program. the epa program asks participants
(1)to commit to achieve, no later than 2010, a
95percent reduction in both facility emissions and product
content levels of pfoa, pfoa precursors and related higher
homologue chemicals and (2)to commit to working toward the
elimination of pfoa, pfoa precursors and related higher
homologue chemicals from emissions and products by no later than
2015. in october 2008, (for the year 2007), dupont reported to
the epa that it had achieved a 98percent reduction of pfoa
emissions in u.s.manufacturing facilities. the company
achieved about a 97percent reduction in global
manufacturing emissions, exceeding the epas 2010
objective. dupont will work individually and with others in the
industry to inform epas regulatory counterparts in the
european union, canada, china and japan about these activities
and pfoa in general, including emissions reductions from
duponts facilities, reformulation of the companys
fluoropolymer dispersions and new manufacturing processes for
fluorotelomers products.
in february 2007, dupont announced its planned commitment to no
longer make, use or buy pfoa by 2015 or sooner if possible.
dupont has developed pfoa replacement technology and
successfully used this technology in its global manufacturing
facilities to produce test materials for all major fluoropolymer
product lines. dupont has begun to supply fluoropolymer products
made without pfoa to customers for testing in their processes,
and is working to obtain the appropriate regulatory approvals
for this technology.
in the meantime, dupont introduced
echelontm
technology which reduces pfoa content by 99percent in
aqueous fluoropolymer dispersion products. dupont has now
converted customers representing over 95percent of the
sales volume for these products to the newly formulated
echelontm
technology. in the first quarter 2008, dupont introduced its
next generation fluorotelomer products. the products are
marketed as
duponttm
capstonetm
products for use in home furnishings, fire fighting foam,
fluorosurfactants, and leather goods. additional products will
be introduced for paper packaging, textiles, and other end use
markets pending appropriate regulatory approvals.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations,
continued
in november 2006, dupont entered into an order on consent under
the safe drinking water act (sdwa) with the epa establishing a
precautionary interim screening level for pfoa of 0.5 part per
billion (ppb) in drinking water sources in the area around the
washington works site located in parkersburg, west virginia. in
january 2009 the epa issued a provisional health advisory for
pfoa of 0.4 ppb in drinking water.
in february 2007, the new jersey department of environmental
protection (njdep) identified a preliminary drinking-water
guidance level for pfoa of 0.04 ppb as part of the first phase
of an ongoing process to establish a state drinking-water
standard. while the njdep will continue sampling and evaluation
of data from all sources, it has not recommended a change in
consumption patterns.
occupational exposure to pfoa has been associated with small
increases in some lipids (e.g. cholesterol). these associations
were also observed in a recent community study. it is not known
whether these are causal associations. based on health and
toxicological studies, dupont believes the weight of evidence
indicates that pfoa exposure does not pose a health risk to the
general public. to date, there are no human health effects known
to be caused by pfoa, although study of the chemical continues.
there have not been any regulatory or government actions that
would prohibit the production or use of pfoa. however, there can
be no assurance that the epa, any other regulatory entity or
government body will not choose to regulate or prohibit the
production or use of pfoa in the future. products currently
manufactured by the company representing approximately
$1billion of 2008 revenues could be affected by any such
regulation or prohibition. dupont has established reserves in
connection with certain pfoa environmental and litigation
matters (see note19 to the consolidated financial
statements).
table of contents
partii
item7a.quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
financial
instruments
derivatives
and other hedging instruments
in the ordinary course of business, the company enters into
contractual arrangements (derivatives) to hedge its exposure to
foreign currency, interest rate and commodity price risks under
established procedures and controls. derivative instruments
utilized include forwards, options, futures and swaps. the
counterparties to these contractual arrangements are major
financial institutions and major commodity exchanges.
the company hedges certain foreign currency denominated
revenues, monetary assets and liabilities, certain
business-specific foreign currency exposures and certain energy
and agricultural feedstock purchases.
concentration
of credit risk
financial instruments that potentially subject the company to
significant concentrations of credit risk consist principally of
cash, investments, accounts receivable and derivatives.
as part of the companys risk management processes, it
continuously evaluates the relative credit standing of all of
the financial institutions that service dupont and monitors
actual exposures versus established limits. the company has not
sustained credit losses from instruments held at financial
institutions.
the company maintains cash and cash equivalents, marketable
securities, derivatives and certain other financial instruments
with various financial institutions. these financial
institutions are generally highly rated and geographically
dispersed and the company has a policy to limit the dollar
amount of credit exposure with any one institution.
the companys sales are not materially dependent on a
single customer or small group of customers. as of
december31, 2008, no one individual customer balance
represented more than 5percent of the companys total
outstanding receivables balance. credit risk associated with its
receivables balance is representative of the geographic,
industry and customer diversity associated with the
companys global businesses.
the company also maintains strong credit controls in evaluating
and granting customer credit. as a result, it may require that
customers provide some type of financial guarantee in certain
circumstances. length of terms for customer credit varies by
industry and region.
foreign
currency risk
the companys objective in managing exposure to foreign
currency fluctuations is to reduce earnings and cash flow
volatility associated with foreign currency rate changes.
accordingly, the company enters into various contracts that
change in value as foreign exchange rates change to protect the
u.s.dollar value of its existing foreign
currency-denominated assets, liabilities, commitments, and cash
flows.
the company uses foreign currency exchange contracts to offset
its net exposures, by currency, related to the foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities of its
operations. the primary business objective of this hedging
program is to maintain an approximately balanced position in
foreign currencies so that exchange gains and losses resulting
from exchange rate changes, net of related tax effects, are
minimized. the company also uses foreign currency exchange
contracts to offset a portion of the companys exposure to
certain foreign currency-denominated revenues so that gains and
losses on these contracts offset changes in the u.s.dollar
value of the related foreign currency-denominated revenues. the
objective of the hedge program is to reduce earnings and cash
flow volatility related to changes in foreign currency exchange
rates.
the following table summarizes the impacts of this program on
the companys results of operations for the years ended
december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, and includes the
companys pro rata share of its equity affiliates
exchange gains and losses and corresponding gains and losses on
foreign currency exchange contracts.
(dollars in millions)
pre-tax exchange loss
$
(255
)
$
(85
)
$
(4
)
tax (expense)/benefit
(26
)
after-tax loss
$
(172
)
$
(31
)
$
(30
)
table of contents
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk continued
from time to time, the company will enter into foreign currency
exchange contracts to establish with certainty the usd amount of
future firm commitments denominated in a foreign currency.
decisions regarding whether or not to hedge a given commitment
are made on a
case-by-case
basis, taking into consideration the amount and duration of the
exposure, market volatility and economic trends. foreign
currency exchange contracts are also used, from time to time, to
manage near-term foreign currency cash requirements.
interest rate
risk
the company uses interest rate swaps to manage the interest rate
mix of the total debt portfolio and related overall cost of
borrowing.
interest rate swaps involve the exchange of fixed or floating
rate interest payments to effectively convert fixed rate debt
into floating rate debt based on usd libor. interest rate swaps
allow the company to maintain a target range of floating rate
debt.
commodity
price risk
the company enters into over-the-counter and exchange-traded
derivative commodity instruments to hedge its exposure to price
fluctuations on certain raw material purchases.
a portion of certain energy feedstock purchases are hedged to
reduce price volatility using fixed price swaps and options.
the company contracts with independent growers to produce
finished seed inventory. under these contracts, growers are
compensated with bushel equivalents that are marketed to the
company for the market price of grain during the contract
period. derivative instruments having a high correlation to the
underlying commodity are used to hedge the commodity price risk
involved in compensating growers.
the company utilizes derivatives to manage the price volatility
of soybean meal. these derivative instruments have a high
correlation to the underlying commodity exposure and are deemed
effective in offsetting soybean meal feedstock price risk.
additional details on these and other financial instruments are
set forth in note23 to the consolidated financial
statements.
sensitivity
analysis
the following table illustrates the fair values of outstanding
derivative contracts at december31, 2008 and 2007, and the
effect on fair values of a hypothetical adverse change in the
market prices or rates that existed at december31, 2008
and 2007. the sensitivity for interest rate swaps is based on a
one percent change in the market interest rate. foreign
currency, agricultural and energy derivative sensitivities are
based on a 10percent change in market rates.
fair value
fair value
asset/ (liability)
sensitivity
(dollars in millions)
interest rate swaps
$
$
$
(16
)
$
(26
)
foreign currency contracts
(348
)
(581
)
(536
)
agricultural feedstocks
(49
)
energy feedstocks
(161
)
-
(189
)
-
the changes in 2008 sensitivity, as compared to 2007, are the
result of an increase in price volatility and an increase in
size of the foreign exchange and energy feedstock portfolios.
since the companys risk management programs are highly
effective, the potential loss in value for each risk management
portfolio described above would be largely offset by changes in
the value of the underlying exposure.
item8.financial
statements and supplementary data
the financial statements and supplementary data required by this
item are included herein, commencing on
pagef-1
of this report.
table of contents
item9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
none.
item9a.controls
and procedures
the company maintains a system of disclosure controls and
procedures for financial reporting to give reasonable assurance
that information required to be disclosed in the companys
reports submitted under the securities exchange act of 1934
(exchange act) is recorded, processed, summarized and reported
within the time periods specified in the rules and forms of the
sec. these controls and procedures also give reasonable
assurance that information required to be disclosed in such
reports is accumulated and communicated to management to allow
timely decisions regarding required disclosures.
as of december31, 2008, the companys chief executive
officer (ceo) and chief financial officer (cfo), together with
management, conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of the
companys disclosure controls and procedures pursuant to
rules13a-15(e)
and
15d-15(e) of
the exchange act. based on that evaluation, the ceo and cfo
concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are
effective.
there has been no change in the companys internal control
over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter
of 2008 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the companys internal control over
financial reporting. the company has completed its evaluation of
its internal controls and has concluded that the companys
system of internal controls was effective as of
december31, 2008 (see
pagef-2).
the company continues to take appropriate steps to enhance the
reliability of its internal control over financial reporting.
management has identified areas for improvement and discussed
them with the companys audit committee and independent
registered public accounting firm.
item9b.other
information
none.
table of contents
partiii
item10.directors,
executive officers and corporate governance
information with respect to this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the proxy. information related to directors is
included within the section entitled, election of
directors. the company has not made any material changes
to the procedures by which security holders may recommend
nominees to its board of directors since these procedures were
communicated in the companys 2008 proxy statement for the
annual meeting of stockholders held on april30, 2008.
information related to the audit committee is incorporated
herein by reference to the proxy and is included within the
sections entitled committees of the board and
committee membership. information regarding
executive officers is contained in the proxy section entitled
section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance and in parti, item4 of this report.
the company has adopted a code of ethics for its ceo, cfo and
controller that may be accessed from the companys website
at www.dupont.com by clicking on investor center and then
corporate governance. any amendments to, or waiver from, any
provision of the code will be posted on the companys
website at the above address.
item11.executive
compensation
information with respect to this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the proxy and is included in the sections
compensation discussion and analysis, 2008
summary compensation table, 2008 grants of
plan-based awards, outstanding equity awards,
2008 option exercises and stock vested,
pension plan benefits, nonqualified deferred
compensation, potential payments upon termination or
change in control, and directors
compensation. information related to the compensation
committee is included within the sections entitled
compensation committee interlocks and insider
participation and compensation committee
report.
item12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
information with respect to beneficial owners is incorporated
herein by reference to the proxy and is included in the section
entitled ownership of company stock.
securities
authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans as of
december31, 2008
(shares in thousands, except per
share)
number of securities
number of securities to
weighted-average
remaining available
be issued upon exercise
exercise price of
for future issuance
of outstanding options,
outstanding options,
under equity
plan category
warrants and rights
warrants and rights
compensation plans
equity compensation plans approved by security holders
70,895
$
46.20
49,155
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
11,274
$
44.06
-
total
82,169
$
45.88
49,155
includes stock-settled time-vested
and performance-based restricted stock units granted and stock
units deferred under the companys equity and incentive
plan, stock performance plan, variable compensation plan and the
stock accumulation and deferred compensation plan for directors.
performance-based restricted stock units reflect the maximum
number of shares to be awarded at the conclusion of the
performance cycle (200% of the original grant). the actual award
payouts can range from zero to 200percent of the original
grant.
represents the weighted-average
exercise price of the outstanding stock options only; the
outstanding stock-settled time-vested and performance-based
restricted stock units and deferred stock units are not included
in this calculation.
reflects shares available pursuant
to the issuance of stock options, restricted stock, restricted
stock units or other stock-based awards under the equity and
incentive plan approved by the shareholders on april25,
2007 (see note22 to the companys consolidated
financial statements). the maximum number of shares of stock
reserved for the grant or settlement of awards under the equity
and incentive plan (the share limit) shall be 60,000
and shall be subject to adjustment as provided therein; provided
that each share in excess of 20,000 issued under the equity and
incentive plan pursuant to any award settled in stock, other
than a stock option or stock appreciation right, shall be
counted against the foregoing share limit as four shares for
every one share actually issued in connection with such award.
(for example, if 22,000shares of restricted stock are
granted under the equity and incentive plan, 28,000 shall be
charged against the share limit in connection with that award.)
includes options totaling 10,206
granted under the companys 2002 corporate sharing program
(see note22 to the consolidated financial statements) and
100 options with an exercise price of $46.50 granted to a
consultant. also includes 968 options from the conversion of
dupont canada options to dupont options in connection with the
companys acquisition of the minority interest in dupont
canada.
table of contents
partiii
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions and director
independence
information with respect to the companys policy and
procedures for the review, approval or ratification of
transactions with related persons is incorporated by reference
herein to the proxy and is included in the section entitled
review and approval of transactions with related
persons. information with respect to director independence
is incorporated by reference herein to the proxy and is included
in the sections entitled dupont board of directors:
corporate governance guidelines, guidelines for
determining the independence of dupont directors,
committees of the board and committee
membership.
item14.principal
accountant fees and services
information with respect to this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the proxy and is included in the sections entitled
ratification of independent registered public accounting
firm.
table of contents
partiv
item15.exhibitsand
financial statement schedules
(a)
financial statements, financial statement schedules and exhibits:
1.
financial statements (see the index to the consolidated
financial statements on
pagef-1
of this report).
2.
financial statement schedules
scheduleiivaluation
and qualifying accounts
(dollars in millions)
balance at
balance at
beginning
charged to costs and
end of
description
of period
expenses
deductions
period
for the year ended december31, 2008
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
total allowances deducted from assets
$
$
$
$
for the year ended december31, 2007
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
total allowances deducted from assets
$
$
$
$
for the year ended december31, 2006
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
total allowances deducted from assets
$
$
$
$
the following should be read in conjunction with the previously
referenced consolidated financial statements:
financial statement schedules listed under sec rules but not
included in this report are omitted because they are not
applicable or the required information is shown in the
consolidated financial statements or notes thereto incorporated
by reference.
condensed financial information of the parent company is omitted
because restricted net assets of consolidated subsidiaries do
not exceed 25percent of consolidated net assets. footnote
disclosure of restrictions on the ability of subsidiaries and
affiliates to transfer funds is omitted because the restricted
net assets of subsidiaries combined with the companys
equity in the undistributed earnings of affiliated companies
does not exceed 25percent of consolidated net assets at
december31, 2008.
separate financial statements of affiliated companies accounted
for by the equity method are omitted because no such affiliate
individually constitutes a 20percent significant
subsidiary.
3.
exhibits
table of contents
partiv
item15.exhibitsand financial statement
schedules, continued
the following list of exhibits includes both exhibits submitted
with this
form10-k
as filed with the sec and those incorporated by reference to
other filings:
exhibit
number
description
.1
companys restated certificate of incorporation
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 3.1 to the companys
annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2007).
.2
companys bylaws, as last amended effective january 1, 2009
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 99 to the companys
current report on form 8-k filed on december 15, 2008).
the company agrees to provide the commission, on request, copies
of instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt
of the company and its subsidiaries.
.1*
the dupont stock accumulation and deferred compensation plan for
directors, as last amended effective january 1, 2009.
.2*
form of award terms for time-vested restricted stock units
granted to non-employee directors under the companys
equity and incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.2 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the
period ended march 31, 2008).
.3*
companys supplemental retirement income plan, as last
amended effective june 4, 1996 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.3 to the companys annual report on form 10-k
for the year ended december 31, 2006).
.4*
companys pension restoration plan, as restated effective
july 17, 2006 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 99.1 to the
companys current report on form 8-k filed on july 20,
2006).
.5*
companys rules for lump sum payments adopted july 17, 2006
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 99.2 to the companys
current report on form 8-k filed on july 20, 2006).
.6*
companys stock performance plan, as last amended effective
january 25, 2007 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.7 to
the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the period
ended march 31, 2007).
.7*
companys equity and incentive plan as approved by the
companys shareholders on april 25, 2007 (incorporated by
reference to pages c1-c13 of the companys annual meeting
proxy statement dated march 19, 2007).
.8*
terms and conditions, as last amended effective january 1, 2007,
of performance-based restricted stock units granted in 2006 and
2007 under the companys stock performance plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibits 10.8 and 10.12,
respectively, to the companys quarterly report on form
10-q for the period ended march 31, 2007).
.9*
form of award terms under the companys equity and
incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibits 10.10,
10.11, 10.13 and 10.14 to the companys quarterly report on
form 10-q for the period ended march 31, 2008).
.10*
companys retirement savings restoration plan, as last
amended effective january 1, 2009 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.15 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended june30, 2008).
.11*
companys retirement income plan for directors, as last
amended august 1995 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.17
to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year
ended december 31, 2007).
.12*
letter agreement and employee agreement, dated as of december 9,
2008, as amended, between the company and r.r. goodmanson.
.13*
companys bicentennial corporate sharing plan, adopted by
the board of directors on december 12, 2001 and effective
january 9, 2002 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.19 to
the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter
ended september 30, 2007).
.14*
companys management deferred compensation plan, adopted on
may 2, 2008, as last amended july 16, 2008 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.20 to the companys quarterly
report on form 10-q for the period ended june 30, 2008).
table of contents
partiv
item15.exhibitsand financial statement
schedules, continued
.15*
supplemental deferral terms for deferred long term incentive
awards and deferred variable compensation awards.
computation of the ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
subsidiaries of the registrant.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
.1
rule 13a-14 (a)/15d-14 (a) certification of the companys
principal executive officer.
.2
rule 13a-14 (a)/15d-14 (a) certification of the companys
principal financial officer.
.1
section 1350 certification of the companys principal
executive officer. the information contained in this exhibit
shall not be deemed filed with the securities and exchange
commission nor incorporated by reference in any registration
statement filed by the registrant under the securities act of
1933, as amended.
.2
section 1350 certification of the companys principal
financial officer. the information contained in this exhibit
shall not be deemed filed with the securities and exchange
commission nor incorporated by reference in any registration
statement filed by the registrant under the securities act of
1933, as amended.
*
management contract or compensatory
plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to this
form10-k.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
february12, 2009
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
by:
/s/j.
l. keefer
j. l. keefer
executivevicepresidentandchieffinancialofficer
(principal financial and accounting officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act
of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following
persons on behalf of the registrant in the capacities and on the
dates indicated:
signature
title(s)
date
/s/e.
j. kullman
e.
j. kullman
chief executive officer and director
(principal executive officer)
february12,2009
/s/c.o.holliday,jr.
c.
o. holliday, jr.
chair of the board and director
february 12, 2009
/s/r.
h. brown
r.
h. brown
director
february 12, 2009
/s/r.
a. brown
r.
a. brown
director
february 12, 2009
/s/b.
p. collomb
b.
p. collomb
director
february 12, 2009
/s/c.
j. crawford
c.
j. crawford
director
february 12, 2009
/s/a.
m. cutler
a.
m. cutler
director
february 12, 2009
/s/j.
t. dillon
j.
t. dillon
director
february 12, 2009
/s/e.
i. du pont,ii
e.
i. du pont,ii
director
february 12, 2009
/s/m.
a. hewson
m.
a. hewson
director
february 12, 2009
/s/l.
d. juliber
l.
d. juliber
director
february 12, 2009
/s/w.
k. reilly
w.
k. reilly
director
february 12, 2009
table of contents
e.i. du pont de
nemours and company
index to the
consolidated financial statements
page(s)
consolidated financial statements:
managements reports on responsibility for
financial statements and internal control over financial
reporting
f-2
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
f-3
consolidated income statements for the years
ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006
f-4
consolidated balance sheets as of
december31, 2008 and december31, 2007
f-5
consolidated statements of stockholders
equity for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and
f-6
consolidated statements of cash flows for the
years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006
f-7
notes to the consolidated financial statements
f-8
f-1
table of contents
managements
reports on responsibility for financial statements and
internal control over financial reporting
managements
report on responsibility for financial statements
management is responsible for the consolidated financial
statements and the other financial information contained in this
annual report on
form10-k.
the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles in the united states of
america (gaap) and are considered by management to present
fairly the companys financial position, results of
operations and cash flows. the financial statements include some
amounts that are based on managements best estimates and
judgments. the financial statements have been audited by the
companys independent registered public accounting firm,
pricewaterhousecoopers llp. the purpose of their audit is to
express an opinion as to whether the consolidated financial
statements included in this annual report on
form10-k
present fairly, in all material respects, the companys
financial position, results of operations and cash flows. their
report is presented on the following page.
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
adequate system of internal control over financial reporting as
defined in
rules13a-15(f)
and
15d-15(f)
under the securities exchange act of 1934. the companys
internal control over financial reporting is a process designed
to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with gaap. the
companys internal control over financial reporting
includes those policies and procedures that:
i.
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable
detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company;
ii.
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
only in accordance with authorization of management and
directors of the company;and
iii.
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisitions, use or disposition of
the companys assets that could have a material effect on
the financial statements. internal control over financial
reporting has certain inherent limitations which may not prevent
or detect misstatements. in addition, changes in conditions and
business practices may cause variation in the effectiveness of
internal controls.
management assessed the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting as of
december31, 2008, based on criteria set forth by the
committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission
(coso) in internal control-integrated framework. based on
its assessment and those criteria, management concluded that the
company maintained effective internal control over financial
reporting as of december31, 2008.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, has issued an audit report on the effectiveness
of the companys internal control over financial reporting
as of december31, 2008, which is presented on the
following page.
ellen j. kullman
jeffrey l. keefer
chief executive officer
and director
executive vice president
and chief financial officer
february12, 2009
f-2
table of contents
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
to the stockholders and the board of directors of
e. i. du pont de nemours and company:
in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and
the related consolidated statements of income,
stockholders equity and cash flows present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of e. i. du pont de
nemours and company and its subsidiaries at december31,
2008 and december31, 2007, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended december31, 2008 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america. in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement
schedule listed in the index appearing under item15(a)
(2)presents fairly, in all material respects, the
information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the
related consolidated financial statements. also in our opinion,
the company maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of
december31, 2008, based on criteria established in
internal controlintegrated framework
issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the
treadway commission (coso). the companys management is
responsible for these financial statements and financial
statement schedule, for maintaining effective internal control
over financial reporting and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting,
included in managements reports on responsibility
for financial statements and internal control over financial
reporting appearing on
pagef-2.
our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial
statements and financial statement schedule and on the
companys internal control over financial reporting based
on our integrated audits. we conducted our audits in accordance
with the standards of the public company accounting oversight
board (united states). those standards require that we plan and
perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement and
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. our audits of the financial
statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements, assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. our audit of internal
control over financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting,
assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk. our audits also
included performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. we believe our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinions.
as discussed in note6 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company changed the manner in which it accounted
for uncertainty in income taxes in 2007.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
philadelphia, pennsylvania
february12, 2009
f-3
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
consolidated
financial statements
consolidated
income statements
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
for the year ended december 31,
net sales
$
30,529
$
29,378
$
27,421
other income, net
1,307
1,275
1,561
total
31,836
30,653
28,982
cost of goods sold and other operating charges
24,083
21,746
20,636
selling, general and administrative expenses
3,593
3,396
3,255
research and development expense
1,393
1,338
1,302
interest expense
total
29,445
26,910
25,653
income before income taxes and minority interests
2,391
3,743
3,329
provision for income taxes
minority interests in earnings (losses) of consolidated
subsidiaries
(15
)
net income
$
2,007
$
2,988
$
3,148
basic earnings per share of common stock
$
2.21
$
3.25
$
3.41
diluted earnings per share of common stock
$
2.20
$
3.22
$
3.38
see notes to the consolidated
financial statements beginning on pagef-8.
f-4
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
consolidated
financial statements
consolidated
balance sheets
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
december 31,
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
3,645
$
1,305
marketable securities
accounts and notes receivable, net
5,140
5,683
inventories
5,681
5,278
prepaid expenses
income taxes
total current assets
15,311
13,160
property, plant and equipment
27,954
26,593
less: accumulated depreciation
16,800
15,733
net property, plant and equipment
11,154
10,860
goodwill
2,135
2,074
other intangible assets
2,710
2,856
investment in affiliates
other assets
4,055
4,363
total
$
36,209
$
34,131
liabilities and stockholders equity
current liabilities
accounts payable
$
3,128
$
3,172
short-term borrowings and capital lease obligations
2,012
1,370
income taxes
other accrued liabilities
4,460
3,823
total current liabilities
9,710
8,541
long-term borrowings and capital lease obligations
7,638
5,955
other liabilities
11,169
7,255
deferred income taxes
total liabilities
28,657
22,553
minority interests
commitments and contingent liabilities
stockholders equity
preferred stock, without par value-cumulative;
23,000,000shares authorized; issued at december31,
2008 and 2007:
$4.50 series 1,673,000shares (callable at $120)
$3.50 series 700,000shares (callable at $102)
common stock, $.30par value; 1,800,000,000shares
authorized; issued at december31, 2008
989,415,000; 2007 986,330,000
additional paid-in capital
8,380
8,179
reinvested earnings
10,456
9,945
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(5,518
)
(794
)
common stock held in treasury, at cost (shares:
december31, 2008 and 2007 87,041,000)
(6,727
)
(6,727
)
total stockholders equity
7,125
11,136
total
$
36,209
$
34,131
see notes to the consolidated
financial statements beginning on pagef-8.
f-5
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
consolidated
financial statements
consolidated
statements of stockholders equity
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
accumulated
additional
other
total
preferred
common
paid in
reinvested
comprehensive
treasury
stockholders
comprehensive
stock
stock
capital
earnings
loss
stock
equity
income
balance january1, 2006
$
$
$
7,678
$
7,990
$
(518
)
$
(6,727
)
$
8,962
net income
3,148
3,148
$
3,148
cumulative translation adjustment
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
minimum pension liability
net unrealized gain on securities
total comprehensive income
$
3,354
common dividends ($1.48 per share)
(1,368
)
(1,368
)
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
common stock
issued compensation plans
repurchased
(180
)
(100
)
(280
)
retired
(1
)
(18
)
(81
)
-
adjustment to initially apply defined benefit plan standard, net
of tax of $1,043 and minority interest of $8
(1,555
)
(1,555
)
balance december31, 2006
$
$
$
7,797
$
9,679
$
(1,867
)
$
(6,727
)
$
9,422
net income
2,988
2,988
$
2,988
cumulative translation adjustment
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
pension benefit plans
other benefit plans
net unrealized gain on securities
total comprehensive income
$
4,061
common dividends ($1.52 per share)
(1,399
)
(1,399
)
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
common stock
issued compensation plans
repurchased
(1,695
)
(1,695
)
retired
(10
)
(256
)
(1,429
)
1,695
-
adjustment to initially apply uncertainty in income taxes
standard
balance december31, 2007
$
$
$
8,179
$
9,945
$
(794
)
$
(6,727
)
$
11,136
net income
2,007
2,007
$
2,007
cumulative translation adjustment
(120
)
(120
)
(120
)
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
(199
)
(199
)
(199
)
pension benefit plans
(4,122
)
(4,122
)
(4,122
)
other benefit plans
(272
)
(272
)
(272
)
net unrealized loss on securities
(11
)
(11
)
(11
)
total comprehensive loss
$
(2,717
)
common dividends ($1.64 per share)
(1,486
)
(1,486
)
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
common stock
issued compensation plans
balance december31, 2008
$
$
$
8,380
$
10,456
$
(5,518
)
$
(6,727
)
$
7,125
see notes to the consolidated
financial statements beginning on pagef-8.
f-6
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
consolidated
financial statements
consolidated
statements of cash flows
(dollars
in millions)
for the year ended december 31,
operating activities
net income
$
2,007
$
2,988
$
3,148
adjustments to reconcile net income to cash provided by
operating activities:
depreciation
1,169
1,158
1,157
amortization of intangible assets
deferred tax expense (benefit)
(615
)
other noncash charges and credits net
contributions to pension plans
(252
)
(277
)
(280
)
decrease (increase) in operating assets:
accounts and notes receivable
(214
)
(194
)
inventories and other operating assets
(663
)
(267
)
(61
)
(decrease) increase in operating liabilities:
accounts payable and other operating liabilities
(515
)
accrued interest and income taxes
(240
)
(177
)
(269
)
cash provided by operating activities
3,129
4,290
3,736
investing activities
purchases of property, plant and equipment
(1,978
)
(1,585
)
(1,532
)
investments in affiliates
(55
)
(113
)
(31
)
payments for businesses net of cash acquired
(144
)
(13
)
(60
)
proceeds from sale of assets net of cash sold
net decrease (increase) in short-term financial instruments
(39
)
forward exchange contract settlements
(285
)
other investing activities net
(31
)
cash used for investing activities
(1,610
)
(1,750
)
(1,345
)
financing activities
dividends paid to stockholders
(1,496
)
(1,409
)
(1,378
)
net (decrease) increase in short-term (less than 90days)
borrowings
(891
)
1,117
(263
)
long-term and other borrowings:
receipts
3,527
1,998
2,611
payments
(547
)
(3,458
)
(3,139
)
repurchase of common stock
-
(1,695
)
(280
)
proceeds from exercise of stock options
proceeds from termination of interest rate swap
-
-
other financing activities net
(35
)
(67
)
(22
)
cash provided by (used for) financing activities
(3,069
)
(2,323
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash
(57
)
increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
2,340
(509
)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
1,305
1,814
1,736
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
3,645
$
1,305
$
1,814
supplemental cash flow information:
cash paid during the year for
interest, net of amounts capitalized
$
$
$
taxes
see notes to the consolidated
financial statements beginning on pagef-8.
f-7
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
1.
summary of
significant accounting policies
the company follows generally accepted accounting principles in
the united states of america (gaap). the significant accounting
policies described below, together with the other notes that
follow, are an integral part of the consolidated financial
statements.
preparation of
financial statements
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with gaap
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues
and expenses during the reporting period. actual results could
differ from those estimates.
basis of
consolidation
the consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
the company, subsidiaries in which a controlling interest is
maintained and variable interest entities (vie) for which dupont
is the primary beneficiary. for those consolidated subsidiaries
in which the companys ownership is less than
100percent, the outside stockholders interests are
shown as minority interests. investments in affiliates over
which the company has significant influence but not a
controlling interest are carried on the equity basis. this
includes majority-owned entities for which the company does not
consolidate because a minority investor holds substantive
participating rights. investments in affiliates over which the
company does not have significant influence are accounted for by
the cost method or as available-for-sale securities. gains or
losses arising from issuances by an affiliate or a subsidiary of
its own stock are recorded as non-operating items.
revenue
recognition
the company recognizes revenue when the earnings process is
complete. the companys revenues are from the sale of a
wide range of products to a diversified base of customers around
the world. revenue for product sales is recognized upon
delivery, when title and risk of loss have been transferred,
collectibility is reasonably assured and pricing is fixed or
determinable. substantially all product sales are sold fob (free
on board) shipping point or, with respect to
non-u.s.customers,
an equivalent basis. accruals are made for sales returns and
other allowances based on the companys experience. the
company accounts for cash sales incentives as a reduction in
sales and noncash sales incentives as a charge to cost of goods
sold or selling expense, depending on the nature of the
incentive. amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling
fees are included in net sales and costs incurred by the company
for the delivery of goods are classified as cost of goods sold
and other operating charges in the consolidated income
statements. taxes on revenue-producing transactions are excluded
from net sales.
the company periodically enters into prepayment contracts with
customers in the agriculture& nutrition segment and
receives advance payments for product to be delivered in future
periods. these advance payments are recorded as deferred revenue
and are included in other accrued liabilities on the
consolidated balance sheets. revenue associated with advance
payments is recognized as shipments are made and title,
ownership and risk of loss pass to the customer.
licensing and royalty income is recognized in accordance with
agreed upon terms, when performance obligations are satisfied,
the amount is fixed or determinable and collectibility is
reasonably assured.
cash and cash
equivalents
cash equivalents represent investments with maturities of three
months or less from time of purchase. they are carried at cost
plus accrued interest, which approximates fair value because of
the short-term maturity of these instruments.
investments in
securities
marketable securities represent investments in fixed and
floating rate financial instruments with maturities greater than
three months and up to twelve months at time of purchase. they
are classified as held-to-maturity and recorded at amortized
cost.
f-8
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
other assets include long-term investments in securities, which
comprise investments for which market values are not readily
available (cost investments) and available-for-sale securities
that are reported at fair value (see note13).
inventories
the majority of the companys inventories are valued at
cost, as determined by the
last-in,
first-out (lifo) method; in the aggregate, such valuations are
not in excess of market. seed inventories are valued at the
lower of cost, as determined by the
first-in,
first-out (fifo) method, or market.
elements of cost in inventories include raw materials, direct
labor and manufacturing overhead. stores and supplies are valued
at cost or market, whichever is lower; cost is generally
determined by the average cost method.
property, plant
and equipment
property, plant and equipment (pp&e) is carried at cost and
is depreciated using the straight-line method. pp&e placed
in service prior to 1995 is depreciated under the
sum-of-the-years digits method or other substantially
similar methods. substantially all equipment and buildings are
depreciated over useful lives ranging from 15 to 25years.
capitalizable costs associated with computer software for
internal use are amortized on a straight-line basis over 5 to
7years. when assets are surrendered, retired, sold or
otherwise disposed of, their gross carrying values and related
accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and
included in determining gain or loss on such disposals.
maintenance and repairs are charged to operations; replacements
and improvements are capitalized.
goodwill and
other intangible assets
goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for
impairment at least annually; however, these tests are performed
more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate
the carrying value may not be recoverable. the companys
fair value methodology is based on quoted market prices, if
available. if quoted market prices are not available, an
estimate of fair market value is made based on prices of similar
assets or other valuation methodologies including present value
techniques. impairment losses are included in cost of goods sold
and other operating charges.
definite-lived intangible assets, such as purchased and licensed
technology, patents and customer lists are amortized over their
estimated useful lives, generally for periods ranging from 5 to
20years. the company continually evaluates the
reasonableness of the useful lives of these assets. once these
assets are fully amortized, they are removed from the
consolidated balance sheets.
impairment of
long-lived assets
the company evaluates the carrying value of long-lived assets to
be held and used when events or changes in circumstances
indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. the carrying
value of a long-lived asset is considered impaired when the
total projected undiscounted cash flows from the asset are
separately identifiable and are less than its carrying value. in
that event, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which
the carrying value exceeds the fair market value of the
long-lived asset. the companys fair value methodology is
based on quoted market prices, if available. if quoted market
prices are not available, an estimate of fair market value is
made based on prices of similar assets or other valuation
methodologies including present value techniques. long-lived
assets to be disposed of other than by sale are classified as
held for use until their disposal. long-lived assets to be
disposed by sale are classified as held for sale and are
reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair market value
less cost to sell and depreciation is discontinued.
research and
development
research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
f-9
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
environmental
accruals for environmental matters are recorded in operating
expenses when it is probable that a liability has been incurred
and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated.
accrued liabilities do not include claims against third parties
and are not discounted.
costs related to environmental remediation are charged to
expense. other environmental costs are also charged to expense
unless they increase the value of the property or reduce or
prevent contamination from future operations, in which case,
they are capitalized.
asset retirement
obligations
the company records asset retirement obligations at fair value
at the time the liability is incurred. accretion expense is
recognized as an operating expense using the credit-adjusted
risk-free interest rate in effect when the liability was
recognized. the associated asset retirement obligations are
capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the long-lived
asset and depreciated over the estimated remaining useful life
of the asset, generally for periods ranging from 1 to
20years.
litigation
the company accrues for liabilities related to litigation
matters when the information available indicates that it is
probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of
the liability can be reasonably estimated. legal costs such as
outside counsel fees and expenses are charged to expense in the
period incurred.
insurance/self-insurance
the company self-insures certain risks where permitted by law or
regulation, including workers compensation, vehicle
liability and employee related benefits. liabilities associated
with these risks are estimated in part by considering historical
claims experience, demographic factors and other actuarial
assumptions. for other risks, the company uses a combination of
insurance and self-insurance, reflecting comprehensive reviews
of relevant risks.
income
taxes
the provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and
liability approach of accounting for income taxes. under this
approach, deferred taxes represent the future tax consequences
expected to occur when the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities are recovered or paid. the provision for income
taxes represents income taxes paid or payable for the current
year plus the change in deferred taxes during the year. deferred
taxes result from differences between the financial and tax
bases of the companys assets and liabilities and are
adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax laws when changes are
enacted. valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred
tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit
will not be realized. provision has been made for income taxes
on unremitted earnings of subsidiaries and affiliates, except
for subsidiaries in which earnings are deemed to be permanently
invested. investment tax credits or grants are accounted for in
the period earned (the flow-through method). interest accrued
related to unrecognized tax benefits is included in
miscellaneous income and expenses, net, under other income, net.
income tax related penalties are included in the provision for
income taxes. it is reasonably possible that changes from future
completed tax examinations could be significant when compared to
the companys global unrecognized tax benefits, however,
due to the uncertainty regarding the timing of completion of
these audits and the possible outcomes, a current estimate of
the range of increase or decrease that may occur within the next
twelve months cannot be made.
foreign currency
translation
the u.s.dollar (usd) is the functional currency of most of
the companys worldwide operations. for subsidiaries where
the usd is the functional currency, all foreign currency asset
and liability amounts are remeasured into usd at end-of-period
exchange rates, except for inventories, prepaid expenses,
property, plant and equipment, goodwill and other intangible
assets, which are remeasured at historical rates. foreign
currency income and expenses are remeasured at average exchange
rates in effect during the year, except for expenses related to
balance sheet amounts remeasured at historical exchange rates.
exchange gains and losses arising from remeasurement of foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities are
included in income in the period in which they occur.
f-10
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
for subsidiaries where the local currency is the functional
currency, assets and liabilities denominated in local currencies
are translated into usd at end-of-period exchange rates and the
resultant translation adjustments are reported, net of their
related tax effects, as a component of accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss) in stockholders equity. assets
and liabilities denominated in other than the local currency are
remeasured into the local currency prior to translation into usd
and the resultant exchange gains or losses are included in
income in the period in which they occur. income and expenses
are translated into usd at average exchange rates in effect
during the period.
variable interest
entities (vies)
the company consolidates vies where dupont is considered the
primary beneficiary. at december31, 2008, the assets,
liabilities and operations of these entities are not material to
the consolidated financial statements of the company.
the company is also involved with other entities that are vies
for which the company is not currently the primary beneficiary.
future events may require these vies to be consolidated if the
company becomes the primary beneficiary. at december31,
2008, the assets and liabilities of the other vies are not
material to the consolidated financial statements of the
company. the companys share of the net income (loss) of
these vies is included in other income, net, in the consolidated
income statements and is not material.
hedging and
trading activities
derivative instruments are reported on the consolidated balance
sheets at their fair values. for derivative instruments
designated as fair value hedges, changes in the fair values of
the derivative instruments will generally be offset on the
income statement by changes in the fair value of the hedged
items. for derivative instruments designated as cash flow
hedges, the effective portion of any hedge is reported in
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) until it is
cleared to earnings during the same period in which the hedged
item affects earnings. the ineffective portion of all hedges is
recognized in current period earnings. changes in the fair
values of derivative instruments that are not designated as
hedges are recorded in current period earnings.
in the event that a derivative designated as a hedge of a firm
commitment or an anticipated transaction is terminated prior to
the maturation of the hedged transaction, gains or losses
realized at termination are deferred and included in the
measurement of the hedged transaction. if a hedged transaction
matures, or is sold, extinguished, or terminated prior to the
maturity of a derivative designated as a hedge of such
transaction, gains or losses associated with the derivative
through the date the transaction matured are included in the
measurement of the hedged transaction and the derivative is
reclassified as for trading purposes. derivatives designated as
a hedge of an anticipated transaction are reclassified as for
trading purposes if the anticipated transaction is no longer
likely to occur.
cash flows from derivative instruments accounted for as either
fair value hedges or cash flow hedges are reported in the same
category as the cash flows from the items being hedged. cash
flows from all other derivative instruments are generally
reported as investing activities in the consolidated statements
of cash flows. see note23 for additional discussion
regarding the companys objectives and strategies for
derivative instruments.
reclassifications
certain reclassifications of prior years data have been
made to conform to 2008 classifications.
accounting
standards issued not yet adopted
in december 2007, the financial accounting standards board
(fasb) issued statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)
no.141 (revised 2007)business
combinations (sfas141r) which replaces
sfasno.141. sfas141r addresses the recognition
and measurement of identifiable assets acquired, liabilities
assumed, and non-controlling interests in business combinations.
sfas141r also requires disclosure that enables users of
the financial statements to better evaluate the nature and
financial effect of business combinations. sfas141r
applies prospectively to business combinations for which the
acquisition date is on or after the beginning of the first
annual reporting period beginning on or after december15,
2008. sfas141r will be adopted by the company on
january1, 2009. the company does not believe that at the
time of adoption sfas141r will have a material impact on
its consolidated financial statements. this standard requires
significantly different accounting treatment for
f-11
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
business combinations than current requirements. thus,
accounting for potential future business combinations after
adoption may produce a significantly different result and
financial statement impact than under current standards.
in december 2007, the fasb issued sfasno.160,
noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial
statementsan amendment of accounting research
bulletinno.51 (sfas160)which
changes the accounting and reporting for minority interests and
for the deconsolidation of a subsidiary. it also clarifies that
a third-party, non-controlling interest in a consolidated
subsidiary is an ownership interest in the consolidated entity
that should be reported as equity in the consolidated financial
statements. sfas160 also requires disclosure that clearly
identifies and distinguishes between the interests of the parent
and the interests of the non-controlling owners. sfas160
is effective for fiscal years beginning after december15,
2008. sfas160 will be adopted by the company on
january1, 2009. the company does not believe that at the
time of adoption sfas160 will have a material impact on
its consolidated financial statements.
in march 2008, the fasb issued sfasno.161,
disclosures about derivative instruments and hedging
activities, an amendment of fasb statement no.133
(sfas161). effective for fiscal years and interim periods
beginning after november15, 2008, the new standard
requires enhanced disclosures about derivative and hedging
activities that are intended to better convey the purpose of
derivative use and the risks managed. sfas161 will not
affect the companys financial position or results of
operations. the new standard solely affects the disclosure of
information.
in december 2008, fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp)
fas132(r)-1, employers disclosures about
postretirement benefit plan assets, which is effective for
fiscal years ending after december15, 2009. the new
standard expands disclosures for assets held by employer pension
and other postretirement benefit plans. fsp fas132(r)-1
will not affect the companys financial position or results
of operations. the new standard solely affects the disclosure of
information.
2.
implementation of
fasb statement of financial accounting standards no.157
fair value measurements (sfas157)
effective january1, 2008, the company prospectively
implemented the provisions of sfas157 for financial assets
and financial liabilities reported or disclosed at fair value.
as permitted by fasb staff position
no.fas157-2,
the company elected to defer implementation of the provisions of
sfas157 for non-financial assets and non-financial
liabilities until january1, 2009, except for non-financial
items that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the
financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually).
the company uses the following valuation techniques to measure
fair value for its financial assets and financial liabilities:
level1
quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities
level2
significant other observable inputs (e.g. quoted prices for
similar items in active markets, quoted prices for identical or
similar items in markets that are not active, inputs other than
quoted prices that are observable such as interest rate and
yield curves, and market-corroborated inputs)
f-12
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
at december31, 2008, the following financial assets and
financial liabilities were measured at fair value on a recurring
basis using the type of inputs shown:
financial
assets
fair value measurements at
december31, 2008using
december31,
level 1 inputs
level 2 inputs
level 3 inputs
derivatives
$
$
-
$
$
-
available-for-sale securities
-
-
$
$
$
$
-
financial
liabilities
fair value measurements at
december31, 2008using
december31,
level 1 inputs
level 2 inputs
level 3 inputs
derivatives
$
$
-
$
$
-
3.
other income,
net
cozaar/hyzaar
licensing income
$
1,019
$
$
royalty income
interest income
equity in earnings (losses) of affiliates (note12)
(130
)
net gains on sales of assets
net exchange (losses)
gains1
(219
)
(65
)
miscellaneous income and expenses,
net2
$
1,307
$
1,275
$
1,561
the company routinely uses foreign
currency exchange contracts to offset its net exposures, by
currency, related to the foreign currency- denominated monetary
assets and liabilities. the objective of this program is to
maintain an approximately balanced position in foreign
currencies in order to minimize, on an after-tax basis, the
effects of exchange rate changes on net monetary asset
positions. the net pre-tax exchange gains and losses are
partially offset by the associated tax impact.
miscellaneous income and expenses,
net, includes interest items, insurance recoveries, litigation
settlements, and other items.
4.
interest
expense
interest incurred
$
$
$
interest capitalized
(49
)
(45
)
(37
)
$
$
$
5.
restructuring
activities
during 2008, the company initiated a global restructuring
program described below. employee separation payments, net of
exchange impact, of $47 associated with 2006 restructuring
activities were made in 2008. at december31, 2008, total
liabilities relating to current and prior restructuring
activities were $345.
f-13
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
activities
in response to the challenging economic environment, the company
initiated a global restructuring program during 2008 to reduce
costs and improve profitability across its businesses. the
program includes the elimination of approximately 2,500
positions principally located in western europe and the united
states of america (u.s.) primarily supporting the motor vehicle
and construction markets. as a result, a charge of $535 was
recorded in cost of goods sold and other operating charges. this
charge includes $287 related to employee severance costs and
$248 of asset-related charges, including $111 for asset
shut-downs, $119 for asset impairments and $18 of other
non-personnel charges.
the 2008 program charge reduced the 2008 segment earnings as
follows: agriculture& nutrition$18;
coatings& color technologies$236;
electronic& communication
technologies$55; performance
materials$94; safety&
protection$101; and other$31.
essentially all employee terminations related to this program
will begin in the first quarter of 2009. the program is
estimated to be substantially completed in 2010. there were no
cash payments related to this program in 2008.
account balances and activity for the 2008 restructuring program
are summarized below:
employee separation
other non-personnel
asset - related
costs
charges
total
net charges to income in 2008
$
$
$
$
charges to accounts
asset write-offs
(230
)
-
(2
)
(232
)
net translation adjustment
-
other
-
-
balance at december31, 2008
$
-
$
$
$
activities
during 2007, the company did not institute any significant
restructuring programs. in 2007, employee separation payments,
net of exchange impact, of $77 associated with 2006
restructuring activities were made.
activities
during 2006, the company initiated restructuring actions within
its agriculture& nutrition and coatings&
color technologies segments to improve the companys global
competitiveness. as a result, a net charge of $326 was recorded
in cost of goods sold and other operating charges for employee
separation and asset write-downs. further details are discussed
below.
agriculture&
nutrition
during the fourth quarter 2006, the agriculture&
nutrition segment launched plans to redeploy capital and
resources within various segments of the business. the plans
included the closing or streamlining of manufacturing units at
about twelve sites and the reduction of approximately 1,500
positions globally. restructuring charges resulting from the
plans totaled $194, $72 of which are reflected within
performance materials segment results following the realignment
of certain businesses in 2007. the global program included $64
for severance payments and $130 principally for asset
impairments, primarily related to definite-lived intangible
assets whose remaining useful lives were reduced, abandoned
technology and other non-personnel charges. as of
december31, 2008, 1,300employees were separated from
the company and 200 were redeployed. essentially all employees
have been separated from the company as of december31,
2008. cash payments related to these separations were
approximately $20 in 2008, $25 in 2007 and $4 in 2006.
coatings&
color technologies
a business transformation plan was instituted during the first
quarter 2006 within the coatings& color technologies
segment to better serve the companys customers and improve
profitability. the plan included the elimination of
f-14
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
approximately 1,700 positions. restructuring charges resulting
from the plan totaled $135, including $123 related to severance
payments primarily in europe and the u.s.for approximately
1,300employees involved in manufacturing, marketing,
administrative and technical activities. in connection with this
program, a $12 charge was also recorded related to exit costs of
non-strategic assets. as of december31, 2008, all
positions identified as a part of the companys 2006
program have been separated from the company. this consisted of
1,200 separations and 450 individuals redeployed. cash payments
related to these separations were approximately $27 in 2008, $52
in 2007 and $28 in 2006.
account balances and activity for the 2006 restructuring
programs are summarized below:
write-
employee
down of
separation
assets
costs
total
net charges to income in 2006
$
$
$
charges to accounts
employee separation payments
-
(32
)
(32
)
asset write-offs
(142
)
-
(142
)
balance at december31, 2006
$
-
$
$
employee separation payments
-
(77
)
(77
)
net charges (credits) to income
(5
)
-
asset write-offs
(5
)
-
(5
)
balance at december31, 2007
$
-
$
$
employee separation payments
-
(47
)
(47
)
net charges (credits) to income
-
(9
)
(9
)
other
-
(3
)
(3
)
balance at december31, 2008
$
-
$
$
f-15
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
6.
provision for
income taxes
current tax expense (benefit):
u.s. federal
$
$
$
u.s. state and local
(3
)
(1
)
international
deferred tax expense (benefit):
u.s. federal
(297
)
u.s. state and local
-
(21
)
(18
)
international
(167
)
(40
)
(300
)
(615
)
provision for income taxes
$
$
$
stockholders equity:
stock
compensation1
(3
)
(25
)
(2
)
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to
earnings2
(113
)
net unrealized (losses) gains on
securities2
(5
)
minimum pension
liability2
-
-
pension benefits
net
losses3
(2,209
)
(1,048
)
prior service
cost3
(51
)
other benefits
net
losses3
(113
)
(391
)
net prior service
benefit3
(38
)
(55
)
$
(2,095
)
$
1,296
$
(589
)
represents deferred tax benefits
for certain stock compensation amounts that are deductible for
income tax purposes but do not affect net income.
represents deferred tax charges
(benefits) recorded as a component of accumulated other
comprehensive loss in stockholders equity. see
note20.
on december31, 2006, the
company adopted prospectively sfas158 and as required, the
company included in the ending balance of accumulated other
comprehensive loss, taxes associated with the gains and losses
and prior service costs and credits, that pursuant to
sfasno.87 and 106 prior to amendment by
sfas158 had not been recognized as components of net
periodic benefit cost. the 2008 tax benefit primarily resulted
from the actuarial loss recorded in other comprehensive income
as part of the annual defined benefit pension re-measurement.
deferred income taxes result from temporary differences between
the financial and tax basis of the companys assets and
liabilities. the tax effects of temporary differences and tax
loss/tax credit carryforwards/backs included in the deferred
income tax provision are as follows:
depreciation
$
$
(6
)
$
(12
)
accrued employee benefits
(125
)
other accrued expenses
(20
)
(329
)
inventories
(7
)
(52
)
unrealized exchange (loss)
(15
)
(38
)
(62
)
investment in subsidiaries and affiliates
(20
)
(18
)
amortization of intangibles
(54
)
(18
)
(14
)
other temporary differences
(81
)
tax loss/tax credit carryforwards/backs
(21
)
(22
)
valuation allowance net
(49
)
(185
)
$
$
$
(615
)
f-16
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
the significant components of deferred tax assets and
liabilities at december31, 2008 and 2007, are as follows:
asset
liability
asset
liability
depreciation
$
-
$
1,407
$
-
$
1,392
accrued employee
benefits1
3,645
1,469
other accrued expenses
1,270
1,225
inventories
unrealized exchange gains
-
-
tax loss/tax credit carryforwards/backs
2,745
-
2,830
-
investment in subsidiaries and affiliates
amortization of intangibles
other
$
8,217
$
2,949
$
6,174
$
3,474
valuation allowance
(1,693
)
(1,424
)
$
6,524
$
4,750
the increase in the deferred tax
asset is primarily a result of the actuarial loss recorded in
other comprehensive income as part of the annual defined benefit
pension re-measurement.
current deferred tax assets of $643 and $564 at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, are included in
the caption income taxes within current assets of the
consolidated balance sheets. in addition, deferred tax assets of
$3,087 and $1,523 are included in other assets at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. see note13.
deferred tax liabilities of $15 and $9 at december31, 2008
and 2007, respectively, are included in the caption income taxes
within current liabilities of the consolidated balance sheets.
an analysis of the companys effective income tax rate
(eitr) follows:
statutory u.s. federal income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
exchange
gains/losses1
(0.2
)
(0.9
)
0.6
domestic operations
(2.8
)
(3.2
)
0.1
lower effective tax rates on international
operations-net
(14.3
)
(7.5
)
(12.4
)
tax settlements
(1.8
)
(3.4
)
(10.4
)
lower effective tax rate on export sales
-
-
(0.8
)
the american jobs creation act of 2004
(ajca)2
-
-
(0.6
)
valuation allowance release
-
-
(5.6
)
15.9
%
20.0
%
5.9
%
principally reflects the benefit of
non-taxable exchange gains resulting from remeasurement of
foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities.
further information about the companys foreign currency
hedging program is included in note23 under the heading
currency risk.
reflects the tax impact associated
with the 2005 repatriation of $9.1billion under the ajca.
f-17
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
income before income taxes and minority interests shown below is
based on the location of the corporate unit to which such
earnings are attributable. however, since such earnings are
often subject to taxation in more than one country, coupled with
the impact of exchange gains/losses, the income tax provision
shown above as u.s.or international does not correspond to
the earnings shown in the following table:
united states (including exports)
$
$
1,652
$
1,947
international
1,399
2,091
1,382
$
2,391
$
3,743
$
3,329
under the tax laws of various jurisdictions in which the company
operates, deductions or credits that cannot be fully utilized
for tax purposes during the current year may be carried forward
or back, subject to statutory limitations, to reduce taxable
income or taxes payable in future or prior years. at
december31, 2008, the tax effect of such
carryforwards/backs, net of valuation allowance approximated
$1,397. of this amount, $1,205 has no expiration date, $27
expires after 2008 but before the end of 2013 and $165 expires
after 2013.
at december31, 2008, unremitted earnings of subsidiaries
outside the u.s.totaling $10,101 were deemed to be
permanently reinvested. no deferred tax liability has been
recognized with regard to the remittance of such earnings. it is
not practical to estimate the income tax liability that might be
incurred if such earnings were remitted to the u.s.
each year the company files hundreds of tax returns in the
various national, state and local income taxing jurisdictions in
which it operates. these tax returns are subject to examination
and possible challenge by the taxing authorities. positions
challenged by the taxing authorities may be settled or appealed
by the company. as a result, there is an uncertainty in income
taxes recognized in the companys financial statements in
accordance with sfasno.109, accounting for
income taxes (sfas109)and fasb interpretation
no.48, accounting for uncertainty in income
taxes (fin48). effective january1, 2007, the
company adopted fin48 which clarifies the application of
sfas109 by defining criteria that an individual income tax
position must meet for any part of the benefit of that position
to be recognized in an enterprises financial statements
and provides guidance on measurement, derecognition,
classification, accounting for interest in penalties, accounting
in interim periods, disclosure and transition.
the company
and/or its
subsidiaries files income tax returns in the u.s.federal
jurisdiction, and various states and
non-u.s.jurisdictions.
with few exceptions, the company is no longer subject to
u.s.federal, state and local, or
non-u.s.income
tax examinations by tax authorities for years before 1999. it is
reasonably possible that changes to the companys global
unrecognized tax benefits could be significant, however due to
the uncertainty regarding the timing of completion of audits and
possible outcomes, a current estimate of the range of increases
or decreases that
f-18
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
may occur within the next twelve months cannot be made. a
reconciliation of the beginning and ending amounts of
unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
total unrecognized tax benefits as of january 1
$
$
1,070
gross amounts of decreases in unrecognized tax benefits as a
result of tax positions taken during the prior period
(49
)
(173
)
gross amounts of increases in unrecognized tax benefits as a
result of tax positions taken during the prior period
gross amounts of increases in unrecognized tax benefits as a
result of tax positions taken during the current period
amount of decreases in the unrecognized tax benefits relating to
settlements with taxing authorities
(157
)
(209
)
reduction to unrecognized tax benefits as a result of a lapse of
the applicable statue of limitations
(14
)
(16
)
exchange gain/(loss)
(38
)
total unrecognized tax benefits as of december 31
$
$
total unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would
impact the effective tax rate
$
$
total amount of interest and penalties recognized in the
consolidated income statement
$
$
total amount of interest and penalties recognized in the
consolidated balance sheet
$
$
7.
earnings per
share of common stock
set forth below is a reconciliation of the numerator and
denominator for basic and diluted earnings per share
calculations for the periods indicated:
numerator:
net income
$
2,007
$
2,988
$
3,148
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
(10
)
net income available to common stockholders
$
1,997
$
2,978
$
3,138
denominator:
weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
basic
902,415,000
917,132,000
921,474,000
dilutive effect of the companys employee compensation
plans and accelerated share repurchase agreement
4,956,000
8,270,000
7,127,000
weighted average number of common shares outstanding
diluted
907,371,000
925,402,000
928,601,000
the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding in 2008
declined as a result of the companys 2007 repurchase and
retirement of its common stock in connection with its
$5billion share buyback plan, which was authorized by the
board of directors in october 2005. see note20 for further
information.
the following average number of stock options are antidilutive
and therefore, are not included in the diluted earnings per
share calculation:
average number of stock options
40,831,000
23,252,000
63,294,000
f-19
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
the 17million increase in the average number of stock
options that were antidilutive in 2008 compared to 2007 was
primarily due to the decrease in the companys average
stock price. the 40million decrease in the average number
of stock options that were antidilutive in 2007 compared to 2006
was primarily due to the increase in the companys average
stock price. additionally, there were 12.8million stock
options that expired unexercised and were cancelled in january
2007, which were included in the average number of stock options
that were antidilutive in 2006.
8.
accounts and
notesreceivable
december 31,
accounts and notes receivable-trade, net of allowances of $238
in 2008 and $261 in 2007
$
3,838
$
4,649
other1
1,302
1,034
$
5,140
$
5,683
other includes receivables in
relation to
cozaar/hyzaar
interests, fair value of derivative instruments, value added
tax, general sales tax and other taxes.
accounts and notes receivable are carried at amounts that
approximate fair value and include amounts due from equity
affiliates of $28 for 2008, and $27 for 2007.
9.
inventories
december 31,
finished products
$
3,156
$
3,043
semifinished products
2,234
1,865
raw materials, stores and supplies
1,199
1,000
6,589
5,908
adjustment of inventories to a lifo basis
(908
)
(630
)
$
5,681
$
5,278
inventory values, before lifo adjustment, are generally
determined by the average cost method, which approximates
current cost. excluding seeds, stores and supplies, inventories
valued under the lifo method comprised 79percent and
80percent of consolidated inventories before lifo
adjustment for the periods ended december31, 2008 and
2007, respectively. seed inventories of $1,984 and $1,369 at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, were valued under
the fifo method. stores and supplies inventories of $268 and
$259 at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, were
valued under the average cost method.
10.
property, plant
and equipment
december 31,
buildings
$
4,284
$
4,111
equipment
21,783
20,537
land
construction
1,403
1,519
$
27,954
$
26,593
property, plant and equipment includes gross assets acquired
under capital leases of $54 and $55 at december31, 2008
and 2007, respectively. related amounts included in accumulated
depreciation were $35 and $33 at december31, 2008 and 2007.
f-20
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
11.
goodwill and
other intangible assets
goodwill
the following table summarizes changes in the carrying amount of
goodwill for the year ended december31, 2008, by
reportable segment:
balance
balance
as of
goodwill
as of
december31,
adjustments and
december31,
acquisitions
agriculture& nutrition
$
$
$
coatings& color technologies
-
electronic& communication technologies
-
performance materials
(1
)
safety& protection
other
-
(11
)
total
$
2,135
$
$
2,074
changes in goodwill in 2008 resulted from purchase accounting
refinements and other acquisitions and divestitures. in 2008,
the company performed impairment tests for goodwill and
determined that no significant goodwill impairments existed.
other intangible
assets
the following table summarizes the gross carrying amounts and
accumulated amortization of other intangible assets by major
class:
december31, 2008
december31, 2007
accumulated
accumulated
gross
amortization
net
gross
amortization
net
intangible assets subject to amortization (definite-lived)
purchased and licensed technology
$
2,420
$
(1,356
)
$
1,064
$
2,410
$
(1,142
)
$
1,268
patents
(45
)
(56
)
trademarks
(19
)
(17
)
other1
(260
)
(237
)
3,236
(1,680
)
1,556
3,154
(1,452
)
1,702
intangible assets not subject to amortization
(indefinite-lived)
trademarks/tradenames
-
-
pioneer
germplasm2
-
-
1,154
-
1,154
1,154
-
1,154
$
4,390
$
(1,680
)
$
2,710
$
4,308
$
(1,452
)
$
2,856
primarily consists of sales and
grower networks, customer lists, marketing and manufacturing
alliances and noncompetition agreements.
pioneer germplasm is the pool of
genetic source material and body of knowledge gained from the
development and delivery stage of plant breeding. the company
recognized germplasm as an intangible asset upon the acquisition
of pioneer. this intangible asset is expected to contribute to
cash flows beyond the foreseeable future and there are no legal,
regulatory, contractual, or other factors which limit its useful
life. prior to the adoption of sfasno.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets, the company
amortized germplasm on a straight-line basis over a period of
forty years, the maximum period previously allowed under
generally accepted accounting principles.
the aggregate pre-tax amortization expense for definite-lived
intangible assets was $275 for 2008, $213 for 2007, and $227 for
2006. the estimated aggregate pre-tax amortization expense for
2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013 is
f-21
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
$270, $210, $200, $180 and $160, respectively, including amounts
that will be reported in cost of goods sold and other operating
charges.
12.
summarized
financial information for affiliated companies
summarized combined financial information for affiliated
companies for which the equity method of accounting is used (see
note1)is shown on a 100percent basis. the most
significant of these affiliates at december31, 2008, are
dupont teijin films, dupont-toray company ltd. and
dupont-mitsui, all of which are owned 50percent by the
company. dividends received from equity affiliates were $87 in
2008, $88 in 2007 and $61 in 2006.
results of operations
net
sales1
$
3,064
$
3,414
$
3,491
earnings before income taxes
net income
duponts equity in (losses) earnings of affiliates:
partnerships-pretax2
(4
)
(19
)
corporate joint ventures-after tax
write-down of
investment3
-
(165
)
-
$
$
(130
)
$
includes sales to dupont of $390 in
2008, $496 in 2007, and $624 in 2006.
income taxes are reflected in the
companys provision for income tax.
impairment charge of $165 to write
down the companys investment in a polyester films joint
venture in the performance materials segment. as a result, at
december31, 2007, dupont ceased using the equity method of
accounting for three legal entities within the joint venture.
financial position at december 31,
current assets
$
1,638
$
1,345
noncurrent assets
1,304
1,325
total assets
2,942
2,670
short-term
borrowings1
other current liabilities
long-term
borrowings1
other long-term liabilities
total liabilities
1,529
1,309
duponts investment in affiliates (includes advances)
$
$
the companys pro rata
interest in total borrowings was $288 in 2008 and $246 in 2007,
of which $25 in 2008 and $48 in 2007 were guaranteed by the
company. these amounts are included in the guarantees disclosed
in note 19.
13.
other
assets
december 31,
employee benefitspension (note21)
$
-
$
2,187
long-term investments in securities
deferred income taxes (note6)
3,087
1,523
miscellaneous
$
4,055
$
4,363
included within long-term investments in securities are
securities for which market values are not readily available
(cost investments) and securities classified as
available-for-sale. the companys cost investments totaled
$71 and
f-22
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
$61 at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. the
companys available for sale securities totaled $22 and $29
at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
14.
accounts
payable
december 31,
trade payables
$
2,591
$
2,610
payables to banks
miscellaneous
$
3,128
$
3,172
trade payables includes $73 in 2008 and $34 for 2007 due to
equity affiliates. payables to banks represent checks issued on
certain disbursement accounts but not presented to the banks for
payment. the reported amounts shown above approximate fair value
because of the short-term maturity of these obligations.
15.
short-term
borrowings and capital lease obligations
december 31,
commercial paper
$
$
1,198
other loans-various currencies
long-term debt payable within one year
1,563
capital lease obligations
$
2,012
$
1,370
the estimated fair value of the companys short-term
borrowings, including interest rate financial instruments, based
on quoted market prices for the same or similar issues, or on
current rates offered to the company for debt of the same
remaining maturities, was $2,000 and $1,400 at december31,
2008 and 2007, respectively.
unused bank credit lines were approximately $2,700 and $4,300 at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. these lines are
available to support short-term liquidity needs and general
corporate purposes including letters of credit. outstanding
letters of credit were approximately $325 and $255 at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. these letters of
credit support commitments made in the ordinary course of
business.
the weighted-average interest rate on short-term borrowings
outstanding at december31, 2008 and 2007 was 5.4 and
4.3percent, respectively. the increase in interest rate
for 2008 was due primarily to long-term debt maturing within one
year.
16.
other accrued
liabilities
december 31,
compensation and other employee-related costs
$
$
deferred revenue
1,037
employee benefits (note21)
discounts and rebates
derivative instruments
miscellaneous
1,305
1,089
$
4,460
$
3,823
deferred revenue principally includes advance customer payments
related to businesses within the agriculture&
nutrition segment. miscellaneous other accrued liabilities
principally includes accrued plant and operating
f-23
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
expenses, accrued litigation costs, employee separation costs in
connection with the companys restructuring programs, the
estimated fair value of certain guarantees and accrued
environmental remediation costs.
17.
long-term
borrowings and capital lease obligations
december 31,
u.s. dollar:
industrial development bonds due 2026,
$
$
medium-term notes due
5.75%notes due
5.88%notes due
6.88%notes due
20093,4
4.125%notes due
4.75%notes due 2012
5.00%notes due 2013
5.00%notes due 2013
-
5.875%notes due 2014
-
4.875%notes due 2014
5.25%notes due 2016
6.00%notes due
1,463
-
6.50%debentures due 2028
5.60%notes due 2036
other loans (average interest rate of
3.9percent)3
foreign currency denominated loans:
euro loans (average interest rate of
3.2percent)3
other loans (various
currencies)3
9,194
5,966
less short-term portion of long-term debt
1,563
7,631
5,945
capital lease obligations
total
$
7,638
$
5,955
average interest rates on fixed
rate industrial development bonds for december31, 2008 and
2007, were 6.0percent.
average interest rates on
medium-term notes at december31, 2008 and 2007, were
4.0percent and 5.1percent, respectively.
includes long-term debt due within
one year.
the company has outstanding
interest rate swap agreements with notional amounts totaling
$1,150. over the remaining terms of the notes and debentures,
the company will receive fixed payments equivalent to the
underlying debt and pay floating payments based on usd libor.
the fair value of the swaps was an asset of $43 and $19 at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
during 2008, the interest rate swap
agreement associated with these notes was terminated. the gain
will be amortized over the remaining life of the bond, resulting
in an effective yield of 3.85percent.
the increase in total debt for 2008 is mainly due to the
issuance of $750 of 5.00%senior notes due 2013, $1,250 of
6.00%senior notes due 2018 and $1,000 of
5.875%senior notes due 2014.
maturities of long-term borrowings are $936, $13, $400 and
$1,758 for the years 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013, respectively,
and $4,524 thereafter.
the estimated fair value of the companys long-term
borrowings, including interest rate financial instruments, based
on quoted market prices for the same or similar issues or on
current rates offered to the company for debt of the same
remaining maturities was $7,700 and $6,000 at december31,
2008 and 2007, respectively.
f-24
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
18.
other
liabilities
december 31,
employee benefits:
accrued other long-term benefit costs (note21)
$
3,742
$
3,481
accrued pension benefit costs (note21)
5,168
1,663
accrued environmental remediation costs
miscellaneous
1,970
1,838
$
11,169
$
7,255
miscellaneous includes asset retirement obligations, litigation
accruals, tax contingencies, royalty payables and certain
obligations related to divested businesses.
19.
commitments and
contingent liabilities
guarantees
product warranty
liability
the company warrants that its products meet standard
specifications. the companys product warranty liability as
of december31, 2008 and 2007 was $24 and $23,
respectively. estimates for warranty costs are based on
historical claims experience.
indemnifications
in connection with acquisitions and divestitures, the company
has indemnified respective parties against certain liabilities
that may arise in connection with these transactions and
business activities prior to the completion of the transaction.
the term of these indemnifications, which typically pertain to
environmental, tax and product liabilities, is generally
indefinite. in addition, the company indemnifies its duly
elected or appointed directors and officers to the fullest
extent permitted by delaware law, against liabilities incurred
as a result of their activities for the company, such as adverse
judgments relating to litigation matters. if the indemnified
party were to incur a liability or have a liability increase as
a result of a successful claim, pursuant to the terms of the
indemnification, the company would be required to reimburse the
indemnified party. the maximum amount of potential future
payments is generally unlimited. the carrying amount recorded
for all indemnifications as of december31, 2008 and
december31, 2007 was $110 and $101, respectively. although
it is reasonably possible that future payments may exceed
amounts accrued, due to the nature of indemnified items, it is
not possible to make a reasonable estimate of the maximum
potential loss or range of loss. no assets are held as
collateral and no specific recourse provisions exist.
in connection with the 2004 sale of the majority of the net
assets of textiles and interiors, the company indemnified the
purchasers, subsidiaries of koch industries, inc. (invista),
against certain liabilities primarily related to taxes, legal
and environmental matters and other representations and
warranties under the purchase and sale agreement. the estimated
fair value of the indemnity obligations under the purchase and
sale agreement was $70 and was included in the indemnifications
balance of $110 at december31, 2008. under the purchase
and sale agreement, the companys total indemnification
obligation for the majority of the representations and
warranties cannot exceed $1,400. the other indemnities are not
subject to this limit. in march 2008, invista filed suit in the
southern district of new york alleging that certain
representations and warranties in the purchase and sale
agreement were breached and, therefore, that dupont is obligated
to indemnify it. dupont disagrees with the extent and value of
invistas claims. dupont has not changed its estimate of
its total indemnification obligation under the purchase and sale
agreement as a result of the lawsuit.
obligations for
equity affiliates& others
the company has directly guaranteed various debt obligations
under agreements with third parties related to equity
affiliates, customers, suppliers and other affiliated and
unaffiliated companies. at december31, 2008, the company
had directly guaranteed $605 of such obligations, and $121
relating to guarantees of historical obligations for divested
subsidiaries. this represents the maximum potential amount of
future (undiscounted) payments that the
f-25
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
company could be required to make under the guarantees. the
company would be required to perform on these guarantees in the
event of default by the guaranteed party.
the company assesses the payment/performance risk by assigning
default rates based on the duration of the guarantees. these
default rates are assigned based on the external credit rating
of the counterparty or through internal credit analysis and
historical default history for counterparties that do not have
published credit ratings. for counterparties without an external
rating or available credit history, the non-investment grade
default rate is used.
at december31, 2008 and december31, 2007, a
liability of $121 and $135, respectively, was recorded for these
obligations, representing the amount of payment/performance risk
for which the company deems probable. this liability is
principally related to obligations of the companys
polyester films joint venture, which are guaranteed by the
company.
in certain cases, the company has recourse to assets held as
collateral, as well as personal guarantees from customers and
suppliers. assuming liquidation, these assets are estimated to
cover approximately 18percent of the $300 of guaranteed
obligations of customers and suppliers. set forth below are the
companys guaranteed obligations at december31, 2008:
short-term
long-term
total
obligations for customers, suppliers and other affiliated and
unaffiliated
companies1,
2:
bank borrowings (terms up to 5years)
$
$
$
leases on equipment and facilities
(terms less than 1year)
-
obligations for equity
affiliates2:
bank borrowings (terms up to 4years)
-
leases on equipment and facilities
(terms up to 2years)
-
total obligations for customers, suppliers, other affiliated and
unaffiliated companies and equity affiliates
obligations for divested
subsidiaries3:
conoco (terms up to 18years)
consolidation coal sales company
(terms from 2 to 3years)
-
total obligations for divested subsidiaries
$
$
$
existing guarantees for customers,
suppliers and other unaffiliated companies arose as part of
contractual agreements.
existing guarantees for equity
affiliates and other affiliated companies arose for liquidity
needs in normal operations.
the company has guaranteed certain
obligations and liabilities of its divested subsidiaries conoco
and consolidation coal sales company. conoco and consolidation
coal sales company have indemnified the company for any
liabilities the company may incur pursuant to these guarantees.
operating
leases
the company uses various leased facilities and equipment in its
operations. the terms for these leased assets vary depending on
the lease agreement.
at december31, 2008, the company has one master operating
lease program relating to miscellaneous short-lived equipment
with an unamortized value of approximately $106. lease payments
for these assets totaled $55 in 2008, $59 in 2007 and $58 in
2006, and were reported as operating expenses in the
consolidated income statements. the leases under this program
are considered operating leases and accordingly the related
assets and liabilities are not recorded on the consolidated
balance sheets. furthermore, the lease payments associated with
this program vary based on one month usd libor. in november
2008, the lessor notified the company that the program will
terminate
f-26
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
by november 2009. prior to that time, the company may either
purchase the assets for their unamortized value or arrange for
the sale of the assets and remit the proceeds to the lessor. if
the assets are sold and the proceeds are less than the
unamortized value, the company must pay to the lessor the
difference between the proceeds and the unamortized value, up to
the residual value guarantee, which totaled $92 at
december31, 2008.
future minimum lease payments (including residual value
guarantee amounts) under non-cancelable operating leases are
$320, $193, $161, $134 and $104 for the years 2009, 2010, 2011,
2012 and 2013, respectively, and $162 for subsequent years and
are not reduced by non-cancelable minimum sublease rentals due
in the future in the amount of $10. net rental expense under
operating leases was $320 in 2008, $322 in 2007, and $282 in
2006.
asset retirement
obligations
the company has recorded asset retirement obligations primarily
associated with closure, reclamation and removal costs for
mining operations related to the production of titanium dioxide
in coatings& color technologies. the companys
asset retirement obligation liabilities were $60 and $62 at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
litigation
pfoa
environmental
actions involving the washington works site and surrounding
area
in november 2006, dupont entered into an order on consent under
the safe drinking water act (sdwa) with the
u.s.environmental protection agency (epa) establishing a
precautionary interim screening level for pfoa (collectively,
perfluorooctanoic acids and its salts, including the ammonium
salt) of 0.5 parts per billion (ppb) in drinking water sources
in the area around the dupont washington works site located in
parkersburg, west virginia. as part of the order on consent,
dupont conducted surveys, sampling and analytical testing of
certain area public and private water systems, and installed and
is operating water treatment systems in the area.
in late 2005 dupont and the epa entered into a memorandum of
understanding (epa mou) that required dupont to monitor pfoa in
the soil, air, water and biota around the washington works site.
the data generated in the monitoring process is subject to a
third party peer review. at december31, 2008, dupont has
accruals of about $0.5 to fund its activities under the epa mou
and order on consent.
epa
administrative complaints
in july and december 2004, the epa filed administrative
complaints against dupont alleging that the company failed to
comply with the technical reporting requirements of the toxic
substances control act (tsca) and the resource conservation and
recovery act (rcra) regarding pfoa. under a 2005 agreement
settling the matter, the company paid civil fines of $10.25 and
will complete two supplemental environmental projects at a total
cost of $6.25.
actions:
drinking water
in august 2001, a class action, captioned leach v. dupont, was
filed in west virginia state court against dupont and the lubeck
public service district. dupont uses pfoa as a processing aid to
manufacture fluoropolymer resins and dispersions at various
sites around the world including its washington works plant in
west virginia. the complaint alleged that residents living near
the washington works facility had suffered, or may suffer,
deleterious health effects from exposure to pfoa in drinking
water. the relief sought included damages for medical
monitoring, diminution of property values and punitive damages
plus injunctive relief to stop releases of pfoa. dupont and
attorneys for the class reached a settlement agreement in 2004
and as a result, the company established accruals of $108 in
2004. the agreement was approved by the wood county circuit
court on february28, 2005 after a fairness hearing. the
settlement binds a class of approximately 80,000 residents. as
defined by the court, the class includes those individuals who
have consumed, for at least one year, water containing 0.05 ppb
or greater of pfoa from any of six designated public water
sources or from sole source private wells.
in july 2005, the company paid the plaintiffs
attorneys fees and expenses of $23 and made a payment of
$70, which class counsel has designated to fund a community
health project. the company is also funding a series of health
studies by an independent science panel of experts in the
communities exposed to pfoa to evaluate available scientific
evidence on whether any probable link exists between exposure to
pfoa and human disease. the company expects the independent
science panel to complete these health studies between 2009 and
year-end 2011
f-27
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
at a total estimated cost of $26, of which $5 was originally
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account. in addition, the
company is providing state-of-the art water treatment systems
designed to reduce the level of pfoa in water to six area water
districts, including the little hocking water association
(lhwa), until the science panel determines that pfoa does not
cause disease or until applicable water standards can be met
without such treatment. all of the water treatment systems are
operating. the estimated cost of constructing, operating and
maintaining these systems is about $22 of which $10 was
originally placed in an interest-bearing escrow account. at
december31, 2008, the accrual balance relating to the
funding of the independent science panel health study and the
water treatment systems was $16, including $9 in interest
bearing escrow accounts.
the settlement resulted in the dismissal of all claims asserted
in the lawsuit except for personal injury claims. if the
independent science panel concludes that no probable link exists
between exposure to pfoa and any diseases, then the settlement
would also resolve personal injury claims. if it concludes that
a probable link does exist between exposure to pfoa and any
diseases, then dupont would also fund up to $235 for a medical
monitoring program to pay for such medical testing. in this
event, plaintiffs would retain their right to pursue personal
injury claims. all other claims in the lawsuit would remain
dismissed by the settlement. dupont believes that it is remote
that the panel will find a probable link. therefore, at
december31, 2008, the company had not established any
accruals related to medical monitoring or personal injury
claims. however, there can be no assurance as to what the
independent science panel will conclude.
in june 2007, the lhwa notified dupont that it intends to file
suit under rcra alleging imminent and substantial
endangerment to health and or the environment based on
detection of pfoa in its wells. dupont denies any such
endangerment exists and intends to vigorously defend itself if a
lawsuit is filed.
in september 2007, lhwa refiled the suit it originally filed in
ohio state court and voluntarily dismissed in 2006. the suit
claims that perfluorinated compounds, including pfoa, allegedly
released from the washington works plant contaminated
lhwas well fields and underlying aquifer. lhwas
complaint seeks a variety of relief including compensatory and
punitive damages, and an injunction requiring dupont to provide
a new pristine well field and the infrastructure to
deliverit.
in the second quarter 2006, three purported class actions were
filed alleging that drinking water had been contaminated by pfoa
in excess of 0.05 ppb due to alleged releases from certain
dupont plants. one of these cases was filed in west virginia
state court on behalf of customers of the parkersburg city water
district, but was removed on duponts motion to the
u.s.district court for the southern district of west
virginia. in september 2008, the u.s.district court ruled
that the case could not proceed as a class action.
plaintiffs appeal of the ruling was denied. the three
plaintiffs have filed a case based on their individual claims.
the other two purported class actions were filed in new jersey.
one was filed in federal court on behalf of individuals who
allegedly drank water contaminated by releases from
duponts chambers works plant in deepwater, new jersey. the
second was filed in state court on behalf of customers serviced
primarily by the pennsville township water department and was
removed to new jersey federal district court on duponts
motion. the new jersey cases have been combined for purposes of
discovery and the complaints have been amended to allege that
drinking water had been contaminated by pfoa in excess of 0.04
ppb. in december 2008, the court denied class action status in
both cases, but ordered additional briefing on certain issues.
the plaintiff in one of the cases is seeking leave from the
third circuit court of appeals to appeal the denial. the company
is defending itself vigorously against these lawsuits alleging
contamination of drinking water sources.
while dupont believes that it is reasonably possible that it
could incur losses related to pfoa matters in addition to those
matters discussed above for which it has established accruals, a
range of such losses, if any, cannot be reasonably estimated at
this time.
f-28
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
consumer products
classactions
number
of cases
balance at january1, 2006
filed
resolved
-
balance at december31, 2006
filed
resolved
-
balance at december31, 2007
filed
-
resolved
(1
)
balance at december31, 2008
as of december31, 2008, twenty-two intrastate class
actions are pending on behalf of consumers who have purchased
cookware with
teflon
non-stick coating in federal district courts against dupont. the
actions were filed on behalf of consumers in california,
colorado, connecticut, delaware, the district of columbia,
florida, illinois, indiana, iowa, kentucky, massachusetts,
michigan, missouri, new jersey, new mexico, new york, ohio,
oklahoma, pennsylvania, south carolina, texas and west virginia.
one of the two actions originally filed in california was
dismissed in the second quarter 2008 for failure to prosecute.
in december 2008, the federal district court for the southern
district of iowa ruled that the cases could not proceed as a
class action, but must be tried separately. plaintiffs are
seeking leave to appeal the ruling.
the actions allege that dupont violated state laws by engaging
in deceptive and unfair trade practices by failing to
disclose to consumers that products containing
teflon
were or are potentially harmful to consumers. the actions
seek unspecified monetary damages for consumers who purchased
cooking products containing
teflon,
as well as the creation of funds for medical monitoring and
independent scientific research, attorneys fees and other
relief. in december 2005, a motion was filed by a single named
plaintiff in the superior court for the province of quebec,
canada seeking authorization to institute a class action on
behalf of all quebec consumers who have purchased or used
kitchen items, household appliances or food-packaging containing
teflon
or
zonyl
non-stick coatings. a ruling on this motion is expected from the
court in 2009. damages are not quantified, but are alleged to
include the cost of replacement products as well as one hundred
dollars per class member as exemplary damages.
the company believes that the twenty-two class actions and the
motion filed in quebec are without merit and, therefore,
believes it is remote that it will incur losses related to these
actions. at december31, 2008, the company had not
established any accruals related to these matters.
elastomers
antitrust matters
since 2002, the u.s., european union (eu) and canadian antitrust
authorities have investigated the synthetic rubber markets for
possible violations. these investigations included dupont dow
elastomers, llc (dde), as a result of its participation in the
polychloroprene (pcp) and ethylene propylene diene monomer
(epdm) markets. dde was a joint venture between the dow chemical
company (dow) and dupont.
in april 2004, dupont and dow entered into a series of
agreements under which dupont obtained complete control over
directing ddes response to these investigations and the
related litigation and dupont agreed to a disproportionate share
of the ventures liabilities and costs related to these
matters. consequently, dupont bears any potential liabilities
and costs up to the initial $150. dow is obligated to indemnify
dupont for up to $72.5 by paying 15 to 30percent toward
liabilities and costs in excess of $150. on june30, 2005,
dde became a wholly owned subsidiary of dupont and was renamed
dupont performance elastomers, llc (dpe).
in july 2007, dpe pled guilty to conspiring to fix prices and
paid a fine of cdn $4, approximately $3.8 usd, resolving all
criminal antitrust allegations against it related to pcp in
canada.
f-29
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
in late march 2007, the eu antitrust authorities issued a
statement of objections that made antitrust allegations
regarding the pcp market against dpe, relating to the joint
ventures activities, and dupont, to which both responded.
in december 2007, the eu antitrust authorities issued their
decision, including the imposition of fines against dpe, dow and
dupont totaling euro59.25. in february 2008, dupont
appealed the decision to the eus court of first instance
which has jurisdiction to review the findings and adjust the
fine. it is very unlikely that the fine would be increased as a
result of the review. in march 2008, the company provisionally
paid the fine of euro59.25 ($90.9 usd); a portion of the
payment may be refunded if the appeal is successful. while a
decision on the february 2008 appeal has not been issued, the eu
antitrust authorities revised the december 2007 decision by
imposing an incremental fine on dow of euro4.425 ($6.5
usd). dow provisionally paid the incremental fine in the third
quarter of 2008 which dupont reimbursed under the agreements
between the companies.
dde resolved all criminal antitrust allegations against it
related to pcp in the u.s.through a plea agreement with
the department of justice (doj) in january 2005 which was
approved by the court on march29, 2005. the agreement
requires the subsidiary to pay a fine of $84 which, at its
election, is being paid in six equal, annual installments. the
annual installment payments for 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008 have
been made. the agreement also requires the subsidiary to provide
ongoing cooperation with the dojs investigation.
at december31, 2008, the company has accruals of
approximately $28 related to this matter and a receivable of
$3.9 for the remaining amount that it expects to be reimbursed
by dow.
benlate
in 1991, dupont began receiving claims by growers that use of
benlate
50 df fungicide had caused crop damage. dupont has since been
served with thousands of lawsuits, most of which have been
disposed of through trial, dismissal or settlement. the status
of
benlate
cases is indicated in the table below:
number
of cases
balance at january1, 2006
filed
-
resolved
(3
)
balance at december31, 2006
filed
resolved
(48
)
balance at december31, 2007
filed
-
resolved
(3
)
balance at december31, 2008
at december31, 2008, there were nine cases pending in
florida state court, involving allegations that
benlate
caused crop damage. plaintiffs appealed the courts 2006
dismissal of one of the nine cases for failure to prosecute and
the appellate court reinstated the case. two of the nine cases,
involving twenty-seven costa rican fern growers, were tried
during the second quarter of 2006 resulting in a $56 judgment
against the company, which was reduced to $24 on duponts
motion. at trial, the plaintiffs sought damages in the range of
$270 to $400. the plaintiffs and dupont have appealed the
verdict. dupont believes that the appeal will be resolved in its
favor and, therefore, has not established an accrual relating to
the judgment.
in the remaining two cases pending in florida, plaintiffs allege
damage to shrimping operations. these cases had been decided in
duponts favor, but in september 2007, the judge granted
plaintiffs motion for new trial thus reinstating the cases.
during the first half of 2008, three actions pending against the
company were resolved. one case in which the plaintiffs sought
to reopen settlements with the company and one health effects
case were effectively dismissed. plaintiffs failed in their
effort to appeal a second reopener case that had been settled in
part for $1.2.
f-30
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
the company does not believe that
benlate
caused the damages alleged in each of these cases and denies the
allegations of fraud and misconduct. the company continues to
defend itself in ongoing matters. as of december31, 2008,
the company has incurred costs and expenses of approximately
$2,000 associated with these matters, but does not expect
additional significant costs or expenses associated with the
remaining 11 cases. the company has recovered approximately $275
of its costs and expenses through insurance and does not expect
additional insurance recoveries, if any, to be significant. at
december31, 2008, the company does not have any remaining
accruals related to
benlate.
spelter, west
virginia
in september 2006, a west virginia state court certified a class
action against dupont that seeks relief including the provision
of remediation services and property value diminution damages
for 7,000 residential properties in the vicinity of a closed
zinc smelter in spelter, west virginia. the action also seeks
medical monitoring for an undetermined number of residents in
the class area. the smelter was owned and operated by at least
three companies between 1910 and 2001, including dupont between
1928 and 1950. dupont performed remedial measures at the request
of the epa in the late 1990s and in 2001 repurchased the site to
facilitate and complete the remediation. the fall 2007 trial was
conducted in four phases: liability, medical monitoring,
property and punitive damages. the jury found against dupont in
all four phases awarding $55.5 for property remediation and
$196.2 in punitive damages. in post trial motions, the court
adopted the plaintiffs forty-year medical monitoring plan
estimated by plaintiffs to cost $130 and granted
plaintiffs attorneys legal fees of $127 plus $8 in
expenses. in june 2008, dupont filed its petitions for appeal
with the west virginia supreme court seeking review of a number
of issues associated with the trial courts decisions
before, during and after the trial. on september25, 2008,
the court decided to accept the case and consider the
parties appeal on the merits. a decision on the appeal is
not expected until the second half of 2009. effective with
dupont posting a bond, the execution of judgment against the
company is stayed pending final disposition of duponts
appeal to the west virginia supreme court of appeals. as of
december31, 2008, the company had recorded accruals of
$55, although given the uncertainties inherent in litigation,
there can be no assurance as to the final outcome.
general
the company is subject to various lawsuits and claims arising
out of the normal course of its business. these lawsuits and
claims include actions based on alleged exposures to products,
intellectual property and environmental matters and contract and
antitrust claims. management has noted a nationwide trend in
purported class actions against chemical manufacturers generally
seeking relief such as medical monitoring, property damages,
off-site remediation and punitive damages arising from alleged
environmental torts without claiming present personal injuries.
such cases may allege contamination from unregulated substances
or remediated sites. although it is not possible to predict the
outcome of these various lawsuits and claims, management does
not anticipate they will have a materially adverse effect on the
companys consolidated financial position or liquidity.
however, the ultimate liabilities may be significant to results
of operations in the period recognized. the company accrues for
contingencies when the information available indicates that it
is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of
the liability can be reasonably estimated.
environmental
the company is also subject to contingencies pursuant to
environmental laws and regulations that in the future may
require the company to take further action to correct the
effects on the environment of prior disposal practices or
releases of chemical or petroleum substances by the company or
other parties. the company accrues for environmental remediation
activities consistent with the policy set forth in note1.
much of this liability results from the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act (cercla,
often referred to as superfund), the resource conservation and
recovery act (rcra) and similar state laws. these laws require
the company to undertake certain investigative and remedial
activities at sites where the company conducts or once conducted
operations or at sites where company-generated waste was
disposed. the accrual also includes estimated costs related to a
number of sites identified by the company for which it is
probable that environmental remediation will be required, but
which are not currently the subject of cercla, rcra or state
enforcement activities.
f-31
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
remediation activities vary substantially in duration and cost
from site to site. these activities, and their associated costs,
depend on the mix of unique site characteristics, evolving
remediation technologies, diverse regulatory agencies and
enforcement policies, as well as the presence or absence of
potentially responsible parties. at december31, 2008 and
2007, the consolidated balance sheets included a liability of
$379 and $357, respectively, relating to these matters and, in
managements opinion, is appropriate based on existing
facts and circumstances. the average time frame, over which the
accrued or presently unrecognized amounts may be paid, based on
past history, is estimated to be
15-20years.
considerable uncertainty exists with respect to these costs and,
under adverse changes in circumstances, potential liability may
range up to two to three times the amount accrued as of
december31, 2008.
other
the company has various purchase commitments incident to the
ordinary conduct of business. in the aggregate, such commitments
are not at prices in excess of current market.
20.
stockholders
equity
the companys board of directors authorized a
$2billion share buyback plan in june 2001. during 2008 and
2007, there were no purchases of stock under this program.
during 2005, the company purchased and retired 9.9million
shares at a total cost of $505. as of december31, 2008,
the company has purchased 20.5million shares at a total
cost of $962. management has not established a timeline for the
buyback of the remaining stock under this plan.
in addition to the plan described above, in october 2005 the
board of directors authorized a $5billion share buyback
plan. the company entered into an accelerated share repurchase
agreement with goldman sachs& co. (goldman sachs)
under which the company purchased and retired 75.7million
shares of duponts outstanding common stock from goldman
sachs on october27, 2005 at a price of $39.62 per share,
with goldman sachs purchasing an equivalent number of shares in
the open market over the following nine-month period.
on july27, 2006, goldman sachs completed its purchase of
75.7million shares of duponts common stock at a
volume weighted average price (vwap) of $41.99 per share. upon
the conclusion of the agreement in 2006, the company paid $180
in cash to goldman sachs to settle the agreement. the final
settlement price was based upon the difference between the vwap
per share for the nine-month period, which ended july27,
2006, and the purchase price of $39.62 per share. the amount
paid to settle the contract was recorded as a reduction to
additional paid-in capital during the third quarter 2006. in
addition, the company made open market purchases of its shares
in the third quarter 2006 for $100 at an average price of $42.27
per share.
during 2007, the company paid $1.7billion to purchase and
immediately retire 34.7million shares at an average price
of $48.85 per share. as of december31, 2007, the company
has completed the $5billion share buyback plan with the
purchase and retirement of 112.8million shares at an
average price of $44.33 per share.
common stock held in treasury is recorded at cost. when retired,
the excess of the cost of treasury stock over its par value is
allocated between reinvested earnings and additional paid-in
capital.
f-32
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
set forth below is a reconciliation of common stock share
activity for the three years ended december31, 2008:
shares of common stock
issued
held in treasury
balance january1, 2006
1,006,652,000
(87,041,000
)
issued
4,823,000
-
repurchased
-
(2,366,000
)
retired
(2,366,000
)
2,366,000
balance december31, 2006
1,009,109,000
(87,041,000
)
issued
11,916,000
-
repurchased
-
(34,695,000
)
retired
(34,695,000
)
34,695,000
balance december31, 2007
986,330,000
(87,041,000
)
issued
3,085,000
-
balance december31, 2008
989,415,000
(87,041,000
)
the pre-tax, tax and after-tax effects of the components of
other comprehensive income / (loss) are shown below:
pretax
tax
after-tax
cumulative translation adjustment
$
(120
)
$
-
$
(120
)
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
(312
)
(199
)
pension benefits (note21)
(6,326
)
2,204
(4,122
)
other benefits (note21)
(423
)
(272
)
net unrealized losses on securities
(16
)
(11
)
other comprehensive loss
$
(7,197
)
$
2,473
$
(4,724
)
cumulative translation adjustment
$
$
-
$
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
(15
)
pension benefits (note21)
1,028
(388
)
other benefits (note21)
(168
)
net unrealized gains on securities
(2
)
other comprehensive income
$
1,646
$
(573
)
$
1,073
cumulative translation adjustment
$
$
-
$
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
(9
)
minimum pension liability adjustment
(54
)
net unrealized gains on securities
(3
)
other comprehensive income
$
$
(66
)
$
f-33
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
balances of related after-tax components comprising accumulated
other comprehensive loss are summarized below:
december 31,
cumulative translation adjustment
$
$
$
net revaluation and clearance of cash flow hedges to earnings
(158
)
net unrealized (loss)/gain on securities
(3
)
pension benefits
net losses
(5,527
)
(1,395
)
(2,022
)
net prior service cost
(107
)
(117
)
(130
)
other benefits
net losses
(511
)
(307
)
(720
)
net prior service benefit
$
(5,518
)
$
(794
)
$
(1,867
)
21.
long-term
employee benefits
the company offers various long-term benefits to its employees.
where permitted by applicable law, the company reserves the
right to change, modify or discontinue the plans.
defined benefit
pensions
the company has both funded and unfunded noncontributory defined
benefit pension plans covering a majority of the
u.s.employees. the benefits under these plans are based
primarily on years of service and employees pay near
retirement. the companys funding policy is consistent with
the funding requirements of federal laws and regulations.
pension coverage for employees of the companys
non-u.s.consolidated
subsidiaries is provided, to the extent deemed appropriate,
through separate plans. obligations under such plans are funded
by depositing funds with trustees, under insurance policies, or
remain unfunded.
other long-term
employee benefits
the parent company and certain subsidiaries provide medical,
dental and life insurance benefits to pensioners and survivors,
and disability and life insurance protection to employees. the
associated plans for retiree benefits are unfunded and the cost
of the approved claims is paid from company funds. essentially
all of the cost and liabilities for these retiree benefit plans
are attributable to the u.s.parent company plans. the
retiree medical plan is contributory with pensioners and
survivors contributions adjusted annually to achieve a
50/50 target sharing of cost increases between the company and
pensioners and survivors. in addition, limits are applied to the
companys portion of the retiree medical cost coverage.
employee life insurance and disability benefit plans are insured
in many countries. however, primarily in the u.s., such plans
are generally self-insured or are fully experience-rated.
obligations and expenses for self-insured and fully
experience-rated plans are reflected in the figures below.
f-34
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
summarized information on the companys pension and other
long-term employee benefit plans is as follows:
pension benefits
other benefits
obligations and funded status at december 31,
change in benefit obligation
benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
22,206
$
22,849
$
3,796
$
4,396
service cost
interest cost
1,286
1,228
plan participants contributions
actuarial loss (gain)
(664
)
(728
)
(565
)
benefits paid
(1,548
)
(1,544
)
(457
)
(464
)
amendments
-
-
net effects of acquisitions/divestitures
-
-
benefit obligation at end of year
$
21,506
$
22,206
$
4,072
$
3,796
change in plan assets
fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
22,618
$
21,909
$
-
$
-
actual gain (loss) on plan assets
(5,142
)
1,963
-
-
employer contributions
plan participants contributions
benefits paid
(1,548
)
(1,544
)
(457
)
(464
)
net effects of acquisitions/divestitures
-
-
-
fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
16,209
$
22,618
$
-
$
-
funded status
u.s. plans with plan assets
$
(3,420
)
$
2,061
$
-
$
-
non-u.s.
plans with plan assets
(452
)
(90
)
-
-
all other plans
(1,425
)1
(1,559
)1
(4,072
)
(3,796
)
total
$
(5,297
)
$
$
(4,072
)
$
(3,796
)
amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheet consist of:
other assets (note13)
$
-
$
2,187
$
-
$
-
other accrued liabilities (note16)
(129
)
(112
)
(330
)
(315
)
other liabilities (note18)
(5,168
)
(1,663
)
(3,742
)
(3,481
)
net amount recognized
$
(5,297
)
$
$
(4,072
)
$
(3,796
)
includes pension plans maintained
around the world where funding is not permissible or customary.
the pre-tax amounts recognized in accumulated other
comprehensive loss are summarized below:
pension benefits
other benefits
december 31,
net loss
$
8,401
$
2,060
$
$
prior service cost / (benefit)
(1,012
)
(1,118
)
$
8,549
$
2,222
$
(220
)
$
(643
)
the accumulated benefit obligation for all pension plans was
$19,779 and $20,404 at december31, 2008, and 2007,
respectively.
f-35
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
information for pension plans with projected benefit
obligation in excess of plan assets
projected benefit obligation
$
21,482
$
3,183
accumulated benefit obligation
19,755
2,829
fair value of plan assets
16,185
1,408
information for pension plans with accumulated benefit
obligations in excess of plan assets
projected benefit obligation
$
20,231
$
2,463
accumulated benefit obligation
18,646
2,256
fair value of plan assets
15,027
pension benefits
components of net periodic benefit cost (credit) and amounts
recognized in other comprehensive income
net periodic benefit (credit) cost
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
1,286
1,228
1,192
expected return on plan assets
(1,932
)
(1,800
)
(1,648
)
amortization of loss
amortization of prior service cost
curtailment/settlement (gain) loss
-
net periodic benefit (credit) cost
$
(362
)
$
(54
)
$
changes in plan assets and benefit obligations recognized in
other comprehensive income
net loss (gain)
6,397
(893
)
-
amortization of loss
(56
)
(117
)
-
prior service cost
-
-
amortization of prior service cost
(18
)
(18
)
-
curtailment/settlement loss
(1
)
-
-
total recognized in other comprehensive income
$
6,326
$
(1,028
)
$
-
total recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other
comprehensive income
$
5,964
$
(1,082
)
$
the estimated pre-tax net loss and prior service cost for the
defined benefit pension plans that will be amortized from
accumulated other comprehensive loss into net periodic benefit
cost during 2009 are $277 and $18, respectively.
f-36
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
other benefits
components of net periodic benefit cost and amounts
recognized in other comprehensive income
net periodic benefit cost
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
amortization of loss
amortization of prior service benefit
(106
)
(156
)
(156
)
net periodic benefit cost
$
$
$
changes in plan assets and benefit obligations recognized in
other comprehensive income
net (gain) / loss
$
$
(564
)
$
-
amortization of loss
(32
)
(72
)
-
prior service cost
-
-
amortization of prior service benefit
-
total recognized in other comprehensive income
$
$
(478
)
$
-
total recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other
comprehensive income
$
$
(286
)
$
the estimated pre-tax net loss and prior service credit for the
other long-term employee benefit plans that will be amortized
from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net periodic
benefit cost during 2009 are $50 and ($106), respectively.
pension benefits
other benefits
weighted-average assumptions used to
determine benefit obligations at december 31,
discount rate
6.14%
6.01%
6.25%
6.25%
rate of compensation increase
4.30%
4.28%
4.50%
4.50%
pension benefits
other benefits
weighted-average assumptions used to determine net periodic
benefit
cost for the years ended december 31,
discount rate
6.01%
5.56%
6.25
%
5.75
%
expected return on plan assets
8.74%
8.74%
-
-
rate of compensation increase
4.28%
4.32%
4.50
%
4.50
%
for determining u.s.plans net periodic benefit
costs, the discount rate, expected return on plan assets and the
rate of compensation increase were 6.25percent,
9.00percent and 4.50percent for 2008, and
5.75percent, 9.00percent and 4.50percent for
2007. the discount rate for determining the principal
u.s.pension plans net periodic benefit cost was
increased to 6.00percent as of august31, 2006 due to
re-measurement.
in august 2006, the company announced major changes to the
pension and defined contribution benefits that cover the
majority of its u.s.employees. effective january1,
2008, such full service employees on the rolls as of
december31, 2006 continue to accrue benefits in the
pension plan, but at a reduced rate of about one-third of its
previous level. in addition, company-paid postretirement
survivor benefits for these employees do not continue to grow
after december31, 2007. such employees hired after
december31, 2006 do not participate in the pension plan.
as a result of this plan amendment, the company was required to
re-measure its pension expense for the remainder of 2006,
reflecting plan assets and benefit obligations as of the
re-measurement date. better than
f-37
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
expected return on plan assets and a higher discount rate of
6.00percent decreased pre-tax pension expense for 2006 by
$72. for 2007, the plan amendment resulted in a reduction in
pre-tax pension expense of about $40. for 2008, the plan
amendment resulted in a reduction of about $40 in combined
pension and defined contribution plans expense.
the company utilizes published long-term high quality corporate
bond indices to determine the discount rate at measurement date.
where commonly available, the company considers indices of
various durations to reflect the timing of future benefit
payments.
the long-term rate of return on assets in the u.s.was
selected from within the reasonable range of rates determined by
(a)historical real returns (net of inflation) for the
asset classes covered by the investment policy and
(b)projections of inflation over the long-term period
during which benefits are payable to plan participants. for
non-u.s.plans,
assumptions reflect economic assumptions applicable to each
country.
assumed health care cost trend rates at december 31,
health care cost trend rate assumed for next year
8%
9%
rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline (the
ultimate trend rate)
5%
5%
year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate
assumed health care cost trend rates have a modest effect on the
amount reported for the health care plan. a one-percentage point
change in assumed health care cost trend rates would have the
following effects:
1-percentage
1-percentage
point increase
point decrease
effect on total of service and interest cost
$
$
(5
)
effect on postretirement benefit obligation
(63
)
plan
assets
the strategic asset allocation targets of the companys
pension plans as of december31, 2008, and the weighted
average asset allocation of these plans at december31,
2008, and 2007, by asset category were as follows:
plan assets at
december31,
strategic
asset category
target
equity securities
52%
49%
55%
debt securities
31%
31%
30%
real estate
7%
7%
5%
other*
10%
13%
10%
total
100%
100%
100%
*
mainly private equity and private
debt.
all pension plan assets in the u.s.are invested through a
single master trust fund. the strategic asset allocation for
this trust fund is selected by management, reflecting the
results of comprehensive asset liability modeling. the general
principles guiding investment of u.s.pension assets are
those embodied in the employee retirement income security act of
1974 (erisa). these principles include discharging the
companys investment responsibilities for the exclusive
benefit of plan participants and in accordance with the
prudent expert standard and other erisa rules and
regulations. the company establishes strategic asset allocation
percentage targets and appropriate benchmarks for significant
asset classes with the aim of achieving a prudent balance
between return and risk. strategic asset allocations in other
countries are selected in accordance with the laws and practices
of those countries. where appropriate, asset liability studies
are utilized
f-38
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
in this process. u.s.plan assets and a significant portion
of
non-u.s.plan
assets are managed by investment professionals employed by the
company. the remaining assets are managed by professional
investment firms unrelated to the company. the companys
pension investment professionals have discretion to manage the
assets within established asset allocation ranges approved by
senior management of the company. plans invest in securities
from a variety of countries to take advantage of the investment
opportunities that a global portfolio presents and to increase
portfolio diversification. additionally, pension trust funds are
permitted to enter into certain contractual arrangements
generally described as derivatives. derivatives are
primarily used to reduce specific market risks, hedge currency
and adjust portfolio duration and asset allocation in a
cost-effective manner.
the companys pension plans directly held $252
(2percent of total plan assets) and $440 (2percent
of total plan assets) of dupont common stock at
december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
cash
flow
contributions
in 2008, the company contributed $252 to its pension plans. no
contributions were required or made to the principal
u.s.pension plan trust fund in 2008 and no contributions
are required or expected to be made to this plan in 2009. the
pension protection act of 2006 (the act) was signed
into law in the u.s.in august 2006. the act introduced new
funding requirements for single-employer defined benefit pension
plans, provided guidelines for measuring pension plan assets and
pension obligations for funding purposes, introduced benefit
limitations for certain underfunded plans and raised tax
deduction limits for contributions to retirement plans. the new
funding requirements are generally effective for plan years
beginning after december31, 2007. the implementation of
the provisions of this act did not have a material impact on the
companys required contributions. the company expects to
contribute approximately $300 in 2009 to its pension plans other
than the principal u.s.pension plan and also expects to
make cash payments of $330 in 2009 under its other long-term
employee benefit plans.
in 2007, the company made contributions of $277 to its pension
plans. no contributions were required or made to the principal
u.s.pension plan trust fund in 2007. in 2006, the company
made contributions of $280 to its pension plans. no
contributions were required or made in the principal
u.s.pension plan trust fund for 2006.
estimated future
benefit payments
the following benefit payments, which reflect future service, as
appropriate, are expected to be paid:
pension
other
benefits
benefits
$
1,546
$
1,495
1,494
1,505
1,511
years 2014 2018
7,878
1,526
defined
contribution plan
the company sponsors several defined contribution plans, which
cover substantially all u.s.employees. the most
significant is the savings and investment plan (the plan). this
plan includes a non-leveraged employee stock ownership plan
(esop). employees are not required to participate in the esop
and those who do are free to diversify out of the esop. the
purpose of the plan is to provide additional retirement savings
benefits for employees and to provide employees an opportunity
to become stockholders of the company. the plan is a tax
qualified contributory profit sharing plan, with cash or
deferred arrangement and any eligible employee of the company
may participate. the company contributed an amount to the plan
in 2006 and 2007 equal to 50percent of the first
6percent of the employees contribution election. as
part of the retirement plan changes in august 2006, effective
january1, 2007, for employees hired on that date or
thereafter and effective january1, 2008, for active
employees as of december31, 2006, the company contributes
100percent of the first 6percent of the
employees contribution
f-39
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
election and also contributes 3percent of each eligible
employees eligible compensation regardless of the
employees contribution. in addition, the definition of
eligible compensation has been expanded to be similar to the
definition of eligible compensation used in determining pension
benefits.
the companys contributions to the u.s.parent
companys defined contribution plans were $189, $57 and $52
for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007, and 2006,
respectively. the companys matching contributions vest
immediately upon contribution. the 3percent automatic
company contribution also vests immediately for employees with
at least three years of service. in addition, the company made
contributions of $45, $42 and $34 for the years ended
december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively, to other
defined contribution plans. the company expects to contribute
about $255 to its defined contribution plans in 2009.
22.
compensation
plans
effective january1, 2006, the company adopted
sfas123r using the modified prospective application
transition method. as a result of the adoption of the fair value
recognition provisions of sfas123, as amended,
prospectively on january1, 2003, the adoption of
sfas123r did not have a material impact on the
companys financial position or results of operations.
prior to adoption of sfas123r, the nominal vesting
approach was followed for all awards. upon adoption of
sfas123r on january1, 2006, the company began
expensing new stock-based compensation awards using a
non-substantive approach, under which compensation costs are
recognized over at least six months for awards granted to
employees who are retirement eligible at the date of the grant
or would become retirement eligible during the vesting period of
the grant. prior to the adoption of sfas123r, the company
reported the tax benefit of stock option exercises as operating
cash flows. upon the adoption of sfas123r, tax benefits
resulting from tax deductions in excess of compensation cost
recognized for those options or restricted stock units are
reported as financing cash flows.
the total stock-based compensation cost included in the
consolidated income statements was $112, $144 and $140 for 2008,
2007 and 2006, respectively. the income tax benefits related to
stock-based compensation arrangements were $37, $48 and $46 for
2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
on april25, 2007, the shareholders approved the dupont
equity and incentive plan (eip). the eip
consolidated several of the companys existing compensation
plans (the stock performance plan, variable compensation plan,
and equity awards of the stock accumulation and deferred
compensation plan for directors) into one plan providing for
equity-based and cash incentive awards to certain employees,
directors and consultants. currently, equity-based compensation
awards consist of stock options, time-vested restricted stock
units (rsus), performance-based restricted stock units (psus)
and stock appreciation rights.
under the eip, the maximum number of shares reserved for the
grant or settlement of awards is 60million shares,
provided that each share in excess of 20million that is
issued with respect to any award that is not an option or stock
appreciation right will be counted against the 60million
share limit as four shares. at december31, 2008,
approximately 49million shares were authorized for future
grants under the companys eip. awards or grants made in
2007, prior to shareholder approval of the eip, were issued
under the companys previously existing compensation plans.
awards outstanding under each of these plans have not been
terminated. these awards remain outstanding and are administered
under the terms of the applicable existing plan. no further
awards will be made under the companys previously existing
compensation plans.
the companys compensation committee determines the
long-term incentive mix, including stock options, rsus and psus
and may authorize new grants annually.
stock
options
the purchase price of shares subject to option is equal to the
market price of the companys stock on the date of grant.
prior to 2004, options expired 10years from date of grant;
however, beginning in 2004, options serially vest over a
three-year period and carry a six-year option term. the plan
allows retirement eligible employees to retain any granted
awards upon retirement provided the employee has rendered at
least six months of service following grant date.
f-40
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
for purposes of determining the fair value of stock options
awards, the company uses the black-scholes option pricing model
and the assumptions set forth in the table below. the
weighted-average grant-date fair value of options granted in
2008, 2007 and 2006 was $5.30, $9.47 and $7.28, respectively.
dividend yield
3.7
%
2.9
%
3.8
%
volatility
18.86
%
21.11
%
25.02
%
risk-free interest rate
2.6
%
4.7
%
4.4
%
expected life (years)
4.5
4.5
4.5
the company determines the dividend yield by dividing the
current annual dividend on the companys stock by the
option exercise price. a historical daily measurement of
volatility is determined based on the expected life of the
option granted. the risk free interest rate is determined by
reference to the yield on an outstanding u.s.treasury note
with a term equal to the expected life of the option granted.
expected life is determined by reference to the companys
historical experience.
stock option awards as of december31, 2008, and changes
during the year then ended were as follows:
weighted
average
weighted
remaining
aggregate
number of
average
contractual
intrinsic
shares
exercise price
term
value (in
(in thousands)
(per share)
(years)
thousands)
outstanding, december31, 2007
74,537
$
46.66
granted
8,902
$
44.74
exercised
(2,233
)
$
41.42
forfeited
(392
)
$
45.67
cancelled
(4,784
)
$
57.85
outstanding, december31,
76,030
$
45.89
2.75
$-
exercisable, december31, 2008
55,952
$
44.55
2.43
$-
includes 10.2million options
outstanding from the 2002 corporate sharing program grants of
200shares to all eligible employees at an option price of
$44.50. these options are currently exercisable and expire
10years from date of grant.
the aggregate intrinsic values in the table above represent the
total pre-tax intrinsic value (the difference between the
companys closing stock price on the last trading day of
2008 and the exercise price, multiplied by the number of
in-the-money options) that would have been received by the
option holders had all option holders exercised their
in-the-money options at year end. the amount changes based on
the fair market value of the companys stock. total
intrinsic value of options exercised for 2008, 2007 and 2006
were $18, $96 and $22, respectively. in 2008, the company
realized a tax benefit of $6 from options exercised.
as of december31, 2008, $21 of total unrecognized
compensation cost related to stock options is expected to be
recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.58years.
rsus and
psus
in 2004, the company began issuing rsus in addition to stock
options. these rsus serially vest over a three-year period and,
upon vesting, convert one-for-one to dupont common stock. a
retirement eligible employee retains any granted awards upon
retirement provided the employee has rendered at least six
months of service following the grant date. additional rsus are
also granted periodically to key senior management employees.
these rsus generally vest over periods ranging from two to five
years. the fair value of all stock-settled rsus is based upon
the market price of the underlying common stock as of the grant
date.
f-41
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
the company also grants psus to senior leadership. in 2008,
there were 306,480 psus granted. vesting for psus granted in
2008 is equally based upon corporate revenue growth relative to
peer companies and total shareholder return (tsr) relative to
peer companies. performance and payouts are determined
independently for each metric. the actual award, delivered as
dupont common stock, can range from zero percent to
200percent of the original grant. the grant-date fair
value of the psus, subject to the tsr metric, was $63.86,
estimated using a monte carlo simulation. the grant-date fair
value of the psus, subject to the revenue metric, was based upon
the market price of the underlying common stock as of the grant
date.
for psus granted prior to 2008, vesting occurs upon attainment
of (i)corporate revenue growth relative to peer companies
and (ii)return on invested capital objectives (relative to
peer companies for periods prior to 2007 and relative to
internal targets for periods beginning in 2007). the actual
award, delivered as dupont common stock, can range from zero
percent to 200percent of the original grant. the fair
value of psus granted prior to 2008 is based upon the market
price of the underlying common stock as of the grant date.
non-vested awards of rsus and psus as of december31, 2008
and 2007 are shown below. the weighted-average grant-date fair
value of rsus and psus granted during 2008, 2007, and 2006 was
$45.70, $51.00, and $39.47, respectively. the table also
includes board of directors cash-settled rsus granted
prior to 2008.
weighted
number of
average
shares
grant date
(in
fair value
thousands)
(per share)
nonvested, december31, 2007
3,873
$
45.67
granted
1,823
$
45.70
vested
(1,352
)
$
44.63
forfeited
(335
)
$
48.07
nonvested, december31, 2008
4,009
$
45.72
as of december31, 2008, there was $48 unrecognized
stock-based compensation expense related to nonvested awards.
that cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average
period of 1.75years. the total fair value of stock units
vested during 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $60, $53 and $23,
respectively.
other cash-based
awards
cash awards under the eip plan may be granted to employees who
have contributed most to the companys success, with
consideration being given to the ability to succeed to more
important managerial responsibility. such awards were $140, $163
and $153 for 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the amounts of
the awards are dependent on company earnings and are subject to
maximum limits as defined under the governing plans.
in addition, the company has other variable compensation plans
under which cash awards may be granted. these plans include
pioneers annual reward program and the companys
regional and local variable compensation plans. such awards were
$196, $217 and $178 for 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
23.
derivatives and
other hedging instruments
objectives and
strategies for holding derivative instruments
in the ordinary course of business, the company enters into
contractual arrangements (derivatives) to reduce its exposure to
foreign currency, interest rate and commodity price risks under
established procedures and controls. the company has established
a variety of approved derivative instruments to be utilized in
each risk management program, as well as varying levels of
exposure coverage and time horizons based on an assessment of
risk factors related to each hedging program. derivative
instruments utilized during the period include forwards,
options, futures and swaps. the company has not designated any
non-derivatives as hedging instruments.
the corporate financial risk management policy establishes an
oversight committee and risk management guidelines that
authorize the use of specific derivative instruments and further
establishes procedures for
f-42
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
control and valuation, counterparty credit approval and routine
monitoring and reporting. the counterparties to these
contractual arrangements are major financial institutions and
major commodity exchanges. the company is exposed to credit loss
in the event of nonperformance by these counterparties. the
company manages this exposure to credit loss through the
aforementioned credit approvals, limits and monitoring
procedures and, to the extent possible, by restricting the
period over which unpaid balances are allowed to accumulate. the
company does not anticipate nonperformance by counterparties to
these contracts and no material loss would be expected from such
nonperformance. market and counterparty credit risks associated
with these instruments are regularly reported to management.
the company hedges foreign currency-denominated monetary assets
and liabilities, certain foreign currency-denominated revenues,
certain business specific foreign currency exposures, and
certain energy type and agricultural feedstock purchases.
fair value
hedges
during the year ended december31, 2008, the company
maintained a number of interest rate swaps that involve the
exchange of fixed for floating rate interest payments which
allows the company to maintain a target range of floating rate
debt. all interest rate swaps qualify for the shortcut method of
hedge accounting, thus there is no ineffectiveness related to
these hedges. changes in the fair value of derivatives that
hedge interest rate risk are recorded in interest expense each
period. the offsetting changes in the fair values of the related
debt are also recorded in interest expense. the company
maintains no other fair value hedges. during the fourth quarter
of 2008, interest rate swaps were terminated with a combined
notional amount of $1.25billion for cash proceeds of $226,
which are classified within financing cash flows in the
consolidated statements of cash flows. this gain will be
amortized to earnings as a reduction to interest expense over
the remaining life of the debt, through 2018.
cash flow
hedges
the company maintains a number of cash flow hedging programs to
reduce risks related to foreign currency and commodity price
risk. foreign currency programs involve hedging a portion of
certain foreign currency-denominated revenues outside of the
u.s. commodity price risk management programs serve to reduce
exposure to price fluctuations on purchases of inventory such as
natural gas, ethane, corn, soybeans and soybean meal. while each
risk management program has a different time maturity period,
most programs currently do not extend beyond the next two-year
period.
hedges of foreign currency-denominated revenues are reported on
the net sales line of the consolidated income statements, and
the effects of hedges of inventory purchases are reported as a
component of cost of goods sold and other operating charges.
cash flow hedge results are reclassified into earnings during
the same period in which the related exposure impacts earnings.
reclassifications are made sooner if it appears that a
forecasted transaction will not materialize. cash flow hedge
ineffectiveness reported in earnings for 2008 was a pre-tax loss
of $19. pre-tax hedge losses excluded from the assessment of
hedge effectiveness for 2008 was $1. the following table
summarizes the effect of cash flow hedges on accumulated other
comprehensive loss for 2008:
pretax
tax
after-tax
beginning balance
$
$
(25
)
$
additions and revaluations of derivatives designated as cash
flow hedges
(299
)
(193
)
clearance of hedge results to earnings
(13
)
(6
)
ending balance
$
(246
)
$
$
(158
)
portion of ending balance expected to be reclassified into
earnings over the next twelve months
$
(150
)
$
$
(92
)
hedges of net
investment in a foreign operation
during the year ended december31, 2008, the company did
not maintain any hedges of net investment in a foreign operation.
f-43
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
derivatives
not designated in hedging relationships
the company uses foreign currency exchange contracts to reduce
its net exposure, by currency, related to foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities. the
netting of such exposures precludes the use of hedge accounting.
however, the required revaluation of the foreign currency
exchange contracts and the associated foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities results in
a minimal earnings impact, after taxes. in addition, the company
has risk management programs for agricultural commodities that
do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment.
currency
risk
the company uses foreign exchange contracts to offset its net
exposures, by currency, related to monetary assets and
liabilities of its operations that are denominated in currencies
other than the designated functional currency. the primary
business objective is to maintain an approximately balanced
position in foreign currencies so that exchange gains and losses
resulting from exchange rate changes, net of related tax
effects, are minimized. in addition, foreign currency exchange
contracts are used to offset a portion of the companys
exposure to certain foreign currency denominated revenues. the
objective of the hedge program is to reduce earnings and cash
flow volatility related to changes in foreign currency exchange
rates.
from time to time, the company will enter into foreign currency
exchange contracts to establish with certainty the functional
currency amount of future firm commitments denominated in
another currency. decisions regarding whether or not to hedge a
given commitment are made on a
case-by-case
basis, taking into consideration the amount and duration of the
exposure, market volatility and economic trends. foreign
currency exchange contracts are also used to manage near-term
foreign currency cash requirements.
interest rate
risk
the company primarily uses interest rate swaps to manage the
interest rate mix of the total debt portfolio and related
overall cost of borrowing.
interest rate swaps involve the exchange of fixed for floating
rate interest payments that are fully integrated with underlying
fixed-rate bonds or notes to effectively convert fixed rate debt
into floating rate debt based on usd libor.
at december31, 2008, the company had interest rate swap
agreements with total notional amounts of approximately $1,150,
whereby the company, over the remaining terms of the underlying
notes, will receive a fixed rate payment equivalent to the fixed
interest rate of the underlying note and pay a floating rate of
interest that is based on usd libor.
interest rate swaps did not have a material effect on the
companys overall cost of borrowing at december31,
2008 and 2007. see note17 for additional descriptions of
interest rate swaps.
commodity
price risk
the company enters into over-the-counter and exchange-traded
derivative commodity instruments to hedge the commodity price
risk associated with energy feedstock and agricultural commodity
exposures.
f-44
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
24.
geographic
information
net
net
net
net
net
net
sales1
property2
sales1
property2
sales1
property2
united states
$
11,091
$
7,784
$
11,277
$
7,687
$
11,123
$
7,449
europe
belgium
$
$
$
$
$
$
germany
2,220
2,045
1,826
france
1,072
1,039
italy
luxembourg
the netherlands
spain
united kingdom
other
3,478
3,162
2,708
total europe
$
9,486
$
1,852
$
8,829
$
1,754
$
7,921
$
1,736
asia pacific
china/hong kong
$
1,656
$
$
1,594
$
$
1,415
$
india
japan
1,302
1,187
1,103
taiwan
korea
singapore
other
total asia pacific
$
5,483
$
$
5,177
$
$
4,759
$
canada& latin america
brazil
$
1,775
$
$
1,485
$
$
1,191
$
canada
mexico
argentina
other
total canada& latin
america
$
4,469
$
$
4,095
$
$
3,618
$
total
$
30,529
$
11,154
$
29,378
$
10,860
$
27,421
$
10,498
net sales are attributed to
countries based on the location of the customer.
includes property, plant and
equipment less accumulated depreciation.
f-45
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
25.
segment
information
the company has six reportable segments. five of the segments
constitute the companys growth segments:
agriculture& nutrition, coatings& color
technologies, electronic& communication technologies,
performance materials and safety& protection. the
sixth segment, pharmaceuticals, is limited to income from the
companys interest in two drugs,
cozaar
and
hyzaar.
major products by segment include: agriculture&
nutrition (hybrid seed corn and soybean seed, herbicides,
fungicides, insecticides, value enhanced grains and soy
protein); coatings& color technologies (automotive
finishes, industrial coatings and white pigments);
electronic& communication technologies
(fluorochemicals, fluoropolymers, photopolymers and electronic
materials); performance materials (engineering polymers,
packaging and industrial polymers, films and elastomers);
safety& protection (specialty and industrial
chemicals, nonwovens, aramids and solid surfaces); and
pharmaceuticals (representing the companys interest in the
collaboration relating to
cozaar/hyzaar
antihypertensive drugs, which is reported as other income). the
company operates globally in substantially all of its product
lines.
in general, the accounting policies of the segments are the same
as those described in the summary of significant accounting
policies. exceptions are noted as follows and are shown in the
reconciliations below. prior years data have been
reclassified to reflect the 2008 organizational structure.
segment sales include transfers to another business segment.
products are transferred between segments on a basis intended to
reflect, as nearly as practicable, the market value of the
products. segment pre-tax operating income/(loss) (ptoi) is
defined as operating income before income taxes, minority
interests, exchange gains/(losses), corporate expenses, interest
and the cumulative effect of changes in accounting principles.
segment net assets includes net working capital, net permanent
investment and other noncurrent operating assets and liabilities
of the segment. affiliate net assets (pro rata share) excludes
borrowing and other long-term liabilities. depreciation and
amortization includes depreciation on research and development
facilities and amortization of other intangible assets,
excluding write-down of assets which is discussed in
note5. expenditures for long-lived assets exclude
investments in affiliates and include payments for property,
plant and equipment as part of business acquisitions.
f-46
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
coatings &
electronic &
agriculture &
color
communication
performance
safety &
pharma-
nutrition
technologies
technologies
materials
protection
ceuticals
other
total
segment sales
$
7,952
$
6,606
$
3,988
$
6,425
$
5,729
$
-
$
$
30,860
less transfers
-
(55
)
(121
)
(39
)
(98
)
-
(18
)
(331
)
net sales
7,952
6,551
3,867
6,386
5,631
-
30,529
pretax operating income (loss)
1,087
1,025
(181
)
3,650
depreciation and amortization
-
1,271
equity in earnings of affiliates
-
(18
)
segment net assets
5,972
3,598
2,518
3,619
3,560
19,613
affiliate net assets
1,170
expenditures for long-lived assets
-
1,739
segment sales
$
6,842
$
6,609
$
3,797
$
6,630
$
5,641
$
-
$
$
29,697
less transfers
-
(53
)
(114
)
(43
)
(91
)
-
(18
)
(319
)
net sales
6,842
6,556
3,683
6,587
5,550
-
29,378
pretax operating income (loss)
1,199
(224
)
4,878
depreciation and amortization
-
1,198
equity in earnings of affiliates
(155
)
-
(14
)
(107
)
segment net assets
5,712
4,045
2,530
3,794
3,253
19,674
affiliate net assets
1,079
expenditures for long-lived assets
-
1,439
segment sales
$
6,008
$
6,290
$
3,573
$
6,179
$
5,496
$
-
$
$
27,726
less transfers
-
(49
)
(109
)
(46
)
(82
)
-
(19
)
(305
)
net sales
6,008
6,241
3,464
6,133
5,414
-
27,421
pretax operating income (loss)
1,080
(173
)
4,283
depreciation and amortization
-
1,209
equity in earnings of affiliates
(3
)
-
-
(8
)
segment net assets
5,812
3,959
2,476
4,112
3,032
19,724
affiliate net assets
1,249
expenditures for long-lived assets
-
1,378
f-47
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
reconciliation to
consolidated financial statements
ptoi to income before income taxes and minority interests
total segment ptoi
$
3,650
$
4,878
$
4,283
net exchange (losses)/gains (includes affiliates)
(255
)
(85
)
(4
)
corporate expenses and interest
(1,004
)
(1,050
)
(950
)
income before income taxes and minority interests
$
2,391
$
3,743
$
3,329
segment net assets to total assets
total segment net assets
$
19,613
$
19,674
$
19,724
corporate
assets1
8,815
6,649
5,874
liabilities included in net assets
7,781
7,808
6,179
total assets
$
36,209
$
34,131
$
31,777
pension assets are included in
corporate assets.
other items
segment totals
adjustments
consolidated totals
depreciation and amortization
$
1,271
$
$
1,444
equity in earnings of affiliates
(36
)
affiliate net assets
1,170
(326
)
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,739
1,978
depreciation and amortization
$
1,198
$
$
1,371
equity in earnings of affiliates
(107
)
(23
)
(130
)
affiliate net assets
1,079
(261
)
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,439
1,585
depreciation and amortization
$
1,209
$
$
1,384
equity in earnings of affiliates
(17
)
affiliate net assets
1,249
(446
)
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,378
1,532
f-48
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
additional
segment details
2008included the following pre-tax benefits (charges):
agriculture&
nutrition2,
$
(22
)
coatings& color
technologies3
(236
)
electronic& communication
technologies2,
(57
)
performance
materials2,
(310
)
safety&
protection2,
(106
)
other1,
$
(711
)
includes a $51 benefit from a
litigation settlement.
includes a $227 charge for damaged
facilities, inventory write-offs,
clean-up
costs, and other costs related to the hurricanes, in the
following segments: agriculture& nutrition
$4; electronic& communication
technologies $2; performance materials
$216; and safety& protection
$5.
includes a $535 restructuring
charge impacting the segments as follows:
agriculture& nutrition $18;
coatings& color technologies $236;
electronic& communication technologies
$55; performance materials - $94; safety&
protection $101; and other $31.
2007includes the following pre-tax benefits (charges):
performance
materials1,
$
(185
)
other3
(40
)
$
(225
)
included a net $20 charge for
existing litigation in connection with the elastomers antitrust
matter. see note19 for more details.
included a $165 impairment charge
to write-down the carrying value of the companys
investment in a polyester films joint venture.
included a $40 charge for existing
litigation relating to a former business. see note19 for
more details.
2006includes the following pre-tax benefits (charges):
agriculture&
nutrition1,
$
(115
)
coatings& color
technologies1,
3, 4
electronic& communication
technologies1
performance
materials1,
(60
)
safety&
protection1, 3,
(14
)
$
(169
)
included a benefit of $61 of
insurance recoveries, net of fees, which related to asbestos
litigation expenses incurred by the company in prior periods.
pre-tax amounts by segment for the insurance recoveries were:
agriculture& nutrition $7;
coatings& color technologies $19;
electronic& communication technologies
$10; performance materials - $12; and
safety& protection $13.
included a restructuring charge of
$194 in the following segments: agriculture&
nutrition $122 and performance materials
$72. see note4 for more details.
included insurance recoveries
relating to the damage suffered from hurricane katrina in 2005.
pre-tax amounts by segment were: coatings& color
technologies $123 and safety& protection
$20.
included a net restructuring charge
of $132 in the coatings& color technologies segment.
see note4 for more details.
included an asset impairment charge
of $47 associated with an underperforming industrial chemicals
asset held for sale within the safety& protection
segment.
f-49
table of contents
e. i. du pont de
nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
26.
quarterly
financial data (unaudited)
for the quarter ended
march31,
june30,
september30,
december31,
net sales
$
8,575
$
8,837
$
7,297
$
5,820
cost of goods sold and other
expenses1
7,220
7,773
7,149
6,927
income (loss) before income taxes and minority interests
1,470
1,412
(961
)4
net income (loss)
1,191
1,078
(629
)
basic earnings (loss) per share of common
stock2
1.32
1.19
0.40
(0.70
)
diluted earnings (loss) per share of common
stock2
1.31
1.18
0.40
(0.70
)
net sales
$
7,845
$
7,875
$
6,675
$
6,983
cost of goods sold and other
expenses1
6,750
6,823
6,297
6,610
income before income taxes and minority interests
1,312
1,308
net income
basic earnings per share of common
stock2
1.02
1.05
0.57
0.60
diluted earnings per share of common
stock2
1.01
1.04
0.56
0.60
excludes interest expense and
nonoperating items.
earnings per share for the year may
not equal the sum of quarterly earnings per share due to changes
in average share calculations.
includes a $227 charge for damaged
facilities, inventory write-offs,
clean-up
costs, and other costs related to the hurricanes ike and gustav.
includes a $535 charge for employee
separation payments and asset-related charges associated with
the 2008 global restructuring program.
includes a net $52 charge for
existing litigation in the performance materials segment in
connection with the elastomers antitrust matter. see
note19 for more details.
includes a $40 charge for existing
litigation in other relating to a former business. see
note19 under the heading spelter, west virginia, for more
details.
includes an impairment charge of
$165 to write down the companys investment in a polyester
films joint venture in the performance materials segment. this
charge was partially offset by a net $32 benefit resulting from
the reversal of certain litigation accruals in the performance
materials segment established in prior periods for the
elastomers antitrust matter (see note19 for more details)
and a $6 benefit for the reversal of accrued interest associated
with the favorable settlement of certain prior year tax
contingencies.
includes a benefit of $108 for the
reversal of income tax accruals associated with the favorable
settlement of certain prior year tax contingencies.
f-50
table of contents
information for
investors
corporate headquarters
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
1007 market street
wilmington, de 19898
telephone: 302
774-1000
e-mail:
find.info@usa.dupont.com
2009 annual meeting
the annual meeting of the
shareholders will be held at 10:30a.m., wednesday,
april29, in the dupont theatre in the dupont building,
1007 market street, wilmington, delaware.
stock exchange
listings
dupont common stock (symbol
dd)is listed on the new york stock exchange, inc. (nyse)
and on certain foreign exchanges. quarterly high and low market
prices are shown in item5 of the
form10-k.
on may27, 2008, the company certified to the nyse that it
is not aware of any violations of the nyses corporate
governance listing standards. the company filed the required
certifications under section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act
with its annual report for the year ended december31,
2008, on
form10-k.
dupont preferred stock is listed on
the new york stock exchange, inc. (symbol ddpra for $3.50 series
and symbol ddprb for $4.50 series).
dividends
holders of the companys
common stock are entitled to receive dividends when they are
declared by the board of directors. while it is not a guarantee
of future conduct, the company has continuously paid a quarterly
dividend since the fourth quarter 1904. dividends on common
stock and preferred stock are usually declared in january,
april, july and october. when dividends on common stock are
declared, they are usually paid mid march, june, september and
december. preferred dividends are paid on or about the
25thof january, april, july and october.
shareholder services
inquiries from shareholders about
stock accounts, transfers, certificates, dividends (including
direct deposit and reinvestment), name or address changes and
electronic receipt of proxy materials may be directed to
duponts stock transfer agent:
computershare trustcompany,
n.a.
p.o.box43078
providence, ri
02940-3078
or call: in the united states and
canada
983-8766
(toll-free)
other locations-781
575-2724
for the hearing impaired
tdd: 800
952-9245
(toll-free)
or visit computershares home
page at
http://www.computershare.com
independent registered public
accounting firm
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
two commerce square, suite1700
2001 market street
philadelphia, pa 19103
investor relations
institutional investors and other
representatives of financial institutions should contact:
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
dupont investor relations
1007 market street-d-11018
wilmington, de 19898
or call 302
774-4994
bondholder relations
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
dupont finance
1007 market street-d-8028
wilmington, de 19898
or call 302
774-0564
or 302
774-8802
dupont on the internet
financial results, news and other
information about dupont can be accessed from the companys
website at
http://www.dupont.com.
this site includes important information on products and
services, financial reports, news releases, environmental
information and career opportunities. the companys
periodic and current reports filed with the sec are available on
its website, free of charge, as soon as reasonably practicable
after being filed.
product information /
referral
from the united states and canada:
441-7515
(toll-free)
from other locations: 302
774-1000
e-mail:
find.info@usa.dupont.com
on the internet:
http://www.dupont.com
printed reports available to
shareholders
the following company reports may
be obtained, without charge:
1.
2008 annual report to the
securities and exchange commission, filed on
form10-k;
2.
proxy statement for 2009 annual
meeting of stockholders; and
3.
quarterly reports to the securities
and exchange commission, filed on
form10-q
requests should be addressed to:
dupont corporate information center
crp705-gs38
p.o.box80705
wilmington, de
19880-0705
or call 302
774-5991
e-mail:
find.info@usa.dupont.com
services for
shareholders
online account access
registered shareholders may access
their accounts and obtain online answers to stock transfer
questions by signing up for internet account access. call
toll-free 888
983-8766
(outside the united states and canada, call 781
575-2724) to
obtain by mail a temporary personal identification number and
information on viewing your account over the internet.
dividend reinvestment
plan
an automatic dividend reinvestment
plan is available to all registered shareholders. common or
preferred dividends can be automatically reinvested in dupont
common stock. participants also may add cash for the purchase of
additional shares. a detailed account statement is mailed after
each investment. your account can also be viewed over the
internet if you have online account access (see above). to
enroll in the plan, please contact computershare (listed above).
online delivery of proxy
materials
stockholders may request their
proxy materials electronically in 2009 by visiting
http://enroll.icsdelivery.com/dd.
direct deposit of
dividends
registered shareholders who would
like their dividends directly deposited in a u.s.bank
account should contact computershare (listed above).
table of contents
exhibitindex
the following list of exhibits includes both exhibits submitted with this form 10-k as filed with
the sec and those incorporated by reference to other filings:
exhibit
number
description
3.1
companys restated certificate of incorporation (incorporated by reference to exhibit
3.1 to the companys annual report on form10-k for the year ended december31,
2007).
3.2
companys bylaws, as last amended effective january1, 2009 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit99 to the companys current report on form8-k filed on december
15, 2008).
the company agrees to provide the commission, on request, copies of instruments
defining the rights of holders of long-term debt of the company and its subsidiaries.
10.1*
the dupont stock accumulation and deferred compensation plan for directors, as last
amended effective january1, 2009.
10.2*
form of award terms for time-vested restricted stock units granted to non-employee
directors under the companys equity and incentive plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.2 to the companys quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended
march31, 2008).
10.3*
companys supplemental retirement income plan, as last amended effective june4, 1996
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.3 to the companys annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december31, 2006).
10.4*
companys pension restoration plan, as restated effective july17, 2006 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit99.1 to the companys current report on form8-k filed on
july20, 2006).
10.5*
companys rules for lump sum payments adopted july17, 2006 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit99.2 to the companys current report on form8-k filed on july
20, 2006).
10.6*
companys stock performance plan, as last amended effective january25, 2007
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.7 to the companys quarterly report on form
10-q for the period ended march31, 2007).
10.7*
companys equity and incentive plan as approved by the companys shareholders on
april25, 2007 (incorporated by reference to pages c1-c13 of the companys annual
meeting proxy statement dated march19, 2007).
10.8*
terms and conditions, as last amended effective january1, 2007, of performance-based
restricted stock units granted in 2006 and 2007 under the companys stock performance
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibits 10.8 and 10.12, respectively, to the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended march31, 2007).
10.9*
form of award terms under the companys equity and incentive plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibits 10.10, 10.11, 10.13 and 10.14 to the companys quarterly report
on form10-q for the period ended march31, 2008).
10.10*
companys retirement savings restoration plan, as last amended effective january1,
2009 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.15 to the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the period
ended june30, 2008).
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
10.11*
companys retirement income plan for directors, as last amended august1995
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.17 to the companys annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december31, 2007).
10.12*
letter agreement and employee agreement, dated as of december9, 2008, as amended,
between the company and r.r. goodmanson.
10.13*
companys bicentennial corporate sharing plan, adopted by the board of directors on
december12, 2001 and effective january9, 2002 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.19 to the companys quarterly report on form10-q for the quarter ended september
30, 2007).
10.14*
companys management deferred compensation plan, adopted on may2, 2008, as last
amended july16, 2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.20 to the companys
quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended june30, 2008).
10.15*
supplemental deferral terms for deferred long term incentive awards and deferred
variable compensation awards.
computation of the ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
subsidiaries of the registrant.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
rule13a-14 (a)/15d-14 (a)certification of the companys principal executive officer.
31.2
rule13a-14 (a)/15d-14 (a)certification of the companys principal financial officer.
32.1
section1350 certification of the companys principal executive officer. the
information contained in this exhibit shall not be deemed filed with the securities
and exchange commission nor incorporated by reference in any registration statement
filed by the registrant under the securities act of 1933, as amended.
32.2
section1350 certification of the companys principal financial officer. the
information contained in this exhibit shall not be deemed filed with the securities
and exchange commission nor incorporated by reference in any registration statement
filed by the registrant under the securities act of 1933, as amended.
*
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to
this form 10-k.
