10-k
y30921e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
or
o
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file no.1-7657
american express company
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
new york
13-4922250
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or
(i.r.s. employer
organization)
identification no.)
world financial center
200 vesey street
new york, new york
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (212)640-2000
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common shares (par value $0.20 per share)
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act: none
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in
rule405 of the securities act. yes  no o
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section
13 or section 15(d) of the act. yes o no
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed
by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports) and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days. yes  no o
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation
s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form 10-k
or any amendment to this form 10-k. o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated
filer or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated
filer in rule12b-2 of the exchange act.
large accelerated filer accelerated filer onon-accelerated filer o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of
the act). yes o no
as of june30, 2006, the aggregate market value of the registrants voting shares held by
non-affiliates of the registrant was approximately $63.0billion based on the closing sale price as
reported on the new york stock exchange.
as of february22, 2007, there were 1,192,339,538 common shares of the registrant outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference
parts i, ii and iv: portions of registrants 2006 annual report to shareholders.
partiii: portions of registrants proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange
commission in connection with the annual meeting of shareholders to be held on april23,
2007.
table of contents
form10-k
itemnumber
part i
1. business
introduction
global network & merchant services
u.s. card services
international card & global commercial services
corporate & other
foreign operations
segment information and classes of similar services
executive officers of the company
employees
1a. risk factors
1b. unresolved staff comments
2. properties
3. legal proceedings
4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
5. market for companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer
purchases of equity securities
6. selected financial data
7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operation
7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
8. financial statements and supplementary data
9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
9a. controls and procedures
9b. other information
part iii
10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance
11. executive compensation
12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters
13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
14. principal accounting fees and services
part iv
15. exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
index to financial statements
f-1
exhibitindex
e-1
ex-10.7: incentive compensation plan master agreement
ex-10.8: form of award agreement
ex-10.13: description of amendments
ex-10.22: amendment to key executive life insurance plan
ex-10.31: amendment to senior executive severance plan
ex-10.38: amendment to annual incentive award plan
ex-10.44: description of 2007 base salaries of named executive officers
ex-12: computati0n in support of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
ex-13: portions of 2006 annual report
ex-21: subsidiaries
ex-23.1: consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
ex-23.2: consent of ernst & young llp
ex-31.1: certification
ex-31.2: certification
ex-32.1: certifications
table of contents
part i *
item 1. business
introduction
overview
american express company, together with its consolidated subsidiaries (american express, the
company, we, us or our), is a leading global payments, network and travel company that
offers its products and services throughout the world. we were founded in 1850 as a joint stock
association. we were incorporated in 1965 as a new york corporation.
our headquarters are located in new york, new york in lower manhattan. we also have offices
in other locations in north america, as well as throughout the world.
we have three reportable operating segments: global network & merchant services, u.s. card
services and international card & global commercial services,
and a corporate & other section,
which we describe below.
securities exchange act reports and additional information
we maintain an investor relations web site on the internet at http://ir.americanexpress.com.
we make available free of charge, on or through this web site, our annual, quarterly and current
reports and any amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable following the time
they are electronically filed with or furnished to the securities and exchange commission (sec).
to access these, just click on the sec filings link under the caption financial information &
filings found on our investor relations homepage.
you can also access our investor relations web site through our main web site at
www.americanexpress.com by clicking on the about american express link, which is located at the
bottom of our homepage. information contained on our investor relations web site and our main web
site is not incorporated by reference into this report or any other report filed with or furnished
to the sec.
*
some of the statements in this report
constitute forward-looking statements. you can identify forward-looking
statements by words such as believe, expect, anticipate, optimistic,
intend, plan, aim, will, may, should, could, would, likely,
estimate, predict, potential, continue or other similar expressions.
we discuss certain factors that affect our business and operations and factors
that may cause our actual results to differ materially from these
forward-looking statements under item1a. risk factors below.
you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking
statements, which speak only as of the date on which they are made. we
undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking
statements.
table of contents
2006 highlights
during 2006, american express continued its strong performance of recent years. compared with
2005, we delivered:
net revenues of $27.1billion, up 13% from $24.1billion;
income from continuing operations of $3.7billion, up 16% from $3.2billion;
net income of $3.7billion, which was essentially level with year-ago
results (reflects the inclusion of nine months of earnings of ameriprise financial,
inc., which we spun-off to shareholders on september30, 2005);
diluted earnings per share based on income from continuing operations of
$3.01, up 18% from $2.56;
diluted earnings per share based on net income of $2.99, up 1% from $2.97; and
return on average equity of 34.7%, compared with 25.4%.
these results met or exceeded our on-average and over-time financial targets of earnings per
share growth of 12% to 15%, revenue growth of at least 8% and return on equity of 33% to 36%.
for a complete discussion of our 2006 financial results, including financial information
regarding each of our reportable operating segments, see pages 30-111 of the companys 2006 annual
report to shareholders, which are incorporated herein by reference. for a summary of the company
and our reportable operating segments, and a discussion of our principal sources of revenue, see
pages 30-32 and pages 74-76, respectively, of the 2006 annual report to shareholders.
products and services
we provide a variety of products and services worldwide, including, among others:
global card network services;
merchant acquisition and merchant processing for our network partners and
proprietary payments businesses;
charge cards and credit cards for consumers and businesses worldwide;
consumer and small business lending products;
american express travelers cheques and gift cards;
travel and business expense management products and services;
business travel and travel management services;
consumer travel services;
point-of-sale and back-office products and services and marketing programs for
merchants;
international banking products; and
magazine publishing.
in certain countries we have granted licenses to partially-owned affiliates and unaffiliated
entities to offer some of these products and services.
the companys various products and services are sold globally to diverse customer groups,
including consumers, small businesses, mid-market companies, large corporations, and
table of contents
banking institutions. these products and services are sold through various channels including
direct mail, online, targeted sales forces and direct response advertising.
our
general purpose card network, card issuing and merchant acquiring and processing
businesses are global in scope. we are a world leader in providing charge and credit cards to
consumers, small businesses and corporations. these cards, which include cards issued by american
express as well as cards issued by third-party banks and other institutions that are accepted on
the american express network (collectively, cards), are currently issued in over 40 currencies.
our cards permit cardmembers to charge purchases of goods and services in most countries around
the world at the millions of merchants that accept cards bearing our logo. we added a net total of
7.0million cards in 2006, bringing total worldwide cards-in-force to 78.0million (including cards
issued by third parties). in 2006, our worldwide billed business (spending on american
express  cards, including cards issued by third parties) was $561.5billion.
spend-centric model is competitive advantage
we believe that our spend-centric business model (which focuses on generating revenues
primarily by driving spending on our cards and secondarily by finance charges and fees) has
significant competitive advantages. average spending per cardmember, which is substantially higher
than for our competitors, represents greater value to merchants in the form of loyal customers and
higher sales. this gives us the ability to earn a premium discount rate and invest in greater
value-added services for merchants and cardmembers. as a result of the higher revenues generated
from higher spending, we have the flexibility to offer more attractive rewards and other incentives
to cardmembers, which in turn create an incentive for them to spend more on their cards. this
business model, along with our closed loop network, in which we are both the card issuer and the
merchant acquirer, gives us a competitive advantage that we seek to leverage to provide more value
to cardmembers, merchants and card issuing partners.
our business as a whole has not experienced significant seasonal fluctuations, although travel
sales tend to be highest in the second quarter; travelers cheque sales and travelers cheques
outstanding tend to be greatest each year in the summer months, peaking in the third quarter, and
card billed business tends to be moderately higher in the fourth quarter than in other quarters.
the american express brand
our brand and its attributes  trust, security, integrity, quality and customer service  are
key assets of the company. we continue to focus on our brand by educating employees about these
attributes and by incorporating them into our programs, products and services. our brand has been
rated one of the most valuable brands in the world in various surveys, and we believe it provides
us with a significant competitive advantage. we believe our brand and its attributes are critical
to our success, and we invest heavily in managing, marketing and promoting it. (we account for our
expenses in managing our brand advertising and related campaigns in the global network & merchant
services segment discussed below.) in addition, we place significant
table of contents
importance on trademarks, servicemarks and patents, and diligently protect our intellectual
property rights around the world.
global network & merchant services
global network services
we operate a global general purpose charge and credit card network through our global network
services (gns) business. network functions include operations, service delivery, systems,
authorization, clearing, settlement and brand advertising and marketing; the development of new and
innovative products for the network; and establishing and enhancing relationships with merchants
globally.
since may1996, we have been pursuing a strategy of inviting u.s. banks and other institutions
to issue cards on the american express network, building on a business strategy we have implemented
successfully in a number of countries outside the united states, where we have many banks and other
financial institutions issuing cards on the american express network. by leveraging our global
infrastructure and the appeal of the american express brand, we aim to broaden our cardmember and
merchant base for our network worldwide. our gns business has established more than 105 card
issuing or merchant acquiring arrangements with banks and other institutions in 120 countries.
a key asset of our network is the american express brand, which is one of the worlds most
highly recognized and respected brands.
cards bearing our logo are issued by our principal operating subsidiary, american express
travel related services company, inc. (trs), and certain of its subsidiaries and also by
third-party institutions, and are accepted at all merchant locations worldwide that accept american
express-branded cards. in addition, depending on the product, cards bearing our logo are generally
accepted at atm locations worldwide that accept cards. trs and its subsidiaries issue the vast
majority of cards on our network.
gns focuses on partnering with qualified third-party banks and other financial institutions
that choose to issue cards accepted on our global network. although we customize our network
arrangements to the particular market and our partners requirements, as well as to our strategic
plans in that marketplace, all gns arrangements are designed to help issuers develop products for
their highest-spending and most affluent customers and to support the value of american express
card acceptance to merchants. we choose to partner with institutions who share a core set of
attributes such as commitment to high quality standards, strong marketing expertise and
compatibility with the american express brand, and we require adherence to our product, brand and
service standards.*
our gns arrangements fall into three main categories.
*
the use of the term
partner or partnering does not mean or imply a
formal legal partnership.
table of contents
the first type of gns arrangement is known as an independent operator (io) arrangement. as
of the end of 2006, we had 55 of these arrangements around the world. we pursue these arrangements
to expand the presence of the american express network throughout the world, in markets in which we
do not offer a proprietary local currency card. under this type of arrangement, the partners
local presence and relationships help us enhance the impact of our brand in the market, reach
merchant coverage goals more quickly, and operate at economic scale and cost levels that would be
difficult for us to achieve on our own. we license our bank partner to issue local currency cards
in their market, including the classic green, gold and platinum american express cards. in
addition, the majority of these partners serve as the merchant acquirer and processor for local
merchants. american express retains the relationship with multi-national merchants. our io
partner owns the customer relationships and credit risk for the cards it issues, and makes the
decisions about which customers will be issued cards. gns generates revenues in io arrangements
from fees paid by the io partner derived from the number of cards it issues, the level of
cardmember spending on those cards, royalties and the total charge volume at merchants with which
the io partner has an agreement to accept cards. our io partner is responsible for transaction
authorization, billing and pricing, cardmember servicing and funding card receivables for its
cards.
examples of countries where we have entered into io arrangements include ecuador, greece,
south korea, pakistan, croatia, peru, portugal and vietnam. in 2006, we sold our proprietary card
issuing and related businesses in brazil, malaysia and indonesia to global network services io
partners banco bradesco s.a., maybank and bank danamon, respectively. through our partnerships
with these leading financial institutions, we believe we can accelerate growth in cardmember
spending, cards-in-force and merchant acceptance in these countries.
the second type of gns arrangement is known as a network card license (ncl) (which we
formerly referred to as a non-proprietary license). at the end of 2006, we had 48 of these
arrangements in place. we pursue these arrangements to increase our brand presence and gain market
share in markets in which we have a proprietary card issuing business, and in a few cases those in
which we also have io partners. in an ncl arrangement, we grant the third-party financial
institution a license to issue american express-branded cards. the ncl issuer owns the customer
relationships for all cards it issues, provides customer service to its cardmembers, transaction
authorization, billing and credit management, and is responsible for the marketing of the cards, and designs the card product features
(including rewards and other incentives for card holders), subject to
meeting certain standards. we operate the merchant network, route
and process card transactions from the merchants point-of-sale through submission to the issuer,
and settle with issuers. the ncl is the type of arrangement that we have implemented
with banks in the united states.
examples of ncl arrangements include our relationships with citibank (south dakota), n.a. and
bank of america in the united states, lloyds tsb bank in the united kingdom and westpac banking
corporation in australia.
gns revenues in ncl arrangements are related to a variety of factors, including the level of
cardmember spending, royalties and fees charged to the card issuer based on charge volume, and our
provision of value-added services such as cardmember insurance products and
table of contents
other card features and benefits for the issuers cards. as indicated above, the ncl issuer
bears the credit risk for the issued cards, as well as the card marketing and acquisition costs,
cardmember fraud risks and costs of rewards and other loyalty initiatives. we bear the risk
arising from the gns partners potential failure to meet its settlement obligations to us. we
mitigate this risk by partnering with issuers that we believe are financially sound and will meet
their obligations, and by monitoring their financial health, their compliance with the terms of
their relationship with us and the political and economic environment in which they operate. in
addition, we generally require ncl issuers to post a letter of credit, bank guarantee or other
collateral to reduce this risk.
the third type of gns arrangement is a joint venture. we have utilized this type of
arrangement in switzerland, belgium and several other countries. in these markets, trs joins with
a third party to establish a separate business in which trs has a significant ownership stake. the
joint venture typically signs new merchants to the american express network and issues local
currency cards that carry our logo. in a joint venture arrangement, the joint venture assumes the
cardmember credit risk and bears the operating and marketing costs. the economics of the joint
venture are similar to our proprietary card issuing business, which we discuss below under u.s.
card services, and we receive a portion of the joint ventures income depending on the level of
our ownership interest.
gross revenues we receive per dollar spent on a card issued by a gns partner are lower than
those from our proprietary card issuing business. however, because the gns partner is responsible
for most of the operating costs and risk of its card issuing business, our expenses are lower than
those in our proprietary card issuing business. the gns business model generates an attractive
earnings stream and risk profile that requires a lower level of capital support. the return on
equity in our gns business can thus be significantly higher than that of our proprietary card
issuing business. because the majority of gns costs are fixed, the gns business is highly
scalable. gns partners benefit from their association with the american express brand and their
ability to gain attractive revenue streams and expand and differentiate their product offerings
with innovative marketing programs.
in 2006, gns signed 11 new partners to issue cards on the american express network. gns
partners launched over 125 new products during 2006, bringing the total number of american
express-branded gns partner products to approximately 550. outside the united states, we have
signed a number of agreements over the past year in markets such as brazil, indonesia, malaysia and
turkey.
some of the highlights of our gns business outside the united states in 2006 include:
launch of the virgin atlantic american express credit card in conjunction
with virgin atlantic and mbna europe bank;
launch of the dual currency icbc corporate american express card and the
icbc china petrol american express card with industrial and commercial bank of china
and petrochina company limited;
launch of the saa voyager credit card in partnership with nedbank and south
african airways; and
table of contents
launch of the korean air american express card, the first american
express-branded airline cobrand card in korea, in conjunction with samsung card and
korean air.
in contrast to the situation outside the united states, where banks and other qualified
institutions have issued cards on our network for many years, until 2004 no major u.s. banks had
issued cards in the united states on the american express global network. this situation was the
result of rules and policies of visa u.s.a. and visa international service association (together,
visa) and mastercard, incorporated and mastercard international, inc. (together, mastercard) in
the united states, which mandated expulsion of members that issued american express-branded cards.
no bank was willing to risk forfeiting membership in visa and/or mastercard (collectively, the
bankcard associations) to issue cards on our network.
however, as a consequence of the decision in a lawsuit filed in october1998 by the u.s.
department of justice against visa and mastercard in which such rules and policies were found to
violate the u.s. antitrust laws, these rules and policies were finally repealed in late 2004 after
the u.s. supreme court declined to hear visas and mastercards appeal of the lower courts rulings
against them. the supreme courts decision not to hear the appeals marked the end of visas and
mastercards rules that prevented their member banks from issuing cards on competitive networks and
cleared the way for implementation of the trial courts order requiring the repeal of the illegal
rules. we view this decision as a major victory for u.s. consumers as well as u.s. banks because
it opened the door to more vigorous network competition and more innovative card products and
services.
for american express, the conclusion of the litigation brought by the justice department meant
that we were now able to open our network to other card issuers in the united states, just as we
have done internationally. building a network business in the united states that operates in
addition to our proprietary card business provides us with new and substantial opportunities for
growth. we have acted on this decision by entering into several gns arrangements with financial
institutions in the united states, which have all launched products in the marketplace. these
companies include mbna, bank of america, citibank (south dakota), n.a., hsbc bank nevada n.a.,
barclays, which issues cards to u.s. wealth management clients of ubs financial services inc., and
usaa federal savings bank. in addition, we have a gns arrangement with ge money under which ge money bank issues cards
accepted on our network, the first of which is the dillards american express card.
in november2004, we filed a lawsuit against visa, mastercard and certain of their member
banks seeking monetary damages resulting from the illegal rules that were struck down in the u.s.
department of justice lawsuit discussed above. (you can read more about this lawsuit in the legal
proceedings section of this report below.)
with approximately 550 different card products launched on our network so far by our bank
partners, gns is an increasingly important business that is strengthening our brand visibility
around the world, driving more transaction volume onto our merchant network and increasing the
number of merchants accepting the american express card. gns enables us to expand our global
presence without having to invest large amounts of resources, as our gns
table of contents
partners already have established attractive customer bases they can target with american
express-branded products. since 1999, cards-in-force issued by gns partners have grown at a
compound annual growth rate of 27%, and totaled 15million cards at the end of 2006. outside the
united states, approximately 50% of new cards issued in 2006 were cards issued by one of our gns
partners. spending on these cards has grown at a compound annual rate
of 25% since 1999, and
totaled $35.4billion in 2006.
with the increase in electronic transmission of credit card transaction data over merchants
point-of-sale systems, the necessity for merchants and merchant processors to secure this data
against accidental or intentional compromise using a standard protocol that applies to all card
types became clear to american express and the other major card networks. in 2006, in order to
strengthen the security practices of merchants and payment processing firms and to secure payment
account data in a globally consistent manner, we and discover financial services, jcb, mastercard
worldwide and visa international formed pci security standards council, llc (pci co.), an
independent standards-setting organization to manage the ongoing evolution of the payment card
industry (pci)data security standard, which focuses on improving payment card account security
throughout the transaction process. by establishing pci co. to manage the pci data security
standard, we and the other founders have developed a common standard that is more accessible and
efficient for participants in the payment card industry. all merchants and service providers that
store, process and transmit payment card data are required to comply with the pci data security
standard. pci co. is dedicated to driving greater education, awareness and adoption of the pci
data security standard to ensure that all stakeholders involved in the payment process conduct
their business responsibly.
regulation
local regulations governing the issuance of charge and credit cards have not been a
significant factor impacting our arrangements with banks and qualifying financial institutions in
any country in which such arrangements exist, because such banks and institutions generally are
already licensed to issue general purpose cards. accordingly, our gns partners have generally not
had difficulty in obtaining appropriate government authorization in the markets in which we have
chosen to enter into gns arrangements. as a network service provider to regulated u.s. banks, our
gns business is subject to review by certain federal bank regulators, including the federal deposit
insurance corporation, the office of the comptroller of the currency and the office of thrift
supervision. as the operator of a general purpose card network, we are also subject to the usa
patriot act of 2001 (the patriot act), which requires us to conduct due diligence on our gns
partners to ensure that they maintain sufficient anti-money laundering and know your customer
programs to prevent our network from being used for money laundering or terrorist financing.
global merchant services
we operate a global merchant services business, which includes signing merchants to accept
cards, and accepting and processing card transactions and paying merchants that accept cards for
purchases made by cardmembers with cards (charges). we also provide point-of-
table of contents
sale and back-office products and services and marketing programs to merchants, leveraging the
capabilities provided by our closed loop structure.
our
objective is for cardmembers to be able to use the card wherever and however they desire,
as well as to increase merchant coverage in key geographic areas and in selected new industries
that have not traditionally accepted general purpose credit and charge cards as a means of payment.
we add new merchants to our network through a number of sales channels: a proprietary sales force,
third-party sales agents, strategic alliances with banks, the internet, telemarketing and inbound
want to honor calls (i.e., merchants desiring to accept the card contacting us directly).
since the early 1990s, we have significantly expanded the number of merchants that accept our
card products as well as the kinds of businesses that accept the card. in recent years, we have
focused our efforts on increasing the use of our cards for everyday spending. in 1990, 64% of our
u.s. billings came from the travel and entertainment sectors and 36% came from retail and other
sectors. that proportion has now been more than reversed. in 2006, u.s. non-travel and
entertainment billings represented over 65% of the u.s. billed business on american express cards.
this shift resulted from the growth, over time, in the types of merchants that began to accept
charge and credit cards in response to consumers increased desire to use these cards for more of
their purchases, and our focus on expanding card acceptance to meet cardmembers needs.
during 2006, we continued our efforts to encourage consumers to use the card for everyday
spending. we increased the number and types of merchants in retail and everyday spending
categories that accept the card, such as quick-serve restaurants, mass transit, healthcare and
recurring billing merchants.
in addition, we also continued our drive of bringing card acceptance to industries where cash
or checks are the predominant form of payment. for example, in the area of real estate, we signed
an agreement with the moinian group to allow down-payments for luxury condominiums to be charged on
the american express card. card acceptance for private jets and residence/destination clubs, as
well as business-to-business purchases, are other examples of new industries in which the card is
now accepted, and which have the potential to increase our average cardmember spending.
globally, acceptance of general purpose charge and credit cards continues to increase,
including among merchants in industries that have not traditionally accepted charge and credit
cards. as in prior years, during 2006, we continued to grow merchant acceptance of cards around
the world and to refine our approach to calculating merchant coverage in accordance with changes in
the marketplace. management estimates that, as of the end of 2006, our merchant network in the
united states accommodated more than 90% of cardmembers general purpose charge and credit card
spending, and our international merchant network as a whole accommodated approximately 80% of our
cardmembers general purpose charge and credit card spending. these percentages are based on
comparing our cardmembers spending on our network currently with our estimate of what our
cardmembers would spend on our network if all merchants that accept general purpose credit and
charge cards accepted american express cards.
table of contents
we earn discount revenue from fees charged to merchants for accepting cards as payment for
goods or services sold. the merchant discount is the fee charged to the merchant for accepting
cards and is generally expressed as a percentage of the amount charged on a card. the merchant
discount is generally deducted from the amount of the payment that the merchant acquirer (in most
cases, trs or one of its subsidiaries) pays to a merchant for charges submitted. a merchant
acquirer is the entity that contracts for card acceptance with the merchant, accepts transactions
from the merchant, pays the merchant for these transactions and submits the transactions through
the american express network to the appropriate card issuer for billing to the cardmember. when a
cardmember presents the card for payment, the merchant creates a record of charge for the
transaction and submits it to the merchant acquirer for payment. to the extent that trs or one of
its subsidiaries is the merchant acquirer, the merchant discount is recorded by us as discount
revenue at the point-of-sale.
where we act as the merchant acquirer and the card presented at a merchant is issued by a
third-party bank or financial institution, such as in the case of our gns partners, we will make
financial settlement to the merchant and receive the discount revenue. in our role as the operator
of the card network, we will also receive financial settlement from the card issuer, who retains an
issuer rate (i.e., the individually negotiated amount that card issuers receive for transactions
charged on our network with cards that they issue, which is usually expressed as a percentage of
the charged amount). the difference between the discount revenue (received by us in the form of
the merchant discount) and the issuer rate received by the card issuer generates a return to us.
where we are the card issuer and the merchant acquirer is a third-party bank or financial
institution (which can be the case in a country in which the io is the local merchant acquirer), we
receive an issuer rate in our settlement with the merchant acquirer, which is recorded by us as
discount revenue.
the following diagrams depict the relationships among the parties in a point-of-sale
transaction effected on the american express network where we act as both the card issuer and
merchant acquirer (the 3-party model) and under an ncl arrangement where third-party financial
institutions in the united states act as card issuers (the ncl model):
the merchant discount rate that we charge is principally determined by the value we deliver to
the merchant and generally represents a premium over other networks.
we deliver greater value to the
merchant through higher spending cardmembers relative to cards issued on
table of contents
competing card networks, the overall higher volume of spending by all cardmembers, marketing
expertise, and cardmembers insistence on using their cards when enrolled in rewards or other card
loyalty programs, including those as part of our corporate card program.
the merchant discount rate varies with the industry in which the merchant does business, the
charge volume, the timing and method of payment to the merchant, the method of submission of
charges and, in certain instances, the geographic scope of the card acceptance agreement signed
with us (local or global) and the charge amount. in 2006, as in prior
years, we experienced some reduction in our global weighted average merchant discount rate,
principally reflecting the impact of selective repricing initiatives, continued changes in the mix
of business and volume-related pricing adjustments. we expect that the effect of these factors will
likely continue to result in some erosion over time of the weighted average merchant discount rate,
particularly outside the united states.
while most merchants understand our merchant discount rate pricing in relation to the value
provided, we do encounter a relatively small number of merchants that accept our cards, but tell
their customers that they prefer to accept another type of payment and, consequently, suppress use
of the card. we respond to this issue aggressively to ensure that our cardmembers are able to use
their card where and when they want to. we have made progress by: concentrating on acquiring
merchants where cardmembers want to use the card; continuing to enhance the value we provide by
programs such as american express selects and my wishlist, which enable
merchants to gain valuable exposure and additional sales by providing exclusive offers and
experiences to american express cardmembers; providing better and earlier communication of our
value proposition; and, when necessary, cancelling merchants who suppress the use of our card
products.
in the case of my wishlist, a seasonal web site we developed in conjunction with merchant
partners, we are able to greatly enhance our merchant value. through the site, we provide
cardmembers with opportunities to buy a limited number of sought-after items, such as automobiles,
trips, electronics and jewelry, at a fraction of their retail prices, as well as access to numerous
offers from top brands. through american express selects, we make available to our cardmembers
high quality shopping, dining and travel values from merchants all over the world, and these
merchants have an opportunity to reach out to our cardmembers.
merchant satisfaction is a key goal of our global merchant services business. we focus on
understanding and addressing factors that influence merchant satisfaction, including developing and
executing innovative programs that increase card usage at merchants, using technology resources,
our closed loop and deep marketing expertise and strengthening our relationships with merchants
through an expanding roster of services that help them meet their business goals. we offer a full
range of point-of-sale solutions, including integrated point-of-sale terminals and direct links
that allow merchants to accept american express cards, as well as bankcards, debit cards and
checks, and contactless point-of-sale terminals that enable merchants to accept contactless payment
products including our expresspay from american express products. virtually all proprietary point-of-sale solutions
support direct processing (i.e., direct connectivity) to american express, which lowers a
merchants cost of card acceptance and avoids payment delays caused by a third party.
table of contents
expresspay,
a contactless payment feature, is designed to be a fast, easy-to-use
alternative for making everyday purchases at merchants where speed
and convenience is important. expresspay is now accepted at over 30,000 places in the united states,
including top quick-service restaurant, movie theater, drug store and convenience store chains.
expresspay, powered by radio-frequency technology, is available both in a key-fob form and has been
introduced within several card products. in 2006, we expanded merchant coverage of expresspay by
partnering with organizations like the utah transit authority, jack in the box, and arbys
restaurant group, inc. at participating locations.
we continue to focus our efforts on the fast-growing recurring billing industry through
automatic bill payment, a service that allows merchants to bill cardmembers on a regular basis for
recurring charges such as insurance premiums, newspaper subscriptions, health club memberships,
commutation costs and cable television service. we have also made modifications to our host authorization
system to approve more transactions and reduce cardmember inconvenience at the point-of-sale
without a corresponding increase in fraud or credit losses.
wherever we manage both the acquiring relationship with merchants and the card issuing side of
the business, there is a closed loop, which distinguishes our network from the bankcard networks
in that there is access to information at both ends of the card transaction. we maintain a direct
relationship with both our cardmembers and our merchants, and we handle all key aspects of those
relationships. our relationships allow us to analyze information on cardmembers spend. this
enables us to provide targeted marketing for merchants and special offers to cardmembers through a
variety of channels, subject to compliance with our privacy policy and legal requirements. we
protect the confidentiality of this data, and comply with strict privacy, firewall and applicable
legal requirements. we work closely with our card issuing bank partners to maintain key elements of this closed
loop, which permits them to customize marketing efforts, deliver greater value to their cardmembers
and help us to direct increased business to merchants who accept the card.
as the merchant acquirer, we have certain contingent liabilities that arise if a billing
dispute between a cardmember and a merchant is settled in favor of the cardmember. drivers of this
liability are returns in the normal course of business, disputes over fraudulent charges, the
quality or non-delivery of goods and services and billing errors. typically, we offset the amount
due to the cardmember against payments for the merchants current or future charge submissions. we
can realize losses when offsetting submissions cease, such as when the merchant commences a
bankruptcy proceeding or goes out of business. we actively monitor our merchant base to assess the
risk of this exposure. when appropriate, we will take action to reduce the net exposure to a given
merchant by requiring a parent company guarantee or letter of credit, holding cash reserves funded
through charge payable holdbacks from a merchant, lengthening the time between when the merchant
submits a charge for payment and when we pay the merchant or implementing other appropriate risk
management tools. we also establish reserves on our balance sheet for these contingencies.
table of contents
in some markets outside the united states, particularly in the united kingdom, third-party
processors and some bankcard acquirers have begun to offer merchants the capability of converting
credit card transactions from the local currency to the currency of the cardholders residence
(i.e., the cardholders billing currency) at the point-of-sale, and submitting the transaction in
the cardholders billing currency, thus bypassing the traditional foreign currency conversion
process of the card network. this practice is known as dynamic currency conversion. if a
merchant utilizes a dynamic currency conversion process, the merchant and processor share any fee
assessed or spread earned for converting the transaction at the point of sale, thus reducing or
eliminating revenue for card issuers and card networks relating to the conversion of foreign
charges to the cardholders billing currency. this practice is not widespread, and it is uncertain
to what extent consumers will prefer to have foreign currency transactions converted by merchants
in this way. our policy generally requires merchants to submit charges and be paid in the currency
of the country in which the transaction occurs, and we convert the transaction to the cardmembers
billing currency.
competition
our network competes with other charge and credit card networks, including, among others,
visa, mastercard, diners club (which, in the united states and canada, has been folded into the
network operated by mastercard), discover, a business unit of morgan stanley (primarily in the
united states), and jcb co., ltd. (primarily in asia). we are the third largest general purpose
charge and credit card network based on charge volume, behind visa and mastercard, which are larger
than we are in most markets.
the principal competitive factors that affect the network and merchant service business
include:
the number of cards-in-force and amount of spending on these cards;
the quantity and quality of the establishments where the cards can be used;
the economic attractiveness to card issuers and merchant acquirers of
participating in the network;
the success of marketing and promotional campaigns;
reputation and brand recognition;
innovation in systems, technology and product offerings;
the quality of customer service;
the security of cardmember and merchant information; and
cost of card acceptance relative to the value provided.
another aspect of network competition is the recent emergence and rapid growth of alternative
payment mechanisms and systems, which include aggregators (such as paypal), wireless payment
technologies (including using mobile telephone networks to carry out transactions), pre-paid
systems and systems linked to credit cards, and bank transfer models. in the united states, a
credit push payment mechanism is being developed to re-direct online customers to payment
systems based on ach (automated clearing house, i.e., inter-bank
table of contents
transfer), and existing debit networks are making efforts to develop online pin functionality,
which could potentially reduce the relative use of charge and credit cards online.
some of our competitors have attempted to replicate our closed loop structure, such as visas
visa incentive network. although it remains to be seen how effective visa will be, efforts by visa
and other card networks and payment providers to replicate the closed loop speak both to its
continued value, as well as the intense competitive environment in which we operate.
regulation
in recent years, regulators in several countries have focused on the fees involved in the
operation of card networks, including the fees merchants are charged to accept cards. regulators
in the united kingdom, poland, germany, spain, the european union, australia, mexico and
switzerland, among others, have conducted, and are continuing to conduct, investigations into the
way bankcard network members collectively set the interchange, which is the fee paid by the
bankcard merchant acquirer to the card issuing bank. the interchange fee is generally the largest
component of the merchant discount rate charged to merchants by the merchant acquirer for bankcard
debit and credit charges. although the regulators focus has primarily been on visa and mastercard
as the dominant card networks, antitrust actions and government regulation of the bankcard
associations pricing could ultimately affect all networks. downward movement of interchange and
merchant discount fees may affect the relative economic attractiveness to card issuers and merchant
acquirers of participation in a particular network. lower interchange and/or merchant discount
revenue may lead card issuers to look for other sources of revenue such as annual card fees, as
well as to reduce costs by scaling back or eliminating rewards programs. in certain countries
where antitrust actions or regulations have forced our competitors to lower their fees, we have
made adjustments to our own fee arrangements with merchants to reflect local competitive trends.
for example, reductions in bankcard interchange mandated by the reserve bank of australia reforms
in 2003 have resulted in lower merchant discount rates for visa and mastercard. as a result of
changes in the marketplace, we have reduced our own merchant discount rates in australia although
we have nevertheless been able to increase billed business and the number of merchants accepting
our cards. in addition, under legislation enacted in argentina, a merchant acquirer is required to
charge the same merchant discount rate to all merchants in the same industry category, and merchant
discount rates cannot exceed 3%.
in its final report on the retail banking sector issued in january2007, which included review
of the payment cards industry, including interchange fees, the european commission appears to favor
competition law enforcement tools, rather than regulating price levels, as the preferred means to
address perceived issues of insufficient competition in the european payment cards industry. the conclusions
of the european commission as expressed in its final report do not have the force of law, but may
be used as the basis for future legislation or regulation in the european union countries. in
2007, as an example, the competition regulator in poland found insufficient basis for visa and
mastercard interchange fees and ordered the associations to stop their current interchange setting
practices, and the banks are appealing that decision.
table of contents
in the united states, the board of governors of the federal reserve system and various federal
reserve banks have been following developments on interchange and have held several conferences
focused on credit card interchange rates. while the federal reserve has expressed interest in
monitoring this issue, it has not indicated the need to regulate interchange rates in the united
states. in congress, there have been several hearings on visa/mastercard interchange over the last
year. during 2006, there were also a number of bills proposed in individual state legislatures
seeking to impose caps on credit card interchange or to prohibit card companies from charging
merchant discount on the state tax portion of credit card purchases. none of those bills was
enacted. it is expected that congressional hearings and similar proposed state legislation will
continue during 2007. in the event that governmental or regulatory activity to limit interchange
continues or increases, our revenues and profitability could be adversely affected.
regulators, including most recently the european commission, have considered the industry
practice of prohibiting merchants from passing the cost of merchant discount fees along to
consumers through surcharges on card purchases. although some countries, such as the united
kingdom, have for a number of years permitted merchants to levy a surcharge on credit card
purchases, provided that surcharges were clearly disclosed, there has to date been a relatively low
overall incidence of surcharging, as merchants do not want to risk offending customers or losing
them to competitors that do not assess surcharges for credit card purchases. in its final report,
the european commission indicated that prohibiting surcharging appeared to restrict inter-network
competition and may constitute a barrier to entry for alternative, non-cash payment instruments.
in australia, we have seen selective merchant surcharging in certain industries such as
telecommunications and, in some cases, on a basis that is greater than applied to the bankcard
networks.
the european commission will likely be enacting a new legislative directive that will put in
place a licensing and supervision framework for all electronic payment methods in the european
union over the course of the next several years. the objective is to create a single, internal
payments market throughout the european union. the directive will likely be finalized in 2007 and
adopted as legislation in the member states of the european union through to the end of 2008. by
2010, licensing will be required and supervision will commence for american express card operations
in the european union. one provision of this draft directive gives merchants the right to
surcharge, subject to disclosure requirements. at the same time, new technical standards are being
adopted by the industry. all of the foregoing will entail costs to implement and maintain.
u.s. card services
as a significant part of its proprietary card issuing business, trs and its u.s. banking
subsidiaries issue a wide range of card products and services to consumers and small businesses in
the united states. our consumer travel business, which provides travel services to cardmembers and
other consumers, complements our core card business, as does our travelers check and prepaid
services business. the proprietary card business offers a broad set of card products to attract
our target customer base. core elements of our strategy are:
table of contents
focusing on acquiring and retaining high-spending, creditworthy
cardmembers across multiple groups;
designing card products with features that appeal to specific customer
segments;
the use of strong incentives to drive spending on our various card
products, including our membership rewards program and other
rewards features;
the use of loyalty programs such as delta skymiles ,
sponsored by our cobrand and other partners to drive spending;
the development and nurturing of wide-ranging relationships with cobrand
and other partners;
a multi-card strategy (having multiple card products in customers wallets); and
high-quality customer service.
consumer and small business services
we and our licensees offer individual consumer charge cards such as the american express card,
the american express one card, the american express gold card, the platinum
card, and the ultra-premium centurion card; revolving credit cards such as
blue from american express, blue cash card from american express and blue
sky from american express, a travel rewards card launched in 2005; and a variety of cards sponsored
by and cobranded with other corporations and institutions, such as the delta skymiles
credit card from american express, true earningssm card exclusively for costco members,
starwood preferred guest credit card and jetblue card from american express.
charge cards
our charge cards, which carry no pre-set spending limits, are primarily designed as a method
of payment and not as a means of financing purchases of goods or services. charges are approved
based on a variety of factors including a cardmembers current spending patterns, payment history,
credit record, and financial resources. cardmembers generally must pay the full amount billed each
month, and no finance charges are assessed on the balance. charge card accounts that are past due
are subject, in most cases, to a delinquency assessment and, if not brought to current status, may
be cancelled. the no preset-spending limit and pay-in-full nature of these products attract
high-spending cardmembers who want to use a charge card to facilitate larger payments.
the charge cards also offer enrollment services to cardmembers. the sign &
travel  program gives qualified u.s. cardmembers the option of extended
payments for airline, cruise and certain travel charges that are purchased with our charge cards.
the extended payment option offers qualified u.s. cardmembers the option of extending payment for
certain charges on the charge card in excess of a specified amount.
revolving credit cards
we offer a variety of revolving credit cards. these cards have a range of different payment
terms, grace periods and rate and fee structures. since late 1994, our lending balance growth has been among the
table of contents
top tier of card issuers. much of this growth has been due to the breadth of our lending
products, such as blue from american express, blue cash from american express
and the delta skymiles credit card from american express, as well as the increased number of charge
cardmembers who have taken advantage of our lending on charge options (such as the sign & travel
and extended payment option programs described above).
cobrand cards
we issue cards under cobrand agreements with selected commercial firms in the united states.
the competition among card issuers and networks for attractive cobrand card partnerships is quite
intense because they can generate high-spending loyal cardholders. the duration of our cobrand
arrangements generally ranges from five to ten years. cardmembers earn rewards provided by the
partners respective loyalty programs based upon their spending on the cobrand cards, such as
frequent flyer miles, hotel loyalty points and cash back. we make payments to our cobrand
partners, which can be significant, based primarily on the amount of cardmember spending and
corresponding rewards earned on such spending and, under certain arrangements, on the number of
accounts acquired and retained. we expense amounts due under cobrand arrangements in the month
earned. payment terms vary by arrangement, but are monthly or quarterly. generally, once we make
payment to the cobrand partner, the partner is solely liable for providing
rewards to the cardmember under the cobrand partners own loyalty program. as the issuer of the
cobrand card, we retain all the credit risk with the cardmember and bear the receivables funding
and operating expenses for such cards. the cobrand partner retains the risk associated with the
miles, points or other currency earned by the cardmember under the partners loyalty program.
cobrand partnerships with financial services institutions
we also issue cards that are marketed under cobrand partnership arrangements with financial
services partners. such partnerships involve the offering of a standard product (issued by trs or
one of its subsidiaries) to customers of the financial services partner, generally cobranded with
the partners name on the card. under these arrangements, we make payments to the financial
services partners that are primarily based on the number of accounts acquired and retained through
the arrangement and the amount of cardmember spending on such cards. the duration of such
arrangements generally ranges from three to seven years.
for example, during 2005 we established an alliance with guaranty bank to distribute cobranded
cards to guarantys small business customers throughout its branch network in texas and california.
in 2006, we expanded this partnership to include a cobranded american express preferred rewards
gold card, to be offered to guaranty banks consumer customers at its various locations. this past
year, we also announced a strategic bank partnership between open from american express and
sovereign bank, under which sovereign will offer american express business cards to small business
customers in the northeast.
american express centurion bank and american express bank, fsb as issuers of certain cards
table of contents
our revolving credit cards in the united states are issued by american express centurion bank
(centurion bank), which markets primarily through direct mail and other remote marketing
channels, and american express bank, fsb (aebfsb), which markets primarily through in-person
selling and third-party cobrand partners. both banks are wholly owned subsidiaries of trs.
centurion bank is a utah-chartered industrial bank regulated, supervised and regularly
examined by the utah department of financial institutions and the federal deposit insurance
corporation (fdic). centurion bank is an fdic-insured depository institution. aebfsb is a
federal savings bank regulated, supervised and regularly examined by the office of thrift
supervision (ots), a bureau of the u.s. department of the treasury. aebfsb is an fdic-insured
depository institution. the activities of centurion bank and aebfsb are subject to examination by
their respective regulators. both banks take steps to maintain compliance programs to
address the various safety and soundness, internal control and compliance requirements, including anti-money laundering
requirements, that apply to them. you can find a further discussion of the anti-money laundering
initiatives affecting us under corporate and other below.
centurion bank is subject to the risk-based capital adequacy requirements promulgated by the
fdic. under these regulations, a bank is deemed to be well-capitalized if it maintains a tier one
risk-based capital ratio of at least 6%, a total risk-based capital ratio of at least 10% and a
leverage ratio of at least 5%. based on centurion banks tier one risk-based capital, total
risk-based capital and leverage ratios, centurion bank was considered
to be well-capitalized at
december31, 2006.
aebfsb is subject to the risk-based capital adequacy requirements promulgated by the ots.
under these regulations, a federal savings bank is deemed to be well-capitalized if it maintains a
tier one risk-based capital ratio of at least 6%, a total risk-based capital ratio of at least 10%,
and a tier one core capital ratio of at least 5%. based on aebfsbs tier one risk-based capital,
total risk-based capital and tier one core capital ratios, aebfsb was considered to be
well-capitalized at december31, 2006.
card pricing and account management
certain of our cards, particularly charge cards, charge an annual fee that varies based on the
type of card and the number of cards for each account. we also offer many revolving credit cards
with no annual fee but on which we assess finance charges for revolving balances. depending on the
product, we also charge cardmember fees to participate in rewards programs, for account performance
(e.g., late fees) or for certain services (e.g., additional copies of account statements). we
apply standards and criteria for creditworthiness to each cardmember through a variety of means
both at the time of initial solicitation or application and on an ongoing basis during the card
relationship. we use sophisticated credit models and techniques in our risk management operations
and believe that our strong risk management capabilities provide us with a competitive advantage.
table of contents
membership rewards program
the membership rewards program from american express has over 1,300 redemption partners
worldwide and is offered in 98 markets. the program allows cardmembers to earn one point for
virtually every dollar charged on eligible, enrolled american express   cards,
and then redeem their points for a wide array of rewards, including travel, retail merchandise,
dining and entertainment, financial services and even donating their points to benefit tens of
thousands of charities. points have no expiration date, and there is no limit on the number of
points one can earn.
in
2006, we introduced innovative features such as first
collectionsm
portfolio, a luxury rewards tier
exclusively for platinum
card
and centurion card members. redemption partners include some of the worlds
finest retail establishments and service providers, such as tiffany & co., lamborghini and oberoi
hotels & resorts. we also introduced bonus points
mallsm
program, an online gateway to more than 100
retailers, where cardmembers can earn double membership rewards points for their purchases. we
also redesigned our web site to deliver enhanced capabilities. in 2007, we plan to introduce a
tiered structure that will include tailored rewards offerings and
services for our premium cards.
when a cardmember enrolled in the membership rewards program uses the card, we establish
reserves to cover the cost of estimated future reward redemptions for points earned to date. when
a membership rewards program enrollee redeems a reward using membership rewards points, we make a
payment to the membership rewards program partner providing the reward pursuant to contractual
arrangements. because of higher charge volumes and increased customer participation in membership
rewards, the expense of the program has increased both in the united states and internationally
over the past several years and continues to grow.
despite the increasing costs of the membership rewards program as penetration and usage
expand, it plays a vital role in our profitability. the program continues to be an important
driver of cardmember spending and loyalty. we believe, based on historical experience, that
cardmembers enrolled in rewards programs yield higher spend, stronger credit performance and
greater profit for us. for the three-year period through the end of 2006, total spending by u.s.
membership rewards participants increased by 66%. by offering a broader range of redemption
choices, we have given our cardmembers more flexibility in the use of their rewards points and
favorably affected our average cost per point. we continually seek to optimize the overall
economics of the program and make changes to enhance its value to cardmembers. our program is also
valuable to merchants that become redemption partners as we bring them high-spending cardmembers
and new marketing channels to reach these cardmembers.
cardmember special services and programs
throughout the world, our cardmembers have access to a variety of fee-free and fee-based
special services and programs, depending on the type of cards they have and their country of
residence. examples of these special services and programs include:
the membership rewards program;
table of contents
global assistsm hotline;
emergency check cashing privileges;
buyers assurance plan;
automatic flight insurance;
car rental loss and damage insurance;
premium baggage protection;
purchase protection plan;
assured reservations;
emergency card replacement;
online fraud protection guarantee;
return protection;
credit card registry;
manage your card account online;
credit bureau monitoring and reporting;
online year end summary;
identity theft assistance; and
roadside assistance  anywhere;
event ticket protection plan.
automatic bill pay;
during 2006, we began membership changes everythingsm, a five-week series of free activities
in the new york city area for cardmembers who carry american express-issued cards, which was
designed to exhibit the benefits and services that accompany card membership.
we offer the platinum card, a charge card that provides access to additional and enhanced
travel, protection, personal assistance and other services. in addition, we offer the
centurion card, an ultra-premium charge card providing highly personalized
customer service and an array of travel, lifestyle and financial benefits.
open
from american express
in addition to our u.s. consumer card business, through aebfsb we are also a leading
provider of financial services to small businesses (firms that generally have less than 100
employees and/or sales of $10million or less), a key growth area in the united states. open from
american express (open) offers small business owners a wide range of
tools, services and savings designed to meet their evolving needs, including:
charge and credit cards;
access to lines of credit up to $100,000;
discounts at select suppliers of business services and products, including
airline tickets, car rentals, hotel stays, package shipping, computer and software
equipment, telecommunications, printing and photocopying services and other business
services;
expense management reporting;
enhanced online account management capabilities;
retail and travel protections such as baggage insurance; and
travel services.
during
2006, we continued to expand the breadth of products and services
offered by
open by,
among other things, introducing several new cards:
the jetblue business card from american express, which offers small
business owners an automatic open
savings discount of 5% on jetblue flights, plus one
award dollar on virtually every purchase and double awards dollars on select small
business purchases, including jetblue travel, gasoline, office supplies, wireless phone
charges and car rentals;
the american express
simplycashsm business card, offering
automatic cash back
table of contents
rewards for small business owners through monthly rebates within the cardmembers
statements. cardmembers receive 5% cash back each month on gas, office supplies and
wireless charges, and 1% cash back on virtually all other purchases; and
the starwood preferred guest business credit card,
which incorporates programs and services tailored specifically to the
small business owner and
gives starpoints for all their business spending that can be redeemed for hotel stays
or airline flights. at the same time, we enhanced and relaunched the starwood
preferred guest credit card for consumers, enabling cardmembers to take advantage of
greater benefits and richer rewards.
these programs are in addition to open savings, which is a program that
offers savings for open customers on travel and other major business expenses simply by using their
american express business card at participating companies. these savings may be combined with any
existing discounts or offers. during 2006, we expanded open savings by signing new partners and
expanding relationships with existing ones in various categories, including:
the launch of airline partners delta airlines and jetblue airways. small
business owners using any american express business card receive an automatic 3%
discount on the total cost of delta and jetblue flights. in addition, cardmembers who
purchase flights on these airlines, using their respective delta skymiles, skypoints
delta business card or jetblue business card, will receive an additional 2% discount
off the total cost of the flights; and
the inclusion of two new technology partners, gateway and symantec.
competition  card issuing business
our proprietary card business encounters substantial and intense competition. as a card
issuer, we compete in the united states with financial institutions (such as citibank, bank of
america, jpmorgan chase, and capital one financial) that issue general purpose credit cards,
primarily under revolving credit plans, and the morgan stanley affiliate that issues the discover
card on the discover business services network. we also encounter limited competition from
businesses that issue their own cards or otherwise extend credit to their customers, such as
retailers and airline associations, although these cards are not generally substitutes for our
cards because of their limited acceptance. because of continuing consolidations among banking and
financial services companies and credit card portfolio acquisitions by major card issuers, there
are now a smaller number of significant issuers and the largest issuers have continued to grow, in
several cases by acquiring card portfolios and also by cross-selling through their retail branch
networks.
competing card issuers offer a variety of products and services to attract cardholders,
including premium cards with enhanced services or lines of credit, airline frequent flyer program
mileage credits, cash rebates and other reward or rebate programs, services for small business
owners, teaser promotional interest rates for both credit card acquisition and balance transfers,
and cobranded arrangements with partners that offer benefits to cardholders. in recent years we
have encountered increasingly intense competition in the small business sector, as competitors
table of contents
have targeted opens customer base as a result of our leadership position in providing
financial services to small businesses.
most financial institutions that offer demand deposit accounts also issue debit cards to
permit depositors to access their funds. use of debit cards for point-of-sale purchases has grown
as most financial institutions have replaced atm cards with general purpose debit cards bearing
either the visa or mastercard logo. as a result, the volume of transactions made with debit cards
in the united states has continued to increase significantly and, in the united states, has grown
more rapidly than credit and charge card transactions. debit cards are marketed as replacements
for cash and checks, and transactions made with debit cards are typically for small dollar amounts.
the ability to substitute debit cards for credit and charge cards is limited because the consumer
must have sufficient funds in his or her demand deposit account to cover the transaction in
question. for example, larger purchases or delayed purchases may not be appropriate for debit
cards. we do not currently issue point-of-sale debit cards for use on the american express
network.
the principal competitive factors that affect the card-issuing business are:
the features and the quality of the services, including rewards programs,
provided to cardmembers;
the number, spending characteristics and credit performance of cardmembers;
the quantity and quality of the establishments that accept
cards;
the cost of cards to cardmembers;
pricing, payment and other card account terms and conditions;
the number and quality of other payment instruments available to cardmembers;
the nature and quality of expense management data capture and reporting
capability;
the success of targeted marketing and promotional campaigns;
reputation and brand recognition;
the ability of issuers to manage credit and interest rate risk throughout
the economic cycle;
the ability of issuers to implement operational and cost efficiencies; and
the quality of customer service.
as the payment industry continues to evolve, we are also beginning to face competition from
non-traditional players, such as online networks and telecom providers, that leverage new
technology to create payment solutions.
financing activities
american express credit corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of trs, along with its
subsidiaries (credco), purchases the majority of charge card receivables arising from the use of
cards issued in the united states and in certain currencies outside the united states. credco
finances the purchase of receivables principally through the issuance of commercial paper and the
sale of medium- and long-term notes. centurion bank and aebfsb finance their revolving credit
receivables, in part, through the sale of short- and medium-term notes and certificates of deposit
in the united states. trs, centurion bank and aebfsb also fund receivables through
table of contents
asset securitization programs. the cost of funding cardmember receivables and loans is a
major expense of card operations. (you can find a discussion of trs and centurion banks
securitization and other financing activities on page32,
page35, pages
43 - 48 and pages 55 - 56 under the caption financial review, and note
5 on pages 87 - 89 of the companys 2006 annual report
to shareholders, which portions we incorporate herein by reference.)
regulation  card issuing business
the charge card and consumer lending businesses are subject to extensive regulation. in the
united states, the business is subject to a number of federal laws and regulations, including:
the equal credit opportunity act (which generally prohibits discrimination
in the granting and handling of credit);
the fair credit reporting act (fcra), as amended by the fair and
accurate credit transactions act (fact act) (which, among other things, regulates use
by creditors of consumer credit reports and credit prescreening practices and requires
certain disclosures when an application for credit is rejected);
the truth in lending act (tila) (which, among other things, requires
extensive disclosure of the terms upon which credit is granted), including the
amendments to tila that were adopted through the enactment of the fair credit and
charge card disclosure act (which mandates certain disclosures on credit and charge
card applications);
the fair credit billing act (which, among other things, regulates the
manner that billing inquiries are handled and specifies certain billing requirements);
and
the electronic funds transfer act (which regulates disclosures and
settlement of transactions for electronic funds transfers including those at atms).
certain federal privacy-related laws and regulations govern the collection and use of customer
information by financial institutions (see corporate and other below). federal legislation also
regulates abusive debt collection practices. in addition, a number of states, the european union,
and many foreign countries in which we operate have significant
consumer credit protection and disclosure and privacy-related laws (in certain cases more stringent than the laws in the united
states). the application of bankruptcy and debtor relief laws affect us to the extent that such
laws result in amounts owed being classified as delinquent and/or charged off as uncollectible.
card issuers and card networks are subject to anti-money laundering and anti-terrorism legislation,
including, in the united states, the patriot act. (for a discussion of this legislation and its
effect on our business, see regulation in the global network services section above and see
corporate and other below.)
centurion bank, aebfsb and our other bank entities are subject to a variety of laws and
regulations applicable to financial institutions. changes in such laws and regulations or in the
regulatory application or judicial interpretation thereof could impact the manner in which we
conduct our business and the costs of compliance. the regulatory environment in which our card and
lending businesses operate has become increasingly complex and robust. more recently, the u.s.
congress, as well as regulators and various consumer advocacy groups, have begun increasing focus
and attention on the types and levels of fees charged by card issuers for,
table of contents
among other things, late payments, returned checks, payments by telephone, copies of
statements and the like. we regularly review and, as appropriate, refine our business practices in
light of existing and anticipated developments in laws, regulations and industry trends so we can
continue to manage our business prudently and consistent with regulatory requirements and
expectations.
in january2003, the federal financial institutions examination council (the ffiec), an
interagency body composed of the principal u.s. federal entities that regulate banks and other
financial institutions, issued new guidance to the industry on credit card account management and
loss allowance practices (the guidance). the guidance covers five areas: (i)credit line
management, (ii)over-limit practices, (iii)minimum payment and negative amortization practices,
(iv)workout and forbearance practices, and (v)certain income (fee)recognition and loss allowance
practices. the guidance is generally applicable to all institutions under the supervision of the
federal bank regulatory agencies that comprise the ffiec, although it is primarily the result of
the identification by bank regulators in their examinations of other credit card lenders practices
deemed by them to be inappropriate, particularly, but not exclusively, with regard to subprime
lending programs. at present, we do not have any lending programs
that target the subprime market. centurion bank and
aebfsb evaluate and discuss the guidance with their respective regulators on an ongoing basis as
part of their regulatory examination processes, and, as a result, may refine their practices from
time to time based on regulatory input. the guidance has not had, nor
do we expect it to have, any material
impact on our businesses or practices.
global travelers cheques and prepaid services (tcps)
we have been in the business of issuing and selling travelers checks since 1891. in addition
to travelers checks, we also offer a variety of other prepaid products, including reloadable and
non-reloadable prepaid cards and, through american express incentive services l.l.c., a joint
venture with maritz inc., we offer various incentive prepaid products, including the corporate gift
cheque, the incentive funds card and several points-based incentive cards.
we sell the american express  travelers cheque (travelers cheque or
cheque) as a safe and convenient alternative to cash. travelers cheques are available in eight
currencies, including euros. we also issue and sell other forms of paper travelers checks:
american express  gift cheques, which are available in u.s. and canadian
dollars, and the american express cheque-secure funds, which are available in dollars and euros,
and are offered in certain countries as a safe way to keep cash at home. sales of travelers
cheques declined slightly in 2006, reflecting the migration of the prepaid business toward plastic.
tcps offers prepaid gift cards in the united states: the american express  gift card (gift
card), which can be used in the united states at businesses that accept american express cards,
subject to certain usage limitations, and mall-branded gift cards, which are specifically designed
for use solely at merchants that accept the american express card and that are located within a
specific shopping mall. our gift cards are now sold through tens of thousands of
table of contents
locations throughout the united states, and we added many new ones during the year, including
gas stations, retail bank branches and grocery stores. sales of gift cards continued to rise,
reflecting the growing popularity of these products and our efforts to increase buying convenience
for customers.
we also continued to offer the travelers cheque card (tcc), a reloadable, prepaid card
marketed as a plastic form of our travelers cheque. during 2006, the tcc was sold in the united
states, the united kingdom and germany, in u.s. dollars, british pounds sterling and euros,
respectively, for use worldwide, for both online and in-person purchases and at atms (atm fees
apply) that accept the american express card. tcc holders have access to the same customer service
and security provided to holders of travelers cheques, including card replacement or refund if the
tcc is lost or stolen (usually within 24 hours).
we sell american express paper and plastic prepaid products through a variety of channels. we
sell these products directly to consumers via phone and the internet. travelers cheques and gift
cheques are sold primarily through a broad network of selling outlets worldwide, including american
express travel offices, independent travel agents, financial institutions, and many other
financial, travel and commercial businesses. many of the same sellers also sell our prepaid cards.
we sometimes compensate selling outlets for their sales.
in 2006, we continued to expand our gift card retail distribution network significantly to
include walgreens and office depot, as well as more than 2,500 locations in the grocery category,
malls and large national retail chains. these sellers use prepaid card merchandise racks to market
and sell our gift cards.
competition  travelers checks and prepaid cards
travelers cheques compete with a wide variety of financial payment products, including cash,
foreign currency, checks, other brands of travelers checks, and, increasingly, debit and atm cards,
as well as credit and charge cards (even though travelers checks and prepaid cards are not
substitutes for charge and credit cards) and, to a limited extent, competing prepaid cards. the
principal competitive factors affecting the travelers check and prepaid card industry are:
the number and location of merchants willing to accept the form of payment;
the availability to the consumer of other forms of payment;
the amount of fees charged to the consumer;
the compensation paid to, and frequency of settlement by, selling outlets;
the accessibility of sales and refunds for the products;
the success of marketing and promotional campaigns; and
the ability to service the customer satisfactorily, including for lost or
stolen instruments.
our prepaid cards (open-system cards that can be used at multiple unaffiliated sellers of
goods or services) compete with the same payment methods described
above; however, gift cards compete
primarily with cash, checks and other open-system and store-specific gift cards.
table of contents
regulation  travelers cheques and prepaid cards
as an issuer of travelers checks, we are regulated in the united states under the money
transmitter or sale of check laws in effect in most states. these laws require travelers check
(and, where applicable, prepaid card) issuers to obtain licenses, to meet certain safety and
soundness criteria, to hold outstanding proceeds of sale in highly-rated and secure investments,
and to provide detailed reports. we invest the proceeds from sales of our travelers cheques and
prepaid cards issued by trs in accordance with applicable law,
predominantly in highly-rated debt
securities consisting primarily of intermediate- and long-term federal, state and municipal
obligations. in 2006, a few states (e.g., hawaii and new hampshire) passed money transmitter laws
for the first time, and we have applied for or secured licenses in each of these jurisdictions.
many states examine licensees annually. in addition, travelers check issuers are required by the
laws of many states to comply with state unclaimed and abandoned property laws under which such
issuers must pay to states the face amount of any travelers check that is uncashed or unredeemed
after 15years. a few states have amended their abandoned property laws to apply to prepaid cards.
in the past few years, some states have enacted laws pertaining to the issuance and the sale
of gift cards. we continue to monitor state legislative activity restricting the fees that
consumers can be charged or the expiration dates that can apply to gift cards. in certain states
where regulation has made it impossible for us to offer gift cards profitably, we have limited or
withdrawn from selling these cards. federal anti-money laundering regulations require, among other
things, the registration of traveler check issuers as money service businesses and compliance
with anti-money laundering recordkeeping and reporting requirements by issuers and selling outlets.
at this time, stored value issuers and redeemers, while considered to be money service
businesses, are not required to register under these regulations. outside the united states, there are varying licensing
and anti-money laundering requirements, including some that are similar to those in the united
states.
american express consumer travel network  usa
the american express consumer travel network  usa provides travel, financial and cardmember
services to consumers through american express-owned travel service offices, call centers,
participating american express representatives (independently-owned travel agency locations that
operate under the american express brand) and the consumer travel web site. u.s. consumer travel
has distinguished itself in the luxury marketplace through its platinum travel services and
centurion travel services, which provide programs such as the international airline program, which
offers two-for-one fares on certain international first and business class tickets, and the fine
hotels & resorts program, a luxury hotel program offering room upgrades and value-added amenities.
other premium programs developed by consumer travel for centurion and
platinum card members include
centurion cruise
privileges
, centurion
destinations  and platinum destinations  vacations, the private jets program, private
villas and yachts. consumer travel also provides membership rewards programs designed for unique
cardmember segments such as membership rewards land & sea packages and gold destinations.
table of contents
in addition, the consumer travel business operates a wholesale travel business in the united
states through our travel impressions subsidiary. (a wholesaler purchases inventory, such as hotel
rooms, from suppliers and then resells the services to the customer at retail prices that the
wholesaler determines.) our wholesale travel business packages american express vacations and
distributes travel packages through other retail travel agents and private label brands for third
parties in the united states.
our consumer travel web site, americanexpress.com/travel, offers a full range of travel rates
and discounts on airfares, hotels, car rentals, last-minute deals, cruises and full vacation
packages. the web site offers unique american express cardmember benefits such as an american
express travel office locator, travel specialist finder tools, double membership rewards points,
and travel planning resources and destination content through the local color portion of the web
site. in addition, cardmembers are able to redeem membership rewards points for some categories of
travel through both our web site and our call centers and travel offices.
in 2006, consumer travel attracted eight new members with 43 locations to our representative
network, including the travel team, ci travel and passageways travel.
trs worldwide travel network of more than 2,200 retail travel locations is important in
supporting the american express brand and providing cardmember servicing throughout the world,
including a range of traveler cheques, gift cheques, gift cards and foreign exchange services.
competition  consumer travel network  usa
american express consumer travel competes with a variety of different competitors including
traditional brick and mortar travel agents, credit card companies with significant travel
benefits, online travel agents and travel suppliers that distribute their products to consumers
directly via the internet or telephone-based customer service centers. in recent years we have
experienced an increasing presence of niche players that are seeking to capitalize on the growth
in the luxury travel segment by combining luxury travel offers with concierge-type services.
international card & global commercial services
international proprietary consumer card
we
issue our charge and credit cards in numerous countries around the globe. although
our geographic scope is widespread, we generally do not have significant share in the markets in
which we operate. we focus primarily on those markets that we believe offer us the greatest
financial opportunity.
the company continued to bolster its international proprietary card business through the
launch of numerous new or enhanced card products during 2006. these are cards that we issue,
either on our own or, as further described below, as cobrands with partnering institutions. this
past year, among other new proprietary products, we announced or launched:
the american express red card in the united kingdom, in partnership
with project red, pursuant to which a portion of the money spent by cardmembers is
donated to the global fund for hiv/aids programs in africa;
cobranded consumer credit cards with qantas airlines in australia and thai
airways international in thailand, designed to appeal to the airlines most frequent travelers;
the american express small business platinum charge card in italy, and a
small business gold charge card in france;
new platinum credit cards in india and argentina; and
distribution agreements with commerzbank to distribute consumer cards in
germany; with abn-amro to distribute consumer cards in the netherlands; and with
mitsubishi ufj financial group to distribute consumer cards in japan.
we offer many of the same programs in our international proprietary card issuing business as
we do in our u.s. proprietary issuing business. for example, as in the united states, we offer
various flexible payment options similar to our sign & travel program and our extended payment
option to cardmembers in several international markets.
also, as in the united states, we issue cards internationally under distribution agreements
with banks. another example of our distribution partnerships is affinity cards with fraternal,
professional, educational and other organizations. for instance, we have been successful in
penetrating the affinity card segment in australia, where we issue cards with the majority of the
largest professional associations in that country. in australia, affinity cards are a substantial
part of our total revolving portfolio and contribute to our proprietary consumer lending
activities.
as in the united states, rewards programs are a strong driver of cardmember spending in the
international consumer business. we have more than 1,300 redemption partners across our
international business, with an average of 75 partners in each country; less than 23% of these
partners are in the travel industry. cardmembers can redeem their points with more than 35
airlines and over 200 hotels. our redemption options include travel, retail merchandise,
entertainment, shopping and recreation gift certificates, experiences, financial services and
charity rewards. in 2006, we continued to enhance our rewards programs in several markets,
offering more flexible choices that enable cardmembers to redeem points more quickly.
significantly, in selected markets we launched travelkey, which allows cardmembers to book flights
and vacations with virtually any airline to any destination without restrictions, and enhanced the
membership rewards web site to offer easier online redemption. in australia, we introduced
membership rewards concierge service to help cardmembers create customized rewards packages.
membership travel services international provides premium travel and lifestyle, as well as
concierge services, a benefit that exemplifies the customer experience provided to our platinum
card and centurion card customers, through 25 exclusively dedicated international call centers in
25 countries. additionally, membership travel services operates 25 proprietary travel service
offices in mexico, argentina and italy to provide cardmembers with travel and foreign exchange
assistance. across all markets, we are enhancing our capabilities to sell exclusively negotiated
benefits and luxury travel packages with preferred suppliers through american expresss
international airline program, the fine hotel& resorts program and american express vacations to
create exceptional experiences for our cardmembers.
table of contents
competition  international proprietary consumer card
as compared to the united states, consumers outside the united states use cards for a smaller
percentage of their total payments, with some large emerging market countries just beginning to
transition to card usage in any meaningful way. currently, we have a small share of consumer card
spending outside the united states. internationally, our proprietary card issuing business is
subject to competition from multinational banks, such as citibank, hsbc and banco santander, as
well as many local banks and financial institutions. globally, we view citibank and hsbc as our
strongest competitors, as they offer card products in a large number of markets.
global commercial services
through our global commercial services (gcs) group, we provide expense management services
to more than 100,000 firms worldwide through our corporate card program, corporate purchasing
solutions, electronic invoicing and payment services
(source-to-settle
(s2ssm)) and global business travel services. american
express is a
leading global issuer of commercial cards and is also a leading
global travel management company for corporations and businesses. during 2006, we added or retained several
major corporate card clients in the united states and internationally, including accenture, costco
wholesale corporation, merrill lynch, phillips and siemens
corporation. we also were awarded the corporate travel business of
several new clients including astra zeneca plc, medtronic inc.,
nortel networks corporation, bearingpoint inc. and lear corporation. gcs offers four primary
products and services:
corporate card, issued to individuals through a corporate account
established by their employer and designed primarily for travel and entertainment
spending;
corporate purchasing solutions, an account established by a company to pay
for everyday business expenses such as office and computer supplies;
s2s, a suite of electronic solutions
for companies looking to automate their source-to-settle processes and gain savings and
control by integrating steps in their entire procurement cycle; and
business travel, which helps businesses manage their travel expenses
through a variety of travel-related products and services.
table of contents
corporate
card, corporate purchasing solutions, and s2s
the american express corporate card is a charge card that individuals
may obtain through a corporate account established by their employer for business purposes.
through the corporate card program, companies can manage their travel, entertainment and purchasing
expenses and improve negotiating leverage with suppliers, among other benefits. we use our direct
relationships with merchants to offer corporate card clients superior data about company spending,
as well as streamlined dispute resolution. we issue local currency
corporate cards in over 35
countries, which we distribute through proprietary operations and partner banks, and international
dollar corporate cards in over 100 countries.
corporate purchasing solutions (cps) helps global, large and middle market companies manage
their everyday spending. cps is used by corporations to buy everyday goods and services, such as
office supplies and industrial supplies and equipment, in 24 markets around the world. this type
of spending by corporations is less susceptible to economic downturns than traditional travel and
entertainment spending and helps to diversify the spending mix on our cards.
s2ssm
solutions are designed to help companies improve
the efficiency of their supply chain, reduce processing costs and increase control and compliance
along all steps in the purchasing process. the s2s product set
significantly
expands the american express suite of commercial card products and
services and responds to clients
needs as they transform their purchasing process, from sourcing and ordering through invoice and
payment. to support the development and roll-out of the s2s
electronic invoice and payment suite of solutions, at the end of 2006, the company acquired harbor
payments, inc., an atlanta-based technology company with an established network of corporate
clients and business-to-business suppliers.
in addition to providing expense management services to large and global corporations, our gcs
business markets corporate card programs to middle market companies (defined in the united states
as firms with annual revenues of $10million to $1billion) worldwide. gcs is focused on
continuing to expand its business with midsize companies, which represent significant growth opportunities. businesses of this size often do not have corporate card
programs. however, once enrolled in the program, midsize companies, which usually do not have
well-defined purchasing programs, will typically put a significant portion of their business
spending (both travel and entertainment and non-t&e, such as office supplies) on the card because
they can gain control, savings and employee benefits. in 2005, our gcs business invested in a wide
range of marketing programs and product enhancements, and added sales staff to build our business
within the midsize segment. in support of this strategy, gcs offers the savings at
worksm  program in the united states, as well as similar programs globally,
which provide companies with cash back and/or discounted pricing on everyday business products and
services, such as car rentals, hotels, restaurants and courier services.
table of contents
with the increased focus on cost containment by firms, we have experienced significant growth
over the past few years in the corporate meeting card, which helps u.s.-based and international
companies control company meeting expenses. the corporate meeting card is available in 19 global
markets and provides clients with a tool to capture such spending and provides company meeting
planners with a tool to simplify the meetings payment process and access to data to negotiate with
suppliers. gcs also offers the corporate defined expense program. this product allows companies
to set a maximum amount to be charged on a card before expiration and permits them to segregate
spending data for specific purposes on projects. it is designed for companies that want to
allocate funds for a specific purpose, such as employee relocations or training.
during
2006, we also partnered with a group of major hotel companies in north america and
europe to offer our corporate clients secure web-based access to enhanced data regarding their
employees lodging spend. this enhanced data is available for integration with expense reporting
providers to allow for pre-itemization of lodging transactions, thereby reducing the amount of time
required for employees to process their t&e expenses.
gcs also offers american express@work , a secure, web-based suite of
online tools that enables clients to manage their global corporate card, corporate purchasing
solutions and corporate meeting card programs on a 24/7 basis through a single user interface. @
work provides authorized client representatives online access to global management information to
help them gain visibility into their spending patterns, as well as the ability make changes to
their program or card accounts through an easy to use online interface. @ work also includes
automated expense reporting and reconciliation tools that enable clients to enforce program
compliance and effectively integrate spend information with their internal accounting systems.
this suite of online tools is intended to assist companies in managing expenses more efficiently
than offline alternatives, thereby decreasing both the direct and indirect costs associated with
maintaining accounts and ensuring program compliance.
competition  global commercial card business
the
commercial payments industry is dynamic and highly competitive, with
competition increasingly intense at both the card network and card
issuer levels. at the network level, we have experienced increasing
competition in the commercial card marketplace, including aggressive expansion into new and emerging markets,
efforts to transition business-to-business spend from cash and check to cards and electronic
invoicing and payment vehicles and expanding marketing and advertising budgets for commercial
services.
in addition, both visa and mastercard have increased efforts to support card issuers such as
u.s. bank, jpmorgan chase, ge capital financial inc. and citibank (in the united states and
globally), who are willing to build and support data collection and reporting necessary to satisfy
customer requirements.
card issuers have increasingly acquired niche technology offerings to enhance data capture
capabilities and reporting functionality. these efforts are built on the solid progress of the
bankcard associations to offer more global, robust solutions. as such, global servicing, data
quality, technological functionality and simplicity, and customer experience are among the key
competitive factors in the commercial card business.
global travel services
gcs global travel services consists of american express business travel and
global foreign exchange services.
table of contents
american express business travel provides globally integrated solutions, both online and
offline, to help organizations optimize their travel investments and service their traveling
employees. these solutions include travel reservation advice and booking transaction processing;
travel expense management policy consultation; supplier negotiation and consultation; management
information reporting, data analysis and benchmarking; and group and incentive travel services.
business travel services customers directly in 34 key markets worldwide, of which 28 are
proprietary operations and six are managed through joint ventures. in addition, business travel
also serves customers in other relevant markets through franchise partnerships. in 2006, business
travel sold and franchised operations in brazil and new zealand. american express processed $21.8
billion of travel spend globally in 2006.
business travel continues to update its economic model and invest in new innovative products,
services and technologies to enhance the value that we deliver to our customers and address ongoing
travel industry challenges and opportunities. for example, we have substantially reduced our
reliance on commission revenues from suppliers (such as airlines or hotels), and now generate
revenues primarily from customers who pay for the services that we provide. we have comprehensive
cost-saving travel management offerings for our clients, including webfare guarantees for the
small- and mid-sized segments in the united states, a travel management loyalty program with double
membership rewards points for individual travelers and automatic ticket refunds in the united
states and select international markets. we also offer customers savings and benefits through the
preferred extra supplier value programs and advisory services, which provide consulting solutions
in all areas of travel and entertainment expense management. business travel also offers the
travelbahn   distribution solution, a proprietary distribution solution that
provides access to airline inventory and fares for american express business travel customers with
a number of carriers, in north america and in select international markets. business travel offers
a range of other solutions to our customers that provide them with savings, control, services and
traveler care.
among other developments during 2006, we also worked with rearden commerce to launch american
express intelligent online marketplace (axiomsm), an online marketplace of more than 135,000
suppliers that lets clients find, purchase and manage both traditional travel and related services,
such as airport parking, dining and package shipping. this site passes on negotiated savings from
our merchant partners to clients, and makes it easier for business travelers to book with approved
suppliers.
during 2006, business travel also formed global advisory services, providing clients with
end-to-end solutions to help them optimize their investments in air, hotel, car rental and meetings
spending. business travel also introduced security suite, a global traveler security
table of contents
solution to support our clients in locating and caring for their traveling executives in times
of unexpected events and crises.
business travel continued numerous reengineering initiatives in 2006, including the
rationalization of our network, standardization of platforms and processes and implementation of
new technology solutions to increase the flexibility of our business model, increase productivity,
reduce costs and enhance the quality of customer service globally. business travel has also moved
many of its business processes and customer servicing online. in the united states, 43% of all of
gcs business travel transactions were processed online, and while lower than in the united states,
online penetration rates in other markets, including the united kingdom, canada, mexico and
australia have been increasing in recent years, ranging from 7% to 27%.
global foreign exchange services (fes) consists of retail and wholesale foreign exchange
services and international payments. in 2006, we completed the divestiture of most of our retail
travel and fes standalone city locations, with the exceptions of australia, mexico and italy. we
are concentrating the retail foreign exchange business in key international airports, including
londons heathrow, the aeroports de paris and changi airport in singapore. for corporate clients,
our international payments online payment product allows companies and banks to make cross-border
payments in major foreign currencies at competitive exchange rates. wholesale banknote services
are also provided to select financial institutions and travel-related companies.
competition  global travel services
business travel continues to face intense competition in the united states and internationally
from numerous traditional and online travel management companies, as well as from direct sales by
airlines and other travel suppliers. competition among travel management companies is mainly based
on price, service, value creation, convenience, global capabilities and proximity to the customer.
in addition, competition comes from corporate customers themselves, as some companies have become
accredited as in-house corporate travel agents.
in 2006, significant changes were announced to the ownership and network structure of four of
the major traditional travel management companies  business travel international, tq3, carlson
wagonlit and navigant international, inc.  consolidating and realigning the shape of the industry.
similarly, changes to the ownership structures of numerous other travel industry companies were
announced in 2006, including, but not limited to, qantas airways ltd., sabre holdings corporation,
travelport ltd. and worldspan lp. in addition, the recently-withdrawn offer by us airways to
acquire delta air lines has increased speculation that the u.s. airline industry may be entering a
period of consolidation. more change in the industry is expected to follow. each of these changes
to the competitive environment in the industry may result in additional challenges to travel
management companies, which could have a competitive impact.
for
many years, travel management companies have faced pressure on
revenues from airlines, as most
carriers have stopped paying base commissions to travel agents for tickets sold. carriers have
also increased the number of transactions they book directly through their web sites and
table of contents
other means. these trends have reduced the revenue opportunities for travel agents because they do
not receive distribution revenue from directly booked transactions.
overall, intense competition among travel management companies, the ongoing trends of airline
direct sales, rise of low-cost carriers and ongoing reductions in or elimination of airline
commissions and fees continue to put pressure on revenue for travel agents. we believe that the
restructuring of our business model over the last few years by charging customers for the services
we provide and the value we create, restructuring our expense base through the rationalization of
our call center locations, transitioning many of our services online, and our global presence have
helped us to balance these revenue pressures.
american express bank
american express bank (aeb) serves affluent and high net worth individuals and financial
institutions through over 75 locations in 47 countries and regions worldwide. aebs operations are
conducted primarily through our indirect wholly owned subsidiary, american express bank ltd., and
its subsidiaries. aeb serves financial institutions worldwide and individual clients outside the
united states. aeb does not directly or indirectly do business in the united states except as may
be incidental to its activities outside the united states. the following discussion relating to
aeb generally does not distinguish between u.s.- and non-u.s.-based activities.
aebs two primary business lines are global wealth management (gwm), which incorporates the
private bank and financial advisory services, and the financial institutions group (fig). the
private bank focuses on delivering an extensive range of investment management, trust and estate
planning and banking services, including secured lending and investment certificates, to high net
worth individuals. financial advisory services provides a wide variety of local, domestic saving
and investment products to affluent individuals in hong kong, singapore, india, mexico, indonesia,
the philippines and germany.
fig provides financial institution clients with a wide range of correspondent banking
products, including international payments processing (wire transfers and checks), trade-related
payments and financing, cash management, loans, extensions of credit and investment products. aeb
also distributes mutual funds through its financial institutions clients. in addition, aeb
provides treasury and capital market products and services to its customers, including foreign
exchange, foreign exchange options and other derivatives and interest rate risk management
products.
aeb continues to work with other parts of american express to cross-sell a range of payment,
lending and financial service products and build deeper relationships with consumer and small
business customers in key international markets. aeb markets its private bank services to a highly
selective group of cardmembers outside the united states. aeb offers credit products such as
installment loans and revolving lines of credit to both cardmembers and non-cardmembers in germany,
hong kong, india and singapore. aeb also issues deposit certificates denominated in u.s. dollars,
euros, pounds sterling and australian dollars through american express international deposit
company in the cayman islands.
table of contents
aebs worldwide headquarters is located in new york city. it maintains an international
banking agency in new york city and miami, florida, and facility offices in san francisco, san
diego and los angeles, california, as well as a representative office in atlanta, georgia. its
wholly owned edge act subsidiary, american express bank international (aebi), is headquartered in
miami, florida, and has branches in new york city and miami.
risks  banking services
the global nature of aebs business activities is such that concentrations of credit to
geographic regions are not unusual. aeb continually monitors and actively manages its credit
concentrations to reduce the associated risk. the private banks loans are generally secured by
liquid, marketable collateral. fig controls its exposures by limiting its relationships to select
banks and limiting its exposures to such banks to quantitative limits (by obligor, by country and
by exposure type) that are periodically re-evaluated; such exposures also typically carry a
short-term tenure and are trade-related, which generally has a lower risk profile. at december31,
2006, aeb had significant investments in certain on- and off-balance sheet financial instruments,
which were primarily represented by deposits with banks, securities, loans, forward contracts,
contractual amounts of letters of credit (standby and commercial) and guarantees. the
counterparties to these financial instruments were primarily unrelated to aeb, and principally
consisted of consumers to whom aeb has extended loans, banks and other financial institutions and
foreign government agencies operating geographically within the asia/pacific region, europe, north
america, latin america, the indian subcontinent and middle east/africa.
aebs earnings are sensitive to interest rates because the repricing of its liabilities does
not, generally, match the repricing of its assets. aeb invests deposits in excess of loans and the
proceeds of investment certificates in highly-rated investment securities. it maintains mandatory
investment portfolios in a number of countries as required by central banks. aeb monitors and
controls its assets-liability mismatches both on a country and global level through a rigorous
earnings at risk process and manages the mismatch of assets and liabilities by adjusting the
repricing frequency of its investments or by using derivatives.
aeb sells foreign exchange, interest rate and equity products to its customer base and may
decide to take short-term proprietary trading positions as a result of this business. the foreign
exchange, interest rate and equity risk is managed at the branch and global level through a
comprehensive value at risk process. aeb manages counterparty credit exposure on foreign exchange
and interest rate derivatives through a dynamic mark-to-market and potential future exposure
process, in which the current fair value and potential future exposure are calculated and managed
against counterparty loan equivalent limits. you can find more information on aebs management of
its foreign exchange risk and use of derivative financial instruments
under the caption risk management  market risk management
process and in note 10 to the companys
consolidated financial statements on pages
51-52 and pages
93-95, respectively, of our 2006 annual
report to shareholders, which portions of such reports are incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
because aeb conducts significant business in emerging market countries and in countries that
are less politically and economically stable than the united states or those in western europe, its
private banking, financial advisory services and fig activities may be subject to greater credit
and compliance risks than are found in more well-developed jurisdictions. aeb continually monitors
its exposures in such jurisdictions, and regularly evaluates its client base to identify potential
legal risks as a result of clients use of aebs banking services.
competition  banking services
the banking services of aeb are subject to vigorous competition everywhere aeb operates.
competitors include local and international banks whose assets often exceed those of aeb, other
financial institutions and, in certain cases, governmental agencies.
regulation  banking services
american express banking corp. (aebc) is a new york investment company organized under
articlexii of the new york banking law and is a wholly owned direct subsidiary of american
express. american express bank ltd. (aebl) is a wholly owned direct subsidiary of aebc. aebc,
aebl and aebls global network of offices and subsidiaries are subject to continuous supervision
and examination by the new york state banking department (nysbd) pursuant to the new york banking
law. aebc does not directly engage in banking activities. aebls branches, representative offices
and subsidiaries are licensed and regulated in the jurisdictions in which they do business and are
subject to the same local requirements as other competitors that have the same license.
since aebc and aebl do not do business in the united states, except as may be incidental to
their activities outside the united states, our affiliation with aebc and aebl does not require us
to register as a bank holding company under regulationy promulgated by the board of governors of
the federal reserve system (federal reserve board). aebc and aebl are not members of the federal
reserve system, are not subject to supervision by the fdic, and are not subject to any of the
restrictions imposed by the competitive equality banking act of 1987
other than anti-tying rules
with respect to transactions involving products and services of certain of its affiliates. aebc
and aebl are not financial holding companies under the gramm-leach-bliley act.
the nysbd requires aebc, on a consolidated basis, to monitor its financial condition and
maintain risk-based and leverage capital in accordance with minimum thresholds established by the
nysbd. at year-end 2006, aeb had tier one, total and leverage capital (as those terms are defined
under the federal reserve boards risk-based capital guidelines) that exceeded the minimum
standards established by the nysbd. additionally, aeb is not required to comply on a consolidated
basis with the advanced internal ratings based approach incorporated in the basel ii capital accord
framework published in june, 2004. aeb monitors developments with respect to the implementation of
the basel ii capital accord in jurisdictions where its branch and subsidiary network is located.
table of contents
in recent years, u.s. and foreign regulatory authorities, together with international
organizations, have raised increasing concerns over the ability of criminal organizations and
corrupt persons to use global financial intermediaries to facilitate money laundering. in the
united states, the secretary of the treasury has issued regulations pursuant to the patriot act
that specifically impact certain money laundering prevention activities of entities involved, as
aebl is, in correspondent and private banking activities. compliance efforts to combat money
laundering remain a high priority for aebl, and it has increased its efforts to address evolving
regulatory and supervisory standards and requirements in jurisdictions in which it does business.
corporate & other
corporate and other includes american express publishing. we also discuss information
relevant to the company as a whole in this section.
american express publishing
through american express publishing, we publish luxury lifestyle magazines such as
travel+leisure , t+l family, a supplement to travel+leisure, t+l
golf , food & wine  and departures  ;
travel resources such as skyguide ; business resources such as the american
express appointment book and skyguide executive travel, a business traveler supplement; a variety
of general interest, cooking, travel, wine, financial and time management books; branded membership
services; a growing roster of international magazine editions; as well as directly sold and
licensed products. american express publishing also has a custom publishing group and is expanding
its service-driven web sites such as: travelandleisure.com, foodandwine.com, departures.com,
tlgolf.com, tlfamily.com and eskyguide.com. we have an agreement with time inc. under which it
manages our publishing business, and we share profits relating to this business.
service and technology infrastructure
we continue to make significant investments, both in the united states and internationally, in
our card systems and infrastructure to allow faster introduction and greater customization of
products. we also are using technology to develop and improve our service capabilities to continue
to deliver a high quality customer experience. for example, we maintain a service delivery
platform that our employees use in the card business to support a variety of customer servicing and
account management activities such as account maintenance, updating of cardmember information, the
addition of new cards to an account and resolving customer satisfaction issues. in international
markets, we are building flexibility and enhancing our global platforms and capabilities, such as
in revolving credit.
we continue to leverage the internet to lower costs, improve service quality and enhance our
business model. during 2006, we broadened our focus to include opportunities to use the internet
to drive revenue and build our brand, while continuing to focus on migrating transaction volumes at
lower costs. we now have more online interactions with u.s. customers than we do by telephone or
in person.
table of contents
at year-end, customers had enrolled approximately 21million cards globally in our manage
your card account service. this service enables cardmembers to review and pay their american
express bills electronically, view and service their membership rewards program accounts and
conduct various other functions quickly and securely online. we now have an online presence in 62
markets around the world, including gns markets.
we continue to devote substantial resources to our technology platform to ensure the highest
level of data integrity, security and privacy. also, in 2006, we and several other card networks
formed pci security standards council, llc, an independent standards-setting organization that will
manage the evolution of the payment card industry (pci)data security standard. (for a discussion
of this organization, see the global network services section above.)
in 2002, we outsourced most of our technology operations work to ibm. this arrangement, which
has a seven-year term with options to extend, enables us to benefit from ibms expertise while
lowering our information technology costs. ibm is responsible for managing most of our day-to-day
technology operations functions, including mainframe, midrange and desktop systems; web hosting;
database administration; help desk services and data center operations. our internal it
organization continues to retain the companys technology competencies, including information
technology strategy, information security, managing strategic relationships with technologies
partners, developing and maintaining applications and databases and managing the technology
portfolios of our businesses.
regulation  general
most aspects of our business are subject to rigorous regulation by u.s. federal and state
regulatory agencies and securities exchanges and by non-u.s. government agencies or regulatory
bodies and securities exchanges. certain of our public disclosure, internal control environment
and corporate governance principles are subject to the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 and related
regulations and rules of the sec and the new york stock exchange, inc. new laws or regulations or
changes to existing laws and regulations (including changes in interpretation or enforcement) could
materially adversely affect our financial condition or results of operations. as a global
financial institution, to the extent that different regulatory systems impose overlapping or
inconsistent requirements on the conduct of our business, we face complexity and additional costs
in our compliance efforts.
we use information about our customers to develop and make available relevant, personalized
products and services. our customers are given choices about how we use and disclose their
information, and we give them notice regarding the measures we take to safeguard this information.
regulatory activity in the areas of privacy and data protection continues to increase worldwide,
spurred by advancements in technology and related concerns about the rapid and widespread
dissemination and use of information. as noted above, as part of our efforts to enhance payment
account data security, in 2006, we and discover financial services, jcb, mastercard worldwide and
visa international formed the pci security standards council, an open global forum for the ongoing
development, enhancement, storage, dissemination and
table of contents
implementation of security standards for account data protection throughout the transaction
process.
the gramm-leach-bliley act (glba) became effective on july1, 2001. glba provides for
disclosure of a financial institutions privacy policies and practices and affords customers the
right to opt out of the institutions disclosure of their personal financial information to
unaffiliated third parties (with limited exceptions). this legislation does not preempt state laws
that afford greater privacy protections to consumers, and several states have adopted such
legislation. for example, in 2003 california enacted that states financial information privacy
act. we continue our efforts to safeguard the data entrusted to us in accordance with
applicable law and our internal data protection policies, including taking steps to reduce the
potential for identity theft, while seeking to collect and use data properly to achieve our
business objectives.
the fair credit reporting act of 1970 regulates the disclosure of consumer credit reports by
consumer reporting agencies and the use of consumer credit report information by banks and other
companies. fcra was significantly amended by the enactment in december2003 of the fair and
accurate credit transactions act (the fact act). the fact act requires any company that receives
information concerning a consumer from an affiliate to permit the consumer to opt out from having
that information used to market the companys products to the consumer. the fact act further
amends the fcra by adding several new provisions designed to prevent or decrease identity theft and
to improve the accuracy of consumer credit information. new duties are imposed on both consumer
reporting agencies and on businesses that furnish or use information contained in consumer credit
reports. for example, a furnisher of information is required to implement procedures to prevent
the reporting of any information that it learns is the result of identity theft. also, if a
consumer disputes the accuracy of information provided to a consumer reporting agency, the
furnisher of that information must conduct an investigation and respond to the consumer in a timely
fashion. the fact act also requires grantors of credit that use consumer credit report information
in making a determination to offer a borrower credit on terms that are materially less favorable
than the terms offered to most of the lenders other customers to notify the borrower that the
terms are based on a consumer credit report. in such a case the borrower is entitled to receive a
free copy of the report from the consumer reporting agency. grantors of credit using pre-screened
consumer credit report information in credit solicitations are also required to include an enhanced
notice to consumers that they have the right to opt out from receiving further pre-screened offers
of credit. the enactment and implementation of the fact act has not had a significant impact on
our business or practices.
the federal fiscal year 2007 defense authorization act includes a provision (often referred to
as the talent amendment) aimed at preventing abuses of payday lending programs marketed to
members of the u.s. military services. this provision is broadly worded and could be interpreted
to impose a number of new regulatory requirements on lending products that may be marketed to
members of the armed forces. the department of defense has primary authority for making the rules
under which this provision would be implemented. the company is working with industry groups to
urge the department of defense to craft these rules in a manner that will carry out the provisions
purpose of curbing abuses in payday lending without imposing undue regulation on lending products.
table of contents
in the united states, the patriot act was enacted in october2001 in the wake of the september
11, 2001 terrorist attacks. the patriot act substantially
broadened existing anti-money laundering legislation and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
united states. the patriot act contains a wide variety of provisions
aimed at fighting terrorism and money laundering,
including provisions aimed at impeding terrorists ability to access and move funds used in support
of terrorist activities. among other things, the patriot act requires federal regulators, led by
the secretary of the treasury, to regulate or take other steps to require financial institutions to
establish anti-money laundering programs that meet certain standards, including expanded reporting
and enhanced information gathering and recordkeeping requirements. while american express has long
maintained anti-money laundering programs in our businesses, the secretary of the treasury has
issued regulations under the patriot act applicable to certain of our business activities conducted
within aeb, trs and their affiliates, prescribing minimum standards for such anti-money laundering
programs, and we have enhanced existing programs and developed and implemented new ones in response
to these new regulations. for example, in april2002, the u.s. secretary of the treasury issued
regulations applicable to operators of credit card networks (such as visa, mastercard, diners
club, discover and american express) that would require credit card networks to have risk-based
programs to screen institutions that are licensed to issue cards or acquire merchants on their
networks. as a result, we developed and implemented a program for our gns business. we have also
developed and implemented a customer identification program applicable to many of our businesses,
and we have enhanced our know your customer and enhanced due diligence programs in others. we
intend to take steps to comply with any additional regulations that are adopted. in addition, we
will take steps to comply with anti-money laundering initiatives adopted in other jurisdictions in
which we conduct business.
we have significant operations in the european union, including a number of regulated
businesses. we monitor developments in eu legislation, as well as in the other markets in which we
operate, to ensure that we are in a position to comply with all applicable legal requirements,
including european union directives applicable to credit institutions, insurance intermediaries and
other financial institutions.
foreign operations
we derive a significant portion of our revenues from the use of our card products, travelers
cheques, travel and other financial products and services in countries outside the united states
and continue to broaden the use of these products and services outside the united states. (for a
discussion of our revenue by geographic region, see note
19 to our consolidated financial
statements, which you can find on pages
106-109 of our 2006 annual report to shareholders and which
is incorporated herein by reference.) our revenues can be affected by political and economic
conditions in these countries (including the availability of foreign exchange for the payment by
the local card issuer of obligations arising out of local cardmembers spending outside such
country, for the payment of card bills by cardmembers who are billed in other than their local
currency, and for the remittance of the proceeds of travelers cheque sales).
table of contents
substantial and sudden devaluation of local cardmembers
currency can also affect their ability to make payments to the local
issuer of the card in
connection with spending outside the local country. the majority of aebs revenues are derived
from business conducted in countries outside the united states. some of the risks attendant to
those operations include currency fluctuations and changes in political, economic and legal
environments in each such country.
as a result of our foreign operations, we are exposed to the possibility that, because of
foreign exchange rate fluctuations, assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the
u.s. dollar may be realized in amounts greater or less than the u.s. dollar amounts at which they
are currently recorded in our consolidated financial statements. examples of transactions in which
this may occur include the purchase by cardmembers of goods and services in a currency other than
the currency in which they are billed; the sale in one currency of a travelers cheque denominated
in a second currency; foreign exchange positions held by aeb as a consequence of its client-related
foreign exchange trading operations; and, in most instances, investments in foreign operations.
these risks, unless properly monitored and managed, could have an adverse effect on our operations.
for more information on how we manage risk relating to foreign exchange, see risk management
market risk management process on pages
51-52 of our 2006 annual report to shareholders, which
information is incorporated herein by reference.
segment information and classes of similar services
you can find information regarding the companys reportable operating segments, geographic
operations and classes of similar services in note 19 to the consolidated financial statements of
the company, which appears on pages 106-108 of the companys 2006 annual report to shareholders,
which note is incorporated herein by reference.
executive officers of the company
set forth below is a list of all our executive officers as of march1, 2007. none of our
executive officers has any family relationship with any other executive officer, and none of our
executive officers became an officer pursuant to any arrangement or understanding with any other
person. each executive officer has been elected to serve until the next annual election of
officers or until his or her successor is elected and qualified. each officers age is indicated
by the number in parentheses next to his or her name.
kenneth i. chenault -
chairman and chief executive officer;
chairman and chief executive officer, american
express travel related services company, inc.
mr.chenault (55)has been chairman since april2001 and chief executive officer since january
2001. prior thereto he had been president and chief operating officer of the company since
february1997. he has also been chairman of trs since april2001 and chief executive officer of
trs since february1997.
table of contents
l. kevin cox -
executive vice president, human resources
mr.cox (43)has been executive vice president, human resources of the company since april
2005. prior thereto he had been executive vice president of the pepsi bottling group since
september2004. prior thereto, he had been senior vice president, human resources of such company
since march1999.
edward p. gilligan -
group president, american express international & global corporate services
mr.gilligan (47)has been group president, american express international & global corporate
services since july2005. prior thereto, he had been group president, global corporate services
since june2000 and group president, global corporate services & international payments, since july
2003.
john d. hayes -
executive vice president, global advertising and brand management and chief marketing officer
mr.hayes (52)has been executive vice president, global advertising and brand management
since may1995 and chief marketing officer of the company since august2003.
daniel
t. henry -
executive vice president and acting chief financial officer
mr.henry
(57)has been executive vice president and acting chief
financial officer of the company since february 2007. prior thereto,
he had been executive vice president and chief financial officer,
u.s. consumer, small business and merchant services since october
2005 and executive vice president and chief financial officer, u.s.
consumer and small business services since august 2000.
alfred f. kelly, jr. -
group president, consumer, small business and merchant services
mr.kelly (48)has been group president, consumer, small business and merchant services since
october2005. prior thereto, he had been group president, u.s. consumer and small business
services since june2000.
louise m. parent -
executive vice president and general counsel
ms.parent (56)has been executive vice president and general counsel since may1993.
thomas schick -
executive vice president, corporate affairs and communications
mr.schick (60)has been executive vice president, corporate affairs and communications since
march1993.
table of contents
stephen squeri -
executive vice president and chief information officer
mr.squeri (47)has been executive vice president and chief information officer since may
2005. prior thereto, he had been president, global commercial card  global corporate services
since january2002 and president, establishment services  united states and canada, from july2000
through december2001.
employees
we had approximately 65,400 employees on december31, 2006.
item 1a. risk factors
this section highlights specific risks that could affect our company and its businesses. you
should carefully consider each of the following risks and all of the other information set forth in
this annual report on form 10-k. based on the information currently known to us, we believe that
the following information identifies the most significant risk factors affecting our company.
however, the risks and uncertainties our company faces are not limited to those described below.
additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently believe to be
immaterial may also adversely affect our business.
if any of the following risks and uncertainties develops into actual events or the
circumstances described in the risks and uncertainties occur, these events or circumstances could
have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations.
these events could also have a negative effect on the trading price of our securities.
we face increasingly intense competitive pressure which may impact the prices we charge
merchants who accept our cards for payment for goods and services.
unlike our competitors in the payments industry that rely on high revolving credit balances to
drive profits, our business model is focused on cardmember spending. discount revenue, which
represents fees charged to merchants when cardmembers use their cards to purchase goods and
services on our network, is primarily driven by billed business volumes and is our largest single
revenue source. in recent years, we have been under market pressure to reduce merchant discount
rates and undertake other repricing initiatives. this pressure arises, in part, due to the
regulatory pressure on our competitors outside the united states, which has been increasing. if we
continue to experience a decline in the average merchant discount rate we charge merchants or are
unable to sustain premium merchant discount rates on our cards without experiencing overall volume
growth or an increase in merchant coverage, our revenues and profitability could be materially and
adversely affected.
we may not be able to increase consumer and business spending and borrowing on our payment
services products or manage the costs of our cardmember benefits intended to stimulate such use.
our business is characterized by the high level of spending by our cardmembers. increasing
consumer and business spending and borrowing on our payment services products, particularly credit
and charge cards and travelers cheques and other prepaid products, and growth in card lending
balances, depend in part on our ability to develop and issue new or
table of contents
enhanced card and prepaid products and increase revenues from such products. it also depends
on our ability to attract new cardmembers, reduce cardmember attrition, increase merchant coverage,
and capture a greater share of customers total spending on cards issued on our network, both in
the united states and in our international operations. one of the ways in which we attract new
cardmembers is through our membership rewards program, as well as other cardmember benefits. we
may not be able to cost effectively manage and expand cardmember benefits, including containing the
growth of marketing, promotion and rewards expenses and cardmember services expenses. if we are
not successful in increasing consumer and business spending or in managing the costs of our
cardmember benefits, our revenues and profitability could be negatively affected.
our brand and reputation are key assets of our company and our business may be affected by how
we are perceived in the marketplace.
our brand and its attributes are key assets of the company. our ability to attract and retain
consumer cardmembers and corporate clients is highly dependent upon the external perceptions of our
level of service, business practices and financial condition. negative perceptions or publicity
regarding these matters could damage our reputation among existing and potential cardmembers and
corporate clients, which could make it difficult for us to attract new cardmembers and maintain
existing ones. adverse developments with respect to our industry may also, by association,
negatively impact our reputation, or result in greater regulatory or legislative scrutiny.
although we monitor developments for areas of potential risk to our reputation and brand, negative
perceptions or publicity could materially and adversely affect our revenues and profitability.
an increase in account data breaches and fraudulent activity using our cards could lead to
reputational damage to our brand and could reduce the use and acceptance of our charge and credit
cards.
we and other third parties store cardmember account information in connection with our charge
and credit cards. criminals are using increasingly sophisticated methods to capture various types
of information relating to cardmembers accounts, including membership rewards accounts, to engage
in illegal activities such as fraud and identity theft. as outsourcing and specialization become a
more acceptable way of doing business in the payments industry, there are more third parties
involved in processing transactions using our cards. if data breaches or fraud levels involving
our cards were to rise, it could lead to regulatory intervention (such as mandatory card
reissuance) and reputational and financial damage to our brand, which could reduce the use and
acceptance of our cards, and have a material adverse impact on our business.
our reengineering and other cost control initiatives may not prove successful and we may not
realize all or a significant portion of the benefits that we intended.
we have regularly undertaken, and are currently considering undertaking, a variety of efforts
to reengineer our business operations in order to achieve cost savings and other benefits
(including the reinvestment of such savings in key areas such as marketing, promotion and rewards),
enhance revenue-generating opportunities and improve our operating expense to
table of contents
revenue ratio both in the short-term and over time. these efforts include cost management,
structural and strategic measures such as vendor, process, facilities and operations consolidation,
outsourcing functions (including, among others, technologies operations), relocating certain
functions to lower cost overseas locations, moving internal and external functions to the internet
to save costs and planned staff reductions relating to certain of these reengineering actions. if
we do not successfully achieve these efforts in a timely manner or if we are not able to capitalize
on these efforts, we may not realize all or a significant portion of the benefits that we intended.
failure to achieve these benefits could have a negative effect on our financial condition and
results of operations.
we have agreements with business partners in a variety of industries, including the airline
industry, that represent a significant portion of our billed business. we are exposed to the risk
of downturns in these industries, including bankruptcies of our partners, and the possible
obligation to make payments to our partners.
in the ordinary course of our business we enter into different types of contractual
arrangements with business partners in a variety of industries. for example, we have partnered
with costco to offer cobranded cards for consumers and small businesses, and through our membership
rewards program we have partnered with businesses in many industries, most notably the airline
industry, to offer benefits to cardmember participants. the airline industry represents a
significant portion of our billed business and in recent years has undergone bankruptcies,
restructurings and other similar events. in particular, we are exposed to risk under our
agreements with delta air lines, which were restructured in connection with deltas filing for
protection under chapter11 of the bankruptcy code. for additional information relating to the
agreements with delta, see financial review  airline
industry matters on page 60 of our 2006
annual report to shareholders. in addition, under some types of these contractual arrangements,
upon the occurrence of certain triggering events, we may be obligated to make payments to certain
cobrand partners, merchants, vendors and customers. if we are not able to effectively manage the
triggering events, we could unexpectedly have to make payments to these partners, which could have
a negative effect on our financial condition and results of operations. we are also exposed to
risk if we are not able to effectively manage bankruptcies, restructurings, consolidations and
other similar events that may occur in the airline industry or any other industry representing a
significant portion of our billed business, including any potential negative effects on particular
card products and services (and billed business generally) that could result from the actual or
perceived weakness of key business partners in such industries.
our risk management policies and procedures may not be effective.
we must effectively manage credit risk related to consumer debt, business loans, merchant
bankruptcies and other credit trends and the rate of bankruptcies, which can affect spending on
card products, debt payments by individual and corporate customers and businesses that accept our
card products. credit risk is the risk of loss from obligor or counterparty default. we are
exposed to both consumer credit risk, principally from cardmember receivables, and our other
consumer lending activities and institutional credit risk from merchants and gns partners. while
consumer credit risk is more closely linked to general economic conditions rather than
borrower-specific events like institutional credit risk, both expose us to a risk of loss. third
table of contents
parties may default on their obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational
failure or other reasons. country, regional and political risks are components of credit risk.
rising delinquencies and rising rates of bankruptcy are often precursors of future write-offs and
may require us to increase our reserve for loan losses. higher write-off rates and an increase in
our reserve for loan losses may adversely affect our profitability and the performance of our
securitizations, and may increase our cost of funds.
although we make estimates to provide for credit losses in our outstanding portfolio of loans
and receivables, these estimates may not be accurate. in addition, the information that we use in
managing our credit risk may be inaccurate or incomplete. although we regularly review our credit
exposure to specific clients and counterparties and to specific industries, countries and regions
that we believe may present credit concerns, default risk may arise from events or circumstances
that are difficult to foresee or detect, such as fraud. we may also fail to receive full
information with respect to the credit risks of our customers.
we must also effectively manage market risk to which we are exposed. market risk represents
the loss in value of portfolios and financial instruments due to adverse changes in market
variables. we are exposed to market risk from interest rates in our card business. changes in the
interest rates at which we borrow and lend money affect the value of our assets and liabilities.
if the rate of interest we pay on our borrowings increases more than the rate of interest we earn
on our loans, our net finance charge revenue, and consequently our net income, could fall.
we must also accurately estimate the fair value of the assets in our investment portfolio and,
in particular, those investments that are not readily marketable, including the valuation of the
interest-only strip (commonly referred to as the i/o strip) arising from our securitization of
charge and credit card receivables.
finally, we must also manage the operational risks to which we are exposed. we consider
operational risk to be the risk of not achieving our business objectives due to failed processes,
people or information systems, or from the external environment, such as natural disasters.
operational risks include the risk that we may not accurately estimate the expense provision for
the cost of our membership rewards program, as well as the risk that we are unable to manage a
downturn in our businesses and/or negative changes in our and our subsidiaries credit ratings,
which could result in contingent payments under contracts, decreased liquidity and higher borrowing
costs.
although we have devoted significant resources to develop our risk management policies and
procedures and expect to continue to do so in the future, our hedging strategies and other risk
management techniques may not be fully effective. see financial review  risk management on
pages 49-53 of our 2006 annual report to shareholders for a discussion of the policies and
procedures we use to identify, monitor and manage the risks we assume in conducting our businesses.
management of credit, market and operational risk requires, among other things, policies and
procedures to record properly and verify a large number of transactions and events, and these
policies and procedures may not be fully effective.
table of contents
adverse currency fluctuations and foreign exchange controls could decrease revenue we receive
from our international operations.
during 2006, over 30% of our revenue was generated from activities outside the united states.
we are exposed to foreign exchange risk from our international operations, and some of the revenue
we generate outside the united states is subject to unpredictable and indeterminate fluctuations if
the values of other currencies change relative to the u.s. dollar. resulting exchange gains and
losses are included in our net income. furthermore, we may become subject to exchange control
regulations that might restrict or prohibit the conversion of our other revenue currencies into
u.s. dollars. the occurrence of any of these events or circumstances could decrease the revenues
we receive from our international operations and have a material adverse effect on our business.
our access to financing, including securitizations, may be limited.
in general, the amount, type and cost of our funding, including financing from other financial
institutions and the capital markets, directly impacts our expense in operating our business and
growing our assets and therefore, can positively or negatively affect our financial results.
a number of factors could make such financing more difficult, more expensive or unavailable on
any terms both domestically and internationally (where funding transactions may be on terms more or
less favorable than in the united states), including, but not limited to, financial results and
losses, changes within our organization, specific events that adversely impact our reputation,
changes in the activities of our business partners, disruptions in the capital markets, specific
events that adversely impact the financial services industry, counter-party availability, changes
affecting our assets, our corporate and regulatory structure, interest rate fluctuations, ratings
agencies actions, general economic conditions and the legal, regulatory, accounting and tax
environments governing our funding transactions. in addition, our ability to raise funds is
strongly affected by the general state of the united states and world economies, and may become
increasingly difficult due to economic and other factors. also, we compete for funding with other
financial institutions, some of which are publicly traded. competition from these institutions may
increase our cost of funds.
in
addition, we periodically securitize cardmember receivables and loans arising from our card
business. securitization involves the legal sale of beneficial interests in cardmember receivables
and loan balances to a trust, which in turn issues securities to third-party investors
collateralized by the transferred receivables and loans, and our receipt of the proceeds from the
issuance of such securities. although the markets for securitized credit and charge card
receivables and loans is large and well-established, if these markets experience difficulties, we
may be unable to securitize our receivables or to do so at favorable pricing levels. if we were
unable to continue to securitize our loan receivables at desired levels, we would use alternative
funding sources to meet our liquidity needs. if we were unable to find cost-effective and stable
alternatives, it could negatively impact our liquidity and potentially subject us to certain risks.
these risks would include an increase in our cost of funds, an increase in the allowance for loan
table of contents
losses and the provision for possible credit losses as more loans would remain on our
consolidated balance sheet, and lower loan growth.
in addition, the occurrence of certain events may cause the securitization transactions to
amortize earlier than scheduled, which would accelerate the need for an alternate source of
funding.
for a further discussion of our liquidity and funding needs, see financial review  funding
strategy on pages 43-48 in the 2006 annual report to shareholders.
if we are not able to invest successfully in, and compete at the leading edge of,
technological developments across all our businesses, our revenue and profitability could be
negatively affected.
our industry is subject to rapid and significant technological changes. in order to compete
in our industry, we need to continue to invest in technologies across all areas of our business,
including in transaction processing, data management, customer interactions and communications,
travel reservations systems, prepaid products, alternative payment mechanisms and risk management
and compliance systems. we rely in part on third parties, including some of our competitors and
potential competitors, for the development of and access to new technologies. we expect that new
services and technologies applicable to the payments industry will continue to emerge, and these
new services and technologies may be superior to, or render obsolete, the technologies we currently
use in our cards and networks. in addition, our ability to adopt new services and technologies
that we develop may be inhibited by a need for industry-wide standards or by resistance from
cardmembers or merchants to such changes in addition to patent rights held by competitors or
others. our future success will depend, in part, on our ability to develop or adapt to
technological changes and evolving industry standards.
our operating results may suffer because of substantial and increasingly intense competition
worldwide in the payments industry.
the payments industry is highly competitive and includes, in addition to credit card networks,
evolving alternative payment mechanisms and systems. some of our competitors have developed, or
may develop, substantially greater financial and other resources than we have, may offer a wider
range of programs and services than we offer or may use more effective advertising and marketing
strategies to achieve broader brand recognition or merchant acceptance than we have. we may not
continue to be able to compete effectively against these threats. in addition, our competitors may
be more efficient in introducing innovative products, programs and services than we are. as a
result, our revenue or profitability may decline.
banks, card issuers and card network operators generally are the subject of increasing global
regulatory focus, which may impose costly new compliance burdens on our company and lead to
decreased transaction volumes through our network.
we are subject to regulations that affect banks and the payments industry in the many
countries in which our charge and credit cards are used and where we conduct banking
table of contents
activities. in particular, we are subject to numerous regulations applicable to financial
institutions in the united states and abroad. we are also subject to regulations as a provider of
services to financial institutions. regulation of the payments industry has increased
significantly in recent years. for example, we are subject to the regulatory requirements of the
patriot act, which substantially broadened existing anti-money laundering legislation and the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the united states. the patriot act requires us to create and
implement comprehensive anti-money laundering programs that meet certain standards, including
expanded reporting and enhanced information gathering and record-keeping requirements, as well as
to perform due diligence on the third party institutions that issue cards and/or acquire merchants
on our network. increased regulatory focus in this area could result in additional obligations or
restrictions with respect to the types of products and services that we may offer to consumers, the
countries in which our charge and credit cards may be used and where we provide private and
correspondent banking services, and the types of cardholders and merchants who can obtain or accept
our charge and credit cards.
the u.s. congress is also presently considering legislative initiatives in the areas of
internet gambling, internet prescription drug purchases and copyright and trademark infringement,
among others, that could impose additional compliance burdens on our company, for example, imposing
requirements aimed at preventing the use of payment cards to unlawfully purchase prescription drugs
over the internet. many states are also considering a variety of similar legislation. federal and
state law enforcement authorities have also contacted payment companies concerning these issues.
if implemented, these initiatives may require us to monitor, filter, restrict, or otherwise oversee
various categories of charge and credit card transactions, thereby increasing our costs or
decreasing our transaction volumes. various regulatory agencies are also considering regulations
covering identity theft, account management guidelines, disclosure rules, security, and marketing
that would impact us directly, in part due to increased scrutiny of our underwriting standards.
these new requirements may restrict our ability to issue charge and credit cards or partner with
other financial institutions, which could decrease our transaction volumes. in some circumstances,
new regulations could have the effect of limiting our ability to offer new types of charge or
credit cards or restricting our ability to offer existing cards, such as stored value cards, which
could materially and adversely reduce our revenues and revenue growth.
in the united states, the board of governors of the federal reserve system and various federal
reserve banks have been following developments on interchange and have held several conferences
focused on credit card interchange rates. while the federal reserve has expressed interest in
monitoring this issue, it has not indicated the need to regulate interchange rates in the united
states. in congress, there have been several hearings on visa and mastercard interchange over the
last year. during 2006, there were also a number of bills proposed in individual state
legislatures seeking to impose caps on credit card interchange or to prohibit card companies from
charging merchant discount on the state tax portion of credit card purchases. none of those bills
were enacted. it is expected that congressional hearings and similar proposed state legislation
will continue during 2007.
table of contents
regulators and congress have also increased their scrutiny of our industrys fees to its
customers. any legislative or regulatory restrictions on our ability to price our services freely
could materially and adversely affect our transaction volume and revenues.
increased regulatory focus on our company, such as in connection with the matters discussed
above, may increase our compliance costs or result in a reduction of transactions processed on our
networks, which could materially and adversely impact our financial performance.
existing and proposed regulation in the areas of consumer privacy and data use and security
could decrease the number of charge and credit cards issued and could increase our costs.
we are also subject to regulations related to privacy and data use and security in the
jurisdictions in which we do business, and we could be negatively impacted by these regulations.
for example, in the united states, we are subject to the federal trade commissions information
safeguards rule under the gramm-leach-bliley act. the rule requires that each financial
institution develop, implement and maintain a written, comprehensive information security program
containing safeguards that are appropriate to the financial institutions size and complexity, the
nature and scope of the financial institutions activities, and the sensitivity of any customer
information at issue. the heightened legislative and regulatory focus on data security, including
requiring consumer notification in the event of a data breach, continues. in the united states,
there are a number of bills pending in congress and there have been several congressional hearings
to address these issues. congress will likely consider data security/data breach legislation in
2007 that, if implemented, could affect our company.
in addition, approximately 34 states, puerto rico and the district of columbia have enacted
security breach legislation, requiring varying levels of consumer notification in the event of a
security breach, and several other states are considering similar legislation. in 1995, the
european parliament and council passed european directive 95/46/ec on the protection of individuals
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (commonly
referred to as the data protection directive), which obligates the controller of an individuals
personal data to take the necessary technical and organizational measures to protect personal data.
the data protection directive has been implemented through local laws regulating data protection
in european union member states. any additional regulations in these areas may also increase our
costs to comply with such regulations, which could materially and adversely affect our
profitability.
global economic, political and other conditions may adversely affect trends in consumer
spending and in travel.
our business depends heavily upon the overall level of spending using our credit and charge
cards, and we are not insulated from the effects of economic cycles. a sustained deterioration in
general economic conditions, particularly in the united states or europe, or increases in interest
rates in key countries in which we operate, may adversely affect our financial performance by
reducing the number or average purchase amount of transactions involving our charge and credit
cards and result in increasing delinquencies and credit losses.
table of contents
political or economic instability in certain regions or countries could also affect our
commercial or other lending activities, among other businesses, or result in restrictions on
convertibility of certain currencies. in addition, our travel network may be adversely affected by
world geopolitical and other conditions. travel expenditures are sensitive to business and
personal discretionary spending levels and tend to decline during general economic downturns.
terrorist attacks, natural disasters or other catastrophic events may have a negative effect
on our business. because of our proximity to the world trade center, our headquarters were damaged
as a result of the terrorist attacks of september11, 2001. similar events or other disasters or
catastrophic events in the future could have a negative effect on our businesses and
infrastructure, including our information technology systems. because we derive a portion of our
revenues from travel-related spending, our business will be sensitive to safety concerns, and thus
may decline during periods in which travelers become concerned about safety issues or when travel
might involve health-related risks.
if our global network systems are disrupted or we are unable to process transactions
efficiently or at all, our revenue or profitability would be materially reduced.
our transaction authorization, clearing and settlement systems may experience service
interruptions as a result of fire, natural disasters, power loss, disruptions in long distance or
local telecommunications access, fraud, terrorism or accident. a natural disaster or other problem
at our facilities could interrupt our services. additionally, we rely on third-party service
providers for the timely transmission of information across our global network. if a service
provider fails to provide the communications capacity or services we require, as a result of
natural disaster, operational disruption, terrorism or any other reason, the failure could
interrupt our services, adversely affect the perception of our brands reliability and materially
reduce our revenue or profitability.
we rely on third-party providers of various computer systems and other services integral to
the operations of our businesses. these third parties may act in ways that could harm our
business.
we outsource to third-party providers many of our computer systems and other services that are
integral to the operations of our businesses. we are subject to the risk that certain decisions
are subject to the control of our third-party service providers and that these decisions may
adversely affect our activities. we cannot be certain that our third-party vendors will perform
their obligations as expected.
resolution of our unresolved sec staff comment may result in a change in the presentation of
our reportable operating segments in our financial statements.
our business is comprised of three reportable operating segments, u.s. card services,
international card & global commercial services and global network & merchant services. in
connection with a review of our annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2005,
the sec requested certain information regarding the aggregation of our operating segments into the
reportable segments identified above. the company and the sec are
table of contents
continuing to discuss the companys segment reporting. if, as a result of these discussions,
it is concluded that a different reportable operating segment presentation (including the
disaggregation of certain operating segments) is appropriate, we would report our segments
differently in our filings with the sec (although consolidated results would not be impacted). the
sec may also require that we restate segment information that appears in the notes to our
consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k and file an amendment
to this form 10-k to reflect any such changes to the reportable operating segment presentation.
special note about forward-looking statements
we have made various statements in this report that may constitute forward-looking
statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995.
forward-looking statements may also be made in our other reports filed with the sec, in our press
releases and in other documents. in addition, from time to time, we, through our management, may
make oral forward-looking statements. forward-looking statements are subject to risks and
uncertainties, including those identified above, which could cause actual results to differ
materially from such statements. the words believe, expect, anticipate, optimistic,
intend, plan, aim, will, may, should, could, would, likely and similar
expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. we caution you that the risk
factors described above are not exclusive. there may also be other risks that we are unable to
predict at this time that may cause actual results to differ materially from those in
forward-looking statements. readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these
forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date on which they are made. we undertake
no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements.
item 1b. unresolved staff comments
we received comments from the sec in a letter, dated june30, 2006, with respect to our form
10-k for the year ended december31, 2005. all comments have been resolved with the exception of
how we aggregate segment data in our consolidated financial statements under statement of financial
accounting standards no.131, disclosures about segments of an enterprise and related
information. as discussed in risk factors above, the company and the sec are continuing to
discuss the companys segment reporting.
item 2. properties
our principal executive offices are in a 51-story, 2.2million square foot building located in
lower manhattan. this building, which is on land leased from the battery park city authority for a
term expiring in 2069, is one of four office buildings in a complex known as the world financial
center. we have a 49% ownership interest in the building. brookfield financial properties owns
the remaining 51% interest in the building. we also lease space in the building from brookfield.
other owned or leased principal locations include: the american express service centers in
fort lauderdale, florida; phoenix, arizona; greensboro, north carolina; and salt lake city,
table of contents
utah; the american express data centers in phoenix, arizona and in minneapolis, minnesota; the
american express finance center in phoenix, arizona; and the amex canada inc. headquarters in
markham, ontario, canada; and service centers located in mexico city, mexico; sydney, australia;
gurgaon, india and brighton, united kingdom.
in recent years we have engaged in several sale-leaseback transactions pursuant to which we
sold various owned properties to third parties and leased back the properties under long-term net
leases whereby each american express entity that leases back the property is responsible for all
costs and expenses relating to the property (including maintenance, repair, utilities, operating
expenses and insurance costs) in addition to annual rent. the sale leaseback transactions have not
materially impacted our financial results in any year. gains resulting from completed sale and
leaseback transactions are amortized over the initial ten-year lease periods. we continue to
consider whether sale-leaseback transactions are appropriate for other properties that we currently
own.
in february2000, we entered into a ten-year agreement with cbre real estate services, inc.,
formerly known as trammell crow corporate services, inc., for facilities, project and transaction
management and other related services. the agreement covers north and south america and parts of
europe and asia.
generally, we and our subsidiaries lease the premises we occupy in other locations. we
believe that the facilities we own or occupy suit our needs and are well maintained.
item 3. legal proceedings
the company and its subsidiaries are involved in a number of legal and arbitration
proceedings, including class actions, concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of
their respective business activities. the company believes it has meritorious defenses to each of
these actions and intends to defend them vigorously. in the course of its business, the company
and its subsidiaries are also subject to  and governmental examinations, information
gathering requests, subpoenas, inquiries and investigations. the company believes that it is not a
party to, nor are any of its properties the subject of, any pending
legal, arbitration, regulatory, tax or investigative proceedings that would have a material adverse effect on the companys
consolidated financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. however, it is possible that
the outcome of any such proceeding could have a material impact on results of operations in any
particular reporting period as the proceedings are resolved. certain legal proceedings involving
the company are described below.
corporate matters
beginning in mid-july2002, 12 putative class action lawsuits were filed in the united states
district court for the southern district of new york. in october2002, these cases were
consolidated under the caption in re american express company securities litigation. these
lawsuits allege violations of the federal securities laws and the common law in connection with
alleged misstatements regarding certain investments in high-yield bonds and write-downs in the
2000-2001 timeframe. the purported class covers the period from july18, 1999 to july17,
table of contents
2001. the actions seek unspecified compensatory damages as well as disgorgement, punitive
damages, attorneys fees and costs, and interest. on march31, 2004, the court granted the
companys motion to dismiss the lawsuit. plaintiffs appealed the dismissal to the united states
court of appeals for the second circuit. in august2006, the court of appeals, without expressing
any views whatsoever on the merits of the cases, vacated the district courts judgment and remanded
all claims to the district court for further proceedings. more particularly, the court of appeals
reversed the district courts ruling that two of the plaintiffs claims in an amended complaint did
not relate back to the original complaint and were thus time-barred under the statute of
limitations period. as a result, the court of appeals decided that it was prudent to remand all
claims back to the district court so that plaintiffs could file a new amended complaint.
plaintiffs filed their amended complaint on january8, 2007. the company wrote to the court on
february5, 2007, telling the court that it intended to file a motion to strike the amended
complaint. the company continues to believe that it has meritorious defenses to the action.
in december2003, american express travel related services company, inc. was named as a
defendant in a shareholder derivative action purportedly filed on behalf of infospace inc. the
action, captioned dreiling v. american express travel related services company, inc., was
filed in the u.s. district court for the district of washington. the complaint alleges that the
company violated the short swing liability provisions of section 16(a) of the securities exchange
act of 1934, as amended, in connection with its sale of infospace common stock. the plaintiff
seeks disgorgement of profits from the sale of the infospace shares, as well as fees and expenses.
in june2004, the court granted american express motion to dismiss the complaint without american
express ever having answered the complaint. in august2006, the u.s. court of appeals for the
ninth circuit reinstated the action because of certain unresolved factual disputes. the company
continues to believe that it has meritorious defenses to this action and intends to defend it
vigorously.
in january2006, a purported class action captioned paula kritzman, individually and on
behalf of all others similarly situated v. american express retirement plan et al. was filed in
the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york. the plaintiff alleges that when the
american express retirement plan (the axp plan) was amended effective july1, 1995, to convert
from a final average pay formula to a cash balance formula for the calculation of benefits, the
terms of the amended axp plan violated the employee retirement income security act, as amended
(erisa), in at least the following ways: (i)the axp plan violated erisas prohibition on
reducing rates of benefit accrual due to the increasing age of a plan participant; (ii)the axp
plan violated erisas prohibition on forfeiture of accrued benefits; and (iii)the axp plan
violated erisas present value calculation rules. the plaintiff seeks, among other remedies,
injunctive relief entitling the plaintiff and the purported class to benefits that are the greater
of (x)the benefits to which the members of the class would have been entitled without regard to
the conversion of the benefit payout formula of the axp plan to a cash balance formula and (y)the
benefits under the axp plan with regard to the cash balance formula. the plaintiff also seeks pre-
and post-judgment interest and attorneys fees and expenses. the company has filed a motion with
the court seeking to dismiss the complaint.
in november2004, the company filed a lawsuit captioned american express travel related
services company, inc. v. visa usa inc., mastercard international, inc. et al. in the u.s.
district court for the southern district of new york. the lawsuit seeks unspecified monetary
damages against visa, mastercard and eight major banks that are or were members of the two card
associations for the business lost as a result of the illegal, anticompetitive practices of the
card associations that effectively locked the company out of the bank-issued card business in the
united states. the lawsuit follows the u.s. supreme courts october2004 decision not to hear an
appeal from visa and mastercard that sought to overturn a lower court ruling that found the two
card associations in violation of u.s. antitrust laws. since filing the action, trs has
voluntarily dismissed its claims against the following bank defendants: bank of america, n.a., bank
of america corporation (including its subsidiaries fleet bank (ri), n.a. and fleet national bank),
household bank, n.a., household international, inc. and usaa federal savings bank.
table of contents
u.s. card services and global merchant services matters
the company has been named in a number of purported class actions in which the plaintiffs
allege an unlawful antitrust tying arrangement between the companys charge cards, credit cards and
debit cards in violation of various state and federal laws, including the following: (i) cohen
rese gallery et al. v. american express company et al., u.s. district court for the northern
district of california (filed july2003); (ii) italian colors restaurant v. american express
company et al., u.s. district court for the northern district of california (filed august
2003); (iii) drf jeweler corp. v. american express company et al., u.s. district court for
the southern district of new york (filed december2003); (iv) hayama inc. v. american express
company et al., superior court of california, los angeles county (filed december2003); (v)
chez noelle restaurant v. american express company et al., u.s. district court for the
southern district of new york (filed january2004); (vi) mascari enterprises d/b/a sound
stations v. american express company et al., u.s. district court for the southern district of
new york (filed january2004); (vii) mims restaurant v. american express company et al.,
u.s. district court for the southern district of new york (filed february2004); and (viii) the
marcus corporation v. american express company et al., u.s. district court for the southern
district of new york (filed july2004). the plaintiffs in these actions seek injunctive relief and
an unspecified amount of damages. upon motion to the court by the company, the venue of the cohen
rese and italian colors actions was moved to the u.s. district court for the southern district of
new york (sdny) in december2003. each of the above-listed actions (except for hayama) is now
pending in the sdny, consolidated as in re american express merchants litigation. on april30,
2004, the company filed a motion to dismiss all the actions filed prior to such date that were
pending in the sdny, and on march15, 2006, such motion was granted, with the court finding the
claims of the plaintiffs to be subject to arbitration. plaintiffs asked the court to reconsider
its dismissal. that request was denied. the plaintiffs have appealed the courts arbitration
ruling. in addition, during the pendency of the motion in the sdny, the company had asked the
california superior court hearing the hayama action referenced above to stay that action pending
resolution of such motion. the company also filed a motion to dismiss the action filed by the
marcus corporation, which was denied in july2005. nonetheless, the company continues to believe
that it has meritorious defenses and will continue to vigorously defend against the marcus action.
table of contents
in december2004, a purported class action captioned national supermarkets association,
inc., mascari enterprises, inc. d/b/a sound stations, and bunda starr corp. d/b/a brite wines and
spirits v. mbna america bank, n.a., mbna corp., citibank (south dakota) n.a. and citigroup,
incorporated, was filed in the sdny. the action is a lawsuit related to the antitrust tying
actions described in the preceding paragraph. although the company is not named as a defendant,
the plaintiffs in this action are also plaintiffs in the direct actions against american express
described in the preceding paragraph. this lawsuit alleges that, by agreeing to issue american
express-branded cards, mbna and citibank have conspired with the company in the alleged wrongful
tying arrangement described in the preceding paragraph. the company believes this lawsuit is
without merit and is contrary to the department of justices successful efforts to render
unenforceable visas and mastercards rules that prevented
banks from issuing american express-branded cards in the united states. the company also believes that this lawsuit is susceptible to
the same defenses available to the company in the direct actions filed against it, which are
described in the preceding paragraph. in the march15, 2006 decision described in the preceding
paragraph, the sdny denied the companys request to intervene in this action and denied the motion
of mbna and citibank to dismiss the action. the court did, however, stay the action against mbna
and citibank pending the arbitration of the claims made against the company in the actions
described in the preceding paragraph.
in august2005, a purported class action captioned performance labs inc. v. american
express travel related services company, inc. (trs), mastercard international incorporated, visa
usa, inc. et al. was filed in the u. s. district court for the district of new jersey. the
action was then transferred to the u.s. district court for the eastern district of new york. the
complaint alleged that the companys policy prohibiting merchants from imposing restrictions on the
use of american express cards that are not imposed equally on other forms of payment violates u.s.
antitrust laws. the suit sought injunctive relief. trs moved to dismiss the complaint. in addition,
the company learned that two additional purported class actions that made allegations similar to
those made in the performance labs action had also been filed: 518 restaurant corp. v. american
express travel related services company, inc., mastercard international incorporated, visa usa,
inc. et al. (filed in august2005 in the united states district court for the eastern district
of pennsylvania) and lepkowski v. american express travel related services company, inc.,
mastercard international incorporated, visa usa, inc. et al. (filed in october2005 in the u.s.
district court for the eastern district of new york). the plaintiffs in these actions sought
injunctive relief. the 518 restaurant corp. action was voluntarily withdrawn without trs ever
having been served with the complaint. the complaint in the lepkowski action was also never served.
the lepkowski and performance labs cases were consolidated in the u.s. district court for the
eastern district of new york for pre-trial purposes in a larger multi-district litigation involving
other named defendants not affiliated with the company, and all proceedings in the consolidated
action were stayed pending the filing of a consolidated amended complaint. such consolidated
amended complaint was filed on april24, 2006, but the company was not named in that action. other
defendants, not affiliated with the company, were named. however, on april18, 2006, performance
labs, inc., joseph lepkowski, dds d/b/a oak park dental studio, and jasa inc. filed an action in
the sdny against american express company and american express travel related services company,
inc. this complaint challenges the companys anti-steering rules as unlawful under the antitrust
laws. as alleged by plaintiffs, these rules prevent merchants from offering consumers
table of contents
incentives to use alternative forms of payments when consumers wish to use an american
express-branded card. originally plaintiffs sought only injunctive relief but have since amended
their complaint to also seek unspecified damages. these plaintiffs have agreed that a stay would be
imposed with regard to their respective actions pending the appeal of the courts arbitration
ruling discussed above.
the company has been named in several purported class actions in various state courts alleging
that the company violated the respective states laws by wrongfully collecting amounts assessed on
converting transactions made in foreign currencies to u.s. dollars and/or failing to properly
disclose the existence of such amounts in its cardmember agreements and billing statements. the
plaintiffs in the actions seek, among other remedies, injunctive relief, money damages and/or
attorneys fees on their own behalf and on behalf of the putative class of persons similarly
situated. in december2005, the u.s. district court for the southern district of florida granted
final approval of a nationwide class action settlement to resolve all lawsuits and allegations with
respect to the companys collection and disclosure of fees assessed on transactions made in foreign
currencies in the case captioned lipuma v. american express bank, american express travel
related services company, inc. and american express centurion bank (filed in august2003). the
settlement approved by the court calls for the company to (a)deposit $75million into a fund that
will be used to reimburse class members with valid claims, make certain contributions to charitable
organizations to be identified later and pay attorneys fees and (b)make certain changes to the
disclosures in its cardmember agreements and billing statements regarding its foreign currency
conversion practices (which it has already done). the company had previously established reserves
to cover the payment that will be made to reimburse class members and pay attorneys fees. the
courts approval order enjoins all other proceedings that make related allegations pending a final
approval hearing including, but not limited to the following cases: (i) environmental law
foundation, et al. v. american express company, et al., superior court of alameda county,
california (filed march2003); (ii) rubin v. american express company and american express
travel related services company, inc., circuit court of madison county, illinois (filed april
2003); (iii) angie arambula, et al. v. american express company, et al., district court of
cameron county, texas, 103rd judicial district (filed may2003); (iv) fuentes v. american
express travel related services company, inc. and american express company, district court of
hidalgo county, texas (filed may2003); (v) wick v. american express company, et al.,
circuit court of cook county, illinois (filed may2003); (vi) bernd bildstein v. american
express company, et al., supreme court of queens county, new york (filed june2003); (vii)
janowitz v. american express company, et al., circuit court of cook county, illinois (filed
september2003); (viii) paul v. american express company, et al., superior court of orange
county, california (filed january2004); and (ix) ball v. american express, et al.,
superior court of san joaquin, california (filed august2004). the courts approval of the
settlement has been appealed by several attorneys purporting to represent the interests of
objectors to the settlement to the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit.
in july2004, a purported class action captioned ross, et al. v. american express company,
american express travel related services and american express centurion bank was filed in the
united states district court for the southern district of new york. the complaint alleges that
amex conspired with visa, mastercard and diners club in the setting of
table of contents
foreign conversion rates and in the inclusion of arbitration clauses in certain of their cardmember
agreements. the suit seeks injunctive relief and unspecified damages. the class is defined as
all visa, mastercard and diners club general purpose cardholders who used cards issued by any of
the mdl defendant banks.... american express cardholders are not part of the class. in september
2005, the court denied the companys motion to dismiss the action and preliminarily certified an
injunction class of visa and mastercard cardholders to determine the validity of visas and
mastercards cardmember arbitration clauses. american express filed a motion for reconsideration
with the court, which motion was denied in september2006. the company has filed an appeal from
the district courts order denying its motion to compel arbitration. on february14, 2007, the
united states court of appeals for the second circuit denied plaintiffs motion to dismiss that
appeal. the company had also asked the appellate court to entertain an interlocutory appeal of the
district courts certification of an injunction class. on december19, 2006, that appellate court
denied that request.
in january2006, in a matter captioned hoffman, et al. v. american express travel related
services company, inc., no.2001-02281, superior court of the state of california, county of
alameda, the court certified a class action against trs. two classes were certified: (1)all
persons who held american express charge cards with billing addresses in california who purchased
american express fee-based travel-related insurance plans from september6, 1995, through a date
to be determined; and (2)all persons who held american express charge cards with billing addresses
in states other than california and who purchased american express fee-based travel-related
insurance plans from september6, 1995, through a date to be determined. plaintiffs allege that
american express violated california and new york law by allegedly billing customers for flight and
baggage insurance that they did not receive. american express denies the allegations and filed an
interlocutory appeal (known as a petition for a writ of mandate) of the class certification order.
in june2006, the appellate court denied jurisdiction over that interlocutory appeal. american
express also appealed the denial of its motion to compel individual arbitration of all
non-california class members. the appellate court has jurisdiction over that appeal and the appeal
is pending. in the u.s. district court for the eastern district of new york a matter making related
allegations to those raised in hoffman is pending. that matter, captioned environment law
enforcement systems v. american express et al., had effectively been stayed pending the
proceedings in the hoffman action. in october2006, the court in the environment law action entered
an order scheduling a pre-motion conference on american express anticipated motion to compel
arbitration for january31, 2007. that date has since been extended to march5, 2007.
in june2006, a putative class action captioned homa v. american express company et
al. was filed in the u.s. district court for the district of new jersey. the case alleges,
generally, misleading and fraudulent advertising of the tiered up to 5% cash rebates with the
blue cash card. the complaint initially sought certification of a nationwide class consisting of
all persons who applied for and received an american express blue cash card during the period from
september30, 2003 to the present and who did not get the rebate or rebates provided for in the
offer. on december1, 2006, however, plaintiff filed a first amended complaint dropping the
nationwide class claims and asserting claims only on behalf of new jersey residents who while so
residing in new jersey, applied for and received an american express blue cash card
table of contents
during the period from september30, 2003 to the present. the plaintiff seeks unspecified damages
and other unspecified relief that the court deems appropriate.
international matters
as described elsewhere in this report, in recent years, u.s. and foreign regulatory
authorities, together with international organizations, have raised increasing concerns over the
ability of criminal organizations and corrupt persons to use global financial intermediaries to
facilitate money laundering. in the united states, the secretary of the treasury has issued
regulations pursuant to the u.s. patriot act that specifically impact certain money laundering
prevention activities of entities involved, as aebl is, in correspondent and private banking
activities. compliance efforts to combat money laundering remain a high priority for aebl and it
has increased these efforts to address evolving regulatory and supervisory standards and
requirements in jurisdictions in which aebl does business. the
regulatory authorities are exercising heightened scrutiny of the
anti-money laundering programs of financial institutions and have
taken action against financial institutions for deficiencies in such
programs. in early 2004, aebi, a subsidiary of
aebl headquartered in miami, received subpoenas from the department of justice (doj) relating to
certain customer accounts and anti-money laundering (aml) compliance programs. in september2006,
the doj informed aebi of concerns relating to aml compliance programs that could result in an
action. aebi has been cooperating with the doj.
in may2006, in a matter captioned marcotte v. bank of montreal et al., filed in the
superior court of quebec, district of montreal (originally filed in april2003) the court
authorized a class action against amex bank of canada, bank of montreal, toronto-dominion bank,
royal bank of canada, canadian imperial bank of commerce, scotiabank, national bank of canada,
laurentian bank of canada and citibank canada. the action alleges that conversion commissions made
on foreign currency transactions are credit charges under the quebec consumer protection act (the
qcpa) and cannot be charged prior to the 21-day grace period under the qcpa. the class includes
all persons holding a credit card issued by one of the defendants to whom fees were charged since
april17, 2000, for transactions made in foreign currency before expiration of the period of 21
days following the statement of account. the class claims reimbursement of all foreign currency
conversions, cdn $400 per class member for trouble, inconvenience and punitive damages, interest
and fees and costs.
in march2006, a motion to authorize a class action captioned jasmin v. amex bank of
canada, was filed in the superior court of quebec, district of montreal. the motion purports
to claim, on behalf of a canada-wide class of persons who were holders of an american express
credit card who paid their credit card account at the counter or at an automatic banking machine of
an authorized financial institution, and who obtained a grace period that was less than that
appearing on their statement of account and/or who were charged interest under a three- to five-
day processing delay contrary to their contracts, the law respecting banks and the civil code of
quebec. a claim is also being made of an alleged violation of the charter of human rights and
freedoms for depriving the class members of their use of property. the class claims reimbursement
per class member of finance charges in the amount of cdn $75, cdn $100 in punitive damages and cdn
$25 for having to pay their account early and being deprived of the use of their money, interest,
fees and costs.
table of contents
in march2006, in a matter captioned ptack v. amex bank of canada, filed in the
superior court of quebec, district of montreal (originally filed in march2004), the court
authorized a class action against amex bank of canada. the class includes all persons who were
holders of an american express credit card who paid their credit card account via internet,
telephone and/or automatic banking machine, on or before the due date and incurred a finance charge
as a result of the alleged payment processing policy of amex bank. the class claims reimbursement
per class member of finance charges, cdn $100 in punitive damages and cdn $100 for waste of time,
interest and fees and costs. amex bank believes it has meritorious defenses and will defend
against this action.
in november2006, in a matter captioned option consommateurs and benoit fortin v. amex
bank of canada et al. filed in the superior court of quebec, district of montreal (originally
filed in july2003), the court authorized a class action against amex bank of canada, citibank
canada, mbna canada, diners club international, capital one and royal bank of canada. the
plaintiff alleges that the defendants have violated the quebec consumer protection act (qcpa) by
imposing finance charges on credit card transactions prior to 21days following the receipt of the
statement containing the charge. it is alleged that the qcpa provisions which require a 21-day
grace period prior to imposing finance charges applies to credit cards issued by amex bank of
canada in quebec and that finance charges imposed prior to this grace period violate the act. the
class seeks reimbursement of all finance charges imposed in violation of the act, cdn$200 in
punitive damages per class member, interest and fees and costs.
in november2006, in a matter captioned sylvan adams v. amex bank of canada filed in
the superior court of quebec, district of montreal (originally filed in november2004), the court
authorized a class action against amex bank of canada. the plaintiff alleges that prior to
december2003, amex bank of canada charged a foreign currency conversion commission on transactions
to purchase goods and services in currencies other than canadian dollars and failed to disclose the
commissions in monthly billing statements or solicitations directed to prospective cardmembers.
the class, consisting of all cardmembers in quebec that purchased goods or services in a foreign
currency prior to december2003, claims reimbursement of all foreign currency conversion
commissions, cdn$1,000 in punitive damages per class member, interest and fees and costs.
in may2005, amex bank of canada was added as a defendant to a motion to authorize a class
action captioned option consommateurs and joel-christian st-pierre v. bank of montreal et
al. filed in the superior court of quebec, district of quebec. the motion, which also names as
defendants royal bank of canada, toronto-dominion bank, hsbc bank of canada, among others, alleges
that the defendants violated qcpa by imposing finance charges on credit card transactions prior to
21days following the receipt of the statement containing the charge. it is alleged that the qcpa
provisions, which require a 21-day grace period prior to imposing finance charges, applies to
credit cards issued by amex bank of canada in quebec and that finance charges imposed prior to this
grace period violate the qcpa. the proposed class seeks reimbursement of all finance charges
imposed in violation of the qcpa, cdn$100 in punitive damages per class member, interest and fees
and costs.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
we did not submit any matters to a vote of our security holders during the last quarter of our
fiscal year ended december31, 2006.
table of contents
part ii
item 5.
market for companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of
equity securities
(a)our common stock trades principally on the new york stock exchange under the trading
symbol axp. as of december31, 2006, we had 51,644 common shareholders of record. you can find
quarterly price and dividend information concerning our common stock
in note20 to the consolidated financial
statements, which can be found on page 109 of our 2006 annual report to shareholders, which note is
incorporated herein by reference. you can find information on securities authorized for issuance
under our equity compensation plans under the captions executive compensation  share plans,
and executive compensation  equity compensation plan information to be contained in the companys
definitive 2007 proxy statement for our annual meeting of
shareholders, which is scheduled to be held
on april23, 2007. the information to be found under such captions is incorporated herein by
reference. in addition, you can find information regarding our 2007 incentive compensation plan,
which will be voted on by our shareholders at the annual meeting, under the caption item3
proposal to adopt the american express company 2007 incentive compensation plan to be contained
in our definitive 2007 proxy statement. our proxy statement for the annual meeting is expected to
be filed with the sec in march2007 (and, in any event, not later than 120days of the close of our
most recently completed fiscal year).
on december31, 2006, we acquired harbor payments, inc. (harbor), a privately held company,
pursuant to a merger agreement under which fifteen former harbor shareholders received an aggregate
of 2,424,660 unregistered american express common shares in a private placement transaction, in
consideration of all of the outstanding shares of harbor, and harbor became a wholly-owned
subsidiary of ours. the merger documents contained certain representations and warranties of the former
harbor shareholders that we relied upon in making this private
placement pursuant to the exemption from registration provided by
section4(2) of the securities act of 1933, as amended.
(b)not applicable.
(c)the table below sets forth the information with respect to purchases of our common stock
made by or on behalf of the company during the quarter ended december31, 2006.
table of contents
total number of
shares
maximum
purchased as
number of shares
part of publicly
that may yet be
total number
announced
purchased under
of shares
average price
plans or
the plans or
period
purchased
paid per share
programs (3)
programs
october 1-31, 2006
repurchase program (1)
2,300,000
$
57.14
2,300,000
181,118,123
employee transactions
(2)
8,194
$
54.19
n/a
n/a
november 1-30, 2006
repurchase program (1)
5,313,700
$
58.85
5,313,700
175,804,423
employee transactions
(2)
371,854
$
59.20
n/a
n/a
december 1-31, 2006
repurchase program (1)
10,995,100
$
59.85
10,995,100
164,809,323
employee transactions
(2)
44,550
$
59.83
n/a
n/a
total
repurchase program (1)
18,608,800
$
59.23
employee transactions
(2)
424,598
$
59.17
(1)
our board of directors authorized the repurchase of an additional 200million shares of
common stock in may2006. at present, there are approximately 164.8million shares remaining
under such authorization. such authorization does not have an expiration date, and at
present, there is no intention to modify or otherwise rescind such authorization. since
september1994, we have acquired 605.2million shares of our common stock under various board
authorizations to repurchase up to an aggregate of 770million shares, including purchases
made under agreements with third parties.
(2)
includes: (a)shares delivered by or deducted from holders of employee stock options who
exercised options (granted under our incentive compensation plans) in satisfaction of the
exercise price and/or tax withholding obligation of such holders and (b)restricted shares
withheld (under the terms of grants under our incentive compensation plans) to offset tax
withholding obligations that occur upon vesting and release of restricted shares. our
incentive compensation plans provide that the value of the shares delivered or attested to, or
withheld, shall be the average of the high and low price of the companys common stock on the
date the relevant transaction occurs.
(3)
share purchases under publicly announced programs are made pursuant to open market purchases
or privately negotiated transactions (including with employee benefit plans) as market
conditions warrant and at prices we deem appropriate.
item 6. selected financial data
the
consolidated five-year summary of selected financial data
appearing on page111 of the
companys 2006 annual report to shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operation
the
information set forth under the heading financial review
appearing on pages 30-63 of the
companys 2006 annual report to shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
the
information set forth under the heading risk management
appearing on pages 49-53 and
in note 10 to the consolidated financial statements on
pages 93-95 of the companys 2006 annual report
to shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
the report of independent registered public accounting firm (pricewaterhousecoopers llp),
the report of independent registered public accounting firm (ernst & young llp), the
consolidated financial statements and the notes to consolidated financial statements appearing
on pages66-110 of the companys 2006 annual report to shareholders are incorporated herein by
reference.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
not applicable.
item 9a. controls and procedures
the companys management, with the participation of the companys chief executive officer and
acting chief financial officer, has evaluated the effectiveness of the companys disclosure controls and
procedures (as such term is defined in rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the securities exchange
act of 1934, as amended (the exchange act)) as of the end of the period covered by this report.
based on such evaluation, our chief executive officer and acting chief financial officer have concluded
that, as of the end of such period, the companys disclosure controls and procedures are effective.
there have not been any changes in the companys internal control over financial reporting (as
such term is defined in rules13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the exchange act) during the companys
fourth fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect,
the companys internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting, which sets forth
managements evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, and the reports of
independent registered public accounting firms, appearing on
pages65-68 of the companys 2006
annual report to shareholders, are incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
item
9b. other information
not applicable.
part iii
items 10, 11, 12 and 13.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance; executive
compensation; security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters; certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
we expect to file with the sec, in march2007 (and, in any event, not later than 120days
after the close of our last fiscal year), a definitive proxy statement, pursuant to regulation14a
of the sec in connection with our annual meeting of shareholders to be held april23, 2007, which
involves the election of directors. the following information to be included in such proxy
statement is incorporated herein by reference:
information included under the caption corporate governance
summary of the corporate governance
principles  independence of directors;
information included in the table under the caption corporate governance
membership on board committees;
information under the captions corporate governance  compensation and
benefits committee  compensation committee interlocks and
insider participation and report of compensation and
benefits committee;
information included under the caption corporate governance  audit
committee;
information included under the caption compensation of directors;
information included under the caption ownership of our common shares;
information included under the caption items to be voted on by
shareholders  item1  election of directors;
information included under the caption executive
compensation;
information under the caption certain relationships and transactions; and
information under the caption section16(a) beneficial ownership
reporting compliance.
in addition, the information regarding executive officers called for by item 401(b) of
regulations-k may be found under the caption executive officers of the company in this report.
table of contents
we have adopted a set of corporate governance principles, which together with the charters of
the five standing committees of the board of directors (audit; compensation and benefits;
executive; nominating and governance; and public responsibility), our code of conduct (which
constitutes the companys code of ethics), and the code of
business conduct for the members of the board of directors provide the framework for the governance of the company. a complete copy of
our corporate governance principles, the charters of each of the board committees, the code of
conduct (which applies not only to our chief executive officer, chief financial officer and
comptroller, but also to all other employees of the company) and the code of business conduct for
the members of the board of directors may be found by clicking on the corporate governance link
found on our investor relations web site at http://ir.americanexpress.com. you may also access our
investor relations web site through the companys main web site at www.americanexpress.com by
clicking on the about american express link, which is located at the bottom of the companys
homepage. (information from such sites is not incorporated by reference into this report.) you
may also obtain free copies of these materials by writing to our secretary at the companys
headquarters.
item 14. principal accounting fees and services
the information set forth under the heading item2  selection of independent registered
public accountants  audit fees;   audit-related fees;   tax fees;   all other fees; and   policy on pre-approval of services provided by
independent registered public accountants, which will appear in the companys definitive proxy
statement in connection with our annual meeting of shareholders to be held april23, 2007, is
incorporated herein by reference.
part iv
item 15. exhibits and financial statement schedules
1.financial statements:
the financial statements filed as a part of this report are listed on page f-1 hereof under
index to financial statements covered by reports of independent registered public accounting
firms, which is incorporated herein by reference.
2.financial statement schedules:
the financial statement schedules required to be filed in this report are listed on page f-1
hereof under index to financial statements covered by reports of independent registered public
accounting firms, which is incorporated herein by reference.
3.exhibits:
the list of exhibits required to be filed as exhibits to this report are listed on pages e-1
through e-6 hereof under exhibitindex, which is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934,
the company has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized.
american express company
february 28, 2007
/s/
daniel t. henry
daniel t. henry
executive vice president and
acting chief financial officer
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the company and in the capacities and on the
date indicated.
/s/ kenneth i. chenault
/s/ vernon e. jordan, jr.
kenneth i. chenault
vernon e. jordan, jr.
chairman, chief executive officer and director
director
/s/
daniel t. henry
/s/ jan leschly
daniel t. henry
jan leschly
executive
vice president and acting chief financial officer
director
/s/ joan c. amble
/s/ richard c. levin
joan c. amble
richard c. levin
executive vice president and comptroller
director
/s/ daniel f. akerson
/s/ richard a. mcginn
daniel f. akerson
richard a. mcginn
director
director
/s/ charlene barshefsky
/s/ edward d. miller
charlene barshefsky
edward d. miller
director
director
/s/ ursula m. burns
/s/ frank p. popoff
ursula m. burns
frank p. popoff
director
director
/s/ peter chernin
/s/ robert d. walter
peter chernin
robert d. walter
director
director
/s/ ronald a. williams
ronald a. williams
director
february28, 2007
table of contents
american express company
index to financial statements
covered by reports of independent registered
public accounting firms
(items 15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2) of form10-k)
annual report
to shareholders
form 10-k
(page)
american express company and subsidiaries:
data incorporated by reference from 2006 annual report to
shareholders:
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
(pricewaterhousecoopers llp)
66-67
report of independent registered public accounting firm
(ernst & young llp)
consolidated statements of income for each of the three
years in the period ended december31, 2006
consolidated balance sheets at december31, 2006
and 2005
consolidated statements of cash flows for each of the
three years in the period ended december31, 2006
consolidated statements of shareholders equity for each of
the three years in the period ended december31, 2006
notes to consolidated financial statements
74-110
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
f-2
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
f-3
schedules:
report of independent registered public accounting firm on
financial statement schedules
f-4
i  condensed financial information of the company
f-5  f-9
ii  valuation and qualifying accounts for each of the
three years in the period ended december31, 2006
f-10
all other schedules for american express company and subsidiaries have been omitted since the
required information is not present or not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of
the schedule, or because the information required is included in the respective financial
statements or notes thereto.
* * *
the consolidated financial statements of american express company (including the reports of
independent registered public accounting firms) listed in the above index, which are included in
the annual report to shareholders for the year ended december31, 2006, are hereby incorporated by
reference. with the exception of the pages listed in the above index, unless otherwise
incorporated by reference elsewhere in this annual report on form 10-k, the 2006 annual report to
shareholders is not to be deemed filed as part of this report.
f-1
table of contents
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
we hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements (forms-8
no.2-46918, no.2-59230, no.2-64285, no.2-73954, no.2-89680, no.33-01771, no.33-02980, no.
33-28721, no.33-33552, no.33-36442, no.33-48629, no.33-62124, no.33-65008, no.33-53801, no.
333-12683, no.333-41779, no.333-52699, no.333-73111, no.333-38238, and no.333-98479; forms-3
no.2-89469, no.33-43268, no.33-50997, no.333-32525, no.333-45445, no.333-47085, no.
333-55761, no.333-51828, no.333-113768, no.333-117835 and no.333-138032) of american express
company of our report dated february26, 2007, relating to the consolidated financial statements,
managements assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting and the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which appears in the annual report to
shareholders, which is incorporated by reference in this annual report on form 10-k. we also
consent to the incorporation by reference of our report dated
february26, 2007, relating to the
financial statement schedules, which appears in this form 10-k.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february26, 2007
f-2
table of contents
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
we consent to the incorporation by reference in this annual report on form 10-k of american
express company of our report dated february18, 2005, except for notes 2 and 19, as to which the
date is february27, 2006, with respect to the consolidated financial statements of american
express company, included in the 2006 annual report to shareholders of american express company
(the company).
our
audit also included the financial statement schedules of american express company listed in
item15(a). these schedules are the responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility
is to express an opinion based on our audit. in our opinion the
financial statement schedules
referred to above, when considered in relation to the basic financial statements taken as a whole,
present fairly in all material respects the information set forth therein.
we also consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements (form s-8 no.
2-46918, no.2-59230, no.2-64285, no.2-73954, no.2-89680, no.33-01771, no.33-02980, no.
33-28721, no.33-33552, no.33-36442, no.33-48629, no.33-62124, no.33-65008, no.33-53801, no.
333-12683, no.333-41779, no.333-52699, no.333-73111, no.333-38238, and no.333-98479; forms-3
no.2-89469, no.33-43268, no.33-50997, no.333-32525, no.333-45445, no.333-47085, no.
333-55761, no.333-51828, no.333-113768, no.333-117835 and no.333-138032) and in the related
prospectuses of our report dated february18, 2005, except for notes 2 and 19, as to which the date
is february27, 2006, with respect to the consolidated financial statements of american express
company incorporated herein by reference, and our report in the preceding paragraph with respect to
the financial statement schedules of american express company included in this annual report on
form 10-k of american express company.
/s/ ernst & young llp
new york, new york
february26, 2007
f-3
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
on
financial statement schedules
to the board of directors and shareholders
of american express company:
our audits of the consolidated financial statements, of managements assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting and of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting referred to in our report dated february26, 2007 appearing in the
2006 annual report to shareholders of american express company (which report, consolidated
financial statements and assessment are incorporated by reference in this annual report on form
10-k) also included an audit of the financial statement schedules as of and for the years ended
december31, 2006 and december31, 2005, listed in item15(a)(2) of this form 10-k. in our
opinion, these financial statement schedules present fairly, in all material respects, the
information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated financial
statements.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february26, 2007
f-4
table of contents
american express company and consolidated subsidiaries
schedule icondensed financial information of the company
condensed statements of income
(parent company only)
(millions)
years ended december 31,
revenues
$
$
$
expenses:
interest
human resources
other
total
pretax loss
(356
)
(496
)
(498
)
income tax benefit
(187
)
(195
)
(205
)
net loss before equity in net income of
subsidiaries and affiliates
(169
)
(301
)
(293
)
equity in net income of subsidiaries and
affiliates
3,898
3,522
2,979
income from continuing operations
3,729
3,221
2,686
(loss) income from discontinued operations,
net of tax
(22
)
cumulative effect of accounting change
related to discontinued operations,
net of tax
(71
)
net income
$
3,707
$
3,734
$
3,445
see notes to condensed financial information of the parent company on page f-8.
f-5
table of contents
american express company and consolidated subsidiaries
schedule icondensed financial information of the company
condensed balance sheets
(parent company only)
(millions, except share amounts)
december 31,
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
investments
equity in net assets of subsidiaries and affiliates
of continuing operations
11,017
10,955
accounts receivable and accrued interest, less
reserves
land, buildings and equipment  at cost, less
accumulated depreciation: 2006, $22; 2005, $32
due from subsidiaries
5,067
4,853
other assets
total assets
$
16,578
$
16,119
liabilities and shareholders equity
accounts payable and other liabilities
$
$
long-term debt
5,994
5,242
due to subsidiaries
total liabilities
6,067
5,570
shareholders equity:
common shares, $.20 par value, authorized 3.6
billion shares; issued and outstanding 1,199
million shares in 2006 and 1,241million shares in
additional paid-in capital
9,638
8,652
retained earnings
1,153
1,788
accumulated other comprehensive (loss)income,
net of tax:
net unrealized securities gains
net unrealized derivatives gains
foreign currency translation adjustments
(222
)
(400
)
net unrealized pension and other postretirement
benefit costs
(417
)
minimum pension liability
(19
)
total accumulated other comprehensive loss
(520
)
(139
)
total shareholders equity
10,511
10,549
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
16,578
$
16,119
see notes to condensed financial information of the parent company on page f-8.
f-6
table of contents
american express company and consolidated subsidiaries
schedule icondensed financial information of the company
condensed statements of cash flows
(parent company only)
(millions)
years ended december 31,
cash flows from operating activities:
net income
$
3,707
$
3,734
$
3,445
adjustments to reconcile net income to cash
provided by operating activities:
equity in
net (income) loss of subsidiaries and affiliates:
continuing operations
(3,898
)
(3,522
)
(2,979
)
discontinued operations
(513
)
(830
)
cumulative effect of accounting change related to
discontinued operations, net of tax
dividends received from subsidiaries and affiliates
3,479
2,474
2,110
dividends received from discontinued operations
1,325
other operating activities, primarily with subsidiaries
(279
)
(316
)
(76
)
net cash provided by operating activities
3,031
1,857
3,066
cash flows from investing activities:
purchase of investments
(20
)
(30
)
purchase of land, buildings and equipment
(10
)
(8
)
(10
)
acquisition
(200
)
net cash used in investing activities
(230
)
(38
)
(10
)
cash flows from financing activities:
issuance of debt
1,750
principal payment of debt
(1,000
)
(498
)
issuance of
american express common shares and other
1,203
1,129
1,055
repurchase of american express common shares
(4,093
)
(1,853
)
(3,578
)
dividends paid
(661
)
(597
)
(535
)
net cash used in financing activities
(2,801
)
(1,819
)
(3,057
)
net decrease in cash and cash equivalents
(1
)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
$
$
supplemental disclosures of cash flow information:
cash paid for interest (net of amounts capitalized) in 2006, 2005 and 2004 was $190million, $246
million and $174million, respectively. net cash received for income taxes in 2006, 2005 and 2004
was $216million, $160million and $384million, respectively.
see notes to condensed financial information of the parent company on page f-8.
f-7
table of contents
american express company and consolidated subsidiaries
schedule icondensed financial information of the company
notes to condensed financial information of the company
(parent company only)
1.
principles of consolidation
the accompanying condensed financial statements include the accounts of american express company
(the parent company) and, on an equity basis, its subsidiaries and affiliates. parent company
revenues and expenses, other than human resources expenses and interest expense on long-term
debt, are primarily related to intercompany transactions with subsidiaries and affiliates.
these financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial
statements and the accompanying notes thereto of american express company and its subsidiaries
(the company). certain reclassifications of prior period amounts have been made to conform to
the current presentation.
on september30, 2005, the company completed the spin-off of ameriprise financial, inc.
(ameriprise), formerly known as american express financial corporation, the companys financial
planning and financial services business. in addition, during the third quarter of 2005, the
company completed certain dispositions including the sale of its tax, accounting and consulting
business, american express tax and business services, inc. (tbs). the operating results and
cash flows related to ameriprise and certain dispositions (including tbs) have been reflected as
discontinued operations in the condensed financial information.
f-8
table of contents
2.long-term debt consists of (millions):
december 31,
1.85% convertible debentures due december1, 2033(a)
$
$
2,000
3.75% senior notes due november20, 2007
4.75% senior notes due june17, 2009
4.875% senior notes due july15, 2013
5.25% senior notes due september12, 2011
5.48% senior notes due december1, 2033(a)
2,000
5.50 % senior notes due september12, 2006
1,000
5.50 % senior notes due september12, 2016
subordinated debentures due 2036
$
5,994
$
5,242
(a)
at december1, 2006, the parent company remarketed the $2billion convertible debentures
outstanding at december31, 2005, into unsecured 5.48percent floating rate senior notes due 2033.
aggregate annual maturities of long-term debt for the five years ending december31, 2011 are
as follows (millions): 2007, $749; 2008, $0; 2009, $500; 2010, $0; 2011, $400 and thereafter,
$4,345.
f-9
table of contents
american express company and consolidated subsidiaries
schedule ii valuation and qualifying accounts
three years ended december 31, 2006
(millions)
reserve for credit losses,
loans, and
reserve for doubtful
discounts
accounts receivable
balance at beginning of period
1,097
$
1,084
$
1,121
$
1,008
$
$
additions:
charges to income
1,699
1,381
1,188
1,296
1,563
(a)
1,213
(a)
recoveries of amounts
previously written off
deductions:
charges for which reserves
were provided
(1,739
)
(1,516
)
(1,319
)
(1,281
)
(1,418
)
(1,268
)
balance at end of period
$
1,269
$
1,097
$
1,084
$
1,023
$
1,008
$
(a)
before recoveries on accounts previously written off, which are credited to income
(millions): 2006  $210; 2005  $202 and 2004  $196.
f-10
table of contents
exhibit index
the following exhibits are filed as part of this annual report. the exhibit numbers preceded by
an asterisk (*) indicate exhibits electronically filed herewith. all other exhibit numbers
indicate exhibits previously filed and are hereby incorporated herein by reference. exhibits
numbered 10.1 through 10.26, 10.28 through 10.39 and 10.42 through
10.44 are management contracts
or compensatory plans or arrangements.
3.1
companys restated certificate of incorporation (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 of
the companys registration statement on form s-3, dated july31, 1997 (commission file no.
333-32525)).
3.2
companys certificate of amendment of the certificate of incorporation (incorporated by
reference to exhibit3.1 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.
1-7657) for the quarter ended march31, 2000).
3.3
companys by-laws, as amended through september27, 2006 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3.1 of the companys current report on form 8-k
(commission file no.1-7657), dated
september27, 2006 (filed september29, 2006)).
4.
the instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt securities of the company
and its subsidiaries are omitted pursuant to section (b)(4)(iii)(a) of item601 of regulation
s-k. the company hereby agrees to furnish copies of these instruments to the sec upon
request.
10.1
american express company 1989 long-term incentive plan, as amended and restated (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.1 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file
no.1-7657) for the quarter ended march31, 1996).
10.2
american express company 1989 long-term incentive compensation plan master agreement, dated
february27, 1995 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.4 of the companys current report
on form 8-k (commission file no.1-7657), dated november22, 2004 (filed january28, 2005)).
10.3
amendment dated february28, 2000 of american express company 1989 long-term incentive
compensation plan master agreement dated february27, 1995 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.2 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.1-7657) for
the quarter ended march31, 2000).
10.4
american express company 1998 incentive compensation plan, as amended through july25, 2005
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.4 of the companys
annual report on form 10-k (commission
file no.1-7657) for the year ended december31, 2005).
10.5
american express company 1998 incentive compensation plan master agreement, dated april27,
1998 (for awards made prior to january22, 2007) (incorporated by
e-1
table of contents
reference to exhibit10.1 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file
no.1-7657) for the quarter ended september30, 2004).
10.6
amendment of american express company 1998 incentive compensation plan master agreement,
dated april27, 1998 (for awards made prior to january22, 2007) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.1-7657) for
the quarter ended march31, 2000).
*10.7
american express company 1998 incentive compensation plan master agreement, dated
january22, 2007 (for awards made on or after such date).
*10.8
form of award agreement for executive officers in connection with performance grant awards
(a/k/a incentive award) under the american express company 1998 incentive compensation plan,
as amended.
10.9
form of award agreement for executive officers in connection with portfolio grants under the
american express company 1998 incentive compensation plan, as amended (for awards made prior
to january22, 2007) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.8 to the companys annual report
on form 10-k (commission file no.1-7657) for the year ended december31, 2005).
10.10
form of award agreement for executive officers in connection with portfolio grants under the
american express company 1998 incentive compensation plan, as amended (for awards made after
january22, 2007) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the companys current report
on form 8-k (commission file no.1-7657) dated january22, 2007 (filed january26, 2007)).
10.11
description of compensation payable to non-management directors (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.1 of the companys current report on form 8-k (commission file no.1-7657),
dated november21, 2005 (filed january13, 2006)).
10.12
american express company deferred compensation plan for directors, as amended through july
28, 2003 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.3 of the companys current report on form
8-k (commission file no.1-7657), dated november22, 2004 (filed january28, 2005)).
*10.13
description of amendments to 1994  2006 pay-for-performance deferral programs.
10.14
description of american express company pay-for-performance deferral program (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.2 of the companys current report on form 8-k (commission file no.
l-7657), dated november22, 2004 (filed january28, 2005)).
10.15
american express company 2006 pay-for-performance deferral program guide (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.1 of the companys current report on form 8-k (commission file no.
1-7657), dated november21, 2005 (filed november23, 2005)).
e-2
table of contents
10.16
american express company 2005 pay-for-performance deferral program guide (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.10 of the companys annual report on form 10-k (commission file no.
1-7657) for the fiscal year ended december31, 2004).
10.17
american express company 2007 pay-for-performance deferral program document (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.1 of the companys current report on form 8-k (commission file no.
1-7657), dated november20, 2006 (filed november22, 2006)).
10.18
american express company retirement plan for non-employee directors, as amended
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.12 of the companys annual report on form 10-k
(commission file no.1-7657) for the fiscal year ended december31, 1988).
10.19
certificate of amendment of the american express company retirement plan for non-employee
directors dated march21, 1996 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.11 of the companys
annual report on form 10-k (commission file no.1-7657) for the fiscal year ended december31,
1995).
10.20
american express key executive life insurance plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.12 of the companys annual report on form 10-k (commission file no.1-7657) for the
fiscal year ended december31, 1991).
10.21
amendment to american express company key executive life insurance plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.3 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.
1-7657) for the quarter ended september30, 1994).
*10.22
amendment to american express company key executive life
insurance plan, effective as of january 22, 2007.
10.23
american express key employee charitable award program for education (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.13 of the companys annual report on form 10-k (commission file no.
1-7657) for the fiscal year ended december31, 1990).
10.24
american express directors charitable award program (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.14 of the companys annual report on form 10-k (commission file no.1-7657) for the fiscal
year ended december31, 1990).
10.25
american express company salary/bonus deferral plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.20 of the companys annual report on form 10-k (commission file no.1-7657) for the fiscal
year ended december31, 1988).
10.26
amendment to american express company salary/bonus deferral plan (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.4 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.1-7657)
for the quarter ended september30, 1994).
e-3
table of contents
10.27
tax allocation agreement, dated may27, 1994, between lehman brothers holdings inc. and the
company (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 of lehman brothers holdings inc.s
transition report on form 10-k (commission file no.1-9466) for the transition period from
january1, 1994 to november30, 1994).
10.28
american express company 1993 directors stock option plan, as amended (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.11 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.
1-7657) for the quarter ended march31, 2000).
10.29
american express senior executive severance plan effective january1, 1994 (as amended and
restated through may1, 2000) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.10 of the companys
quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.1-7657) for the quarter ended march31,
2000).
10.30
amendments to the american express senior executive severance plan, effective november26,
2001 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.30 of the companys annual report on form 10-k
(commission file no.1-7657) for the year ended december31, 2001).
*10.31
amendment to the american express senior executive severance plan, effective january22,
2007.
10.32
amendment of long-term incentive awards under the american express company 1979 and 1989
long-term incentive plans (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.6 of the companys
quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.1-7657) for the quarter ended september30,
1994).
10.33
amendments of (i)long-term incentive awards under the american express company 1979 and
1989 long-term incentive plans, (ii)the american express senior executive severance plan,
(iii)the american express supplemental retirement plan, (iv)the american express
salary/bonus deferral plan, (v)the american express key executive life insurance plan and
(vi)the ids current service deferred compensation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.37 of the companys annual report on form 10-k (commission file no.1-7657) for the fiscal
year ended december31, 1997).
10.34
american express supplemental retirement plan amended and restated effective march1, 1995
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q
(commission file no.1-7657) for the quarter ended september30, 1999).
10.35
american express supplemental retirement plan (as amended and restated effective july1,
2007) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 of the companys current report on
e-4
table of contents
form8-k (commission file no.1-7657), dated january22, 2007 (filed january26, 2007)).
10.36
american express directors stock plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4 of the
companys registration statement on form s-8, dated december9, 1997 (commission file no.
333-41779)).
10.37
american express annual incentive award plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.6 of
the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.1-7657) for the quarter ended
march31, 2000).
*10.38
amendment to american express annual incentive award plan,
effective january22, 2007.
10.39
agreement dated february27, 1995 between the company and berkshire hathaway inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.43 of the companys annual report on form 10-k
(commission file no.1-7657) for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994).
10.40
agreement dated july20, 1995 between the company and berkshire hathaway inc. and its
subsidiaries (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 of the companys quarterly report on
form 10-q (commission file no.1-7657) for the quarter ended september30, 1995).
10.41
amendment dated september8, 2000 to the agreement dated february27, 1995 between the
company and berkshire hathaway inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit99.3 of the
companys current report on form 8-k (commission file no.1-7657) dated january22, 2001).
10.42
description of a special grant of a stock option and restricted stock award to kenneth i.
chenault, the companys president and chief operating officer (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.2 of the companys quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file no.1-7657) for
the quarter ended june30, 1999).
10.43
american express company 2003 share equivalent unit plan for directors, as adopted and
effective april28, 2003 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 of the companys quarterly
report on form 10-q (commission file no.1-7657) for the quarter ended march31, 2003).
*10.44
description of 2007 base salaries of named executive officers.
10.45
separation and distribution agreement between american express company and ameriprise
financial, inc., dated august24, 2005 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 of the
companys current report on form 8-k (commission file no.1-7657), dated august24, 2005
(filed august30, 2005)).
10.46
employee benefits agreement, dated as of september30, 2005, by and between american express
company and ameriprise financial, inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 of the
companys current report on form 8-k (commission file no.1-7657), dated october6, 2005).
e-5
table of contents
10.47
tax allocation agreement, dated as of september30, 2005, by and between american express
company and ameriprise financial, inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 of the
companys current report on form 8-k (commission file no.1-7657), dated october6, 2005).
*12
computation in support of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
*13
portions of the companys 2006 annual report to shareholders that
are incorporated herein by reference.
*21
subsidiaries of the company.
*23.1
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp (contained on page f-2 of this
annual report on form 10-k).
*23.2
consent of ernst & young llp (contained on page f-3 of this annual
report on form 10-k).
*31.1
certification of kenneth i. chenault, chief executive officer,
pursuant to rule13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange
act of 1934, as amended.
*31.2
certification of daniel t. henry, acting chief financial officer,
pursuant to rule13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange
act of 1934, as amended.
*32.1
certification of kenneth i. chenault, chief executive officer, and
daniel t. henry, acting chief financial officer, pursuant to 18 u.s.c.
section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
e-6
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006 commission file no.1-7657
american express company
(exact name of company as specified in charter)
exhibits
