10-k
a2168212z10-k.htm
10-k
quicklinks
-- click here to rapidly navigate through this document
united states
securities and exchange commission washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended january 29, 2006
or
o
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
commission file number 1-8207
the home depot,inc. (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware (state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
95-3261426
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
2455 paces ferry road, n.w., atlanta, georgia 30339 (address of principal executive offices) (zip code)
registrant's
telephone number, including area code: (770) 433-8211
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange
on which registered
commonstock,$0.05parvaluepershare
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act: none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities
act.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the
act.yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during
the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the
best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of "accelerated filer
and large accelerated filer" in rule12b-2 of the exchange act.
large
accelerated fileraccelerated
fileronon-accelerated filero
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesono
the aggregate market value of the common stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the registrant on july31, 2005 was $91.2billion.
the
number of shares outstanding of the registrant's common stock as of march28, 2006 was 2,117,846,411 shares.
documents incorporated by reference
portions of the registrant's proxy statement for the 2006 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k to
the extent described herein.
the home depot, inc.
fiscal year 2005 form 10-k
table of contents
part i
item 1.
business
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
item 4a.
executive officers of the company
part ii
item 5.
market for the registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
item9b.
other information
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item 14.
principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
cautionary statement pursuant to the  private securities litigation reform act of 1995
certain statements contained herein, including any statements related to net sales growth, increases in comparable store sales, impact of cannibalization, commodity price
inflation and deflation, implementation of store initiatives, protection of intellectual property rights, net earnings performance, earnings per share, stock-based compensation expense, store openings
and closures, payments on commercial paper borrowings, the effect of adopting certain accounting standards, future financial reporting, financing, margins, return on invested capital, operations after
the closing of the merger with hughes supply,inc. ("hughes supply"), the timing and certainty of closing of the merger with hughes supply, the accounting and financial impact of the merger
with hughes supply, strategic direction and the demand for our products and services, constitute "forward-looking statements" as defined in the private securities litigation reform act of 1995. these
statements are based on currently available information and are based on our current expectations and projections about future events. these statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that
could cause actual results to differ materially from our historical experience and expectations. some of the material risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from
historical experience and expectations are described in item 1a. "risk factors." undue reliance should not be placed on the forward-looking statements contained herein as they speak only as of the
date hereof and we undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances. additional information regarding these and other risks and
uncertainties is contained in our periodic filings with the securities and exchange commission.
part i
item 1. business.
introduction
the home depot,inc. is the world's largest home improvement retailer and the second largest retailer in the united states ("u.s."), based on net sales for the fiscal
year ended january29, 2006 ("fiscal 2005"). as of the end of fiscal 2005, we were operating 2,042 stores, most of which are the home depot stores. the following is a description
of our the home depot stores, home depot supply and our other store formats.
the
home depot stores sell a wide assortment of building materials, home improvement and lawn and garden products and provide a number of services. the home depot stores average approximately 105,000
square feet of enclosed space, with approximately 23,000 additional square feet of outside garden area. as of the end of fiscal 2005, we had 1,984 the home depot stores located throughout the u.s.
(including the territories of puerto rico and the virgin islands), canada and mexico.
in
addition to the home depot stores, we have a retail store format that sells products and services primarily for home decorating and remodeling projects called expo design center and two retail
store formats focused on professional customers called home depot supply and the home depot landscape supply. as of the end of fiscal 2005, we were operating 34 expo design center stores, three home
depot supply stores and 11 the home depot landscape supply stores. we also have two the home depot floor stores located in texas and florida that primarily sell flooring products.
in
addition to our retail stores, our business also includes home depot supply. home depot supply distributes products and sells installation services primarily to professional business contractors,
businesses and municipalities and generally operates in the following three areas:
maintenance, repair and operations ("mro") supplies maintenance, repair and operating products primarily to multi-family
housing, hospitality and lodging facilities. included under mro are national waterworks,inc. and apex supply company,inc. national waterworks
provides
a wide range of water and wastewater transmission products through 137 branches in 36 states. apex supply is a wholesale supplier of plumbing, hvac, appliances and other related professional
products with 25 locations in the southeast. mro also distributes its products through 20 distribution centers located in 14 states.
builder provides products and arranges installation services for production home builders through 37 locations in 14 states.
builder also includes williams bros. lumber company, llc, a supplier of lumber and building materials to home builders through 16 branches in georgia.
professional supply includes various brands, such as white cap construction and contractors' warehouse. white cap
construction distributes specialty hardware, tools and materials to construction contractors through 103 branches in 23 states. contractors' warehouse caters to small contractors and remodeling
tradesmen through eight retail stores located in california.
in
january2006, we entered into a definitive merger agreement to acquire hughes supply, a leading distributor of construction, repair and maintenance products, for aggregate consideration of
approximately $3.5billion. upon closing, hughes supply will be part of home depot supply.
the
home depot,inc. is a delaware corporation that was incorporated in 1978. our store support center (corporate office) is located at 2455 paces ferry road, n.w., atlanta, georgia 30339. our
telephone number is (770)433-8211.
we
maintain an internet website at www.homedepot.com. we make available on our website, free of charge, our annual reports to shareholders, annual reports on form10-k, quarterly
reports on form10-q, current reports on form8-k, proxy statements and forms 3, 4 and 5 as soon as reasonably practicable after filing such documents with, or
furnishing such documents to, the securities and exchange commission.
we
have included our website addresses throughout this filing only as textual references. the information contained on our websites is not incorporated by reference into this
form10-k.
retail businesses
the home depot stores
operating strategy.our operating strategy is to offer a broad assortment of high-quality merchandise
and services at competitive prices using knowledgeable, service-oriented personnel and strong marketing and credit promotions. we believe that our associates' knowledge of products and home
improvement techniques and applications is very important to our marketing approach and our ability to maintain and enhance customer satisfaction.
customers.the home depot stores serve three primary customer groups:
do-it-yourself ("d-i-y") customers: these customers are typically home owners
who purchase products and complete their own projects and installations. to complement the expertise of our associates, the home depot stores offer "how-to" clinics taught by associates
and merchandise vendors.
do-it-for-me ("d-i-f-m") customers: these customers
are typically home owners who purchase materials themselves and hire third parties to complete the project and/or installation. we arrange for the installation of a variety of the home depot products
through qualified independent contractors.
professional customers: these customers are professional remodelers, general contractors, repairmen and tradesmen. in many
stores, we offer a variety of programs to these customers, including additional delivery and will-call services, dedicated staff, extensive merchandise selections and expanded credit
programs, all of which we believe increase sales to this group.
products.a typical the home depot store stocks 35,000 to 45,000 products during the year, including both national
brand name and proprietary items. the following table shows the percentage of revenues of each major product group (and related services) for each of the last three fiscal years:
percentage of revenues for
fiscal year ended
product group
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
building materials, lumber and millwork
24.2
%
24.4
%
23.2
%
plumbing, electrical and kitchen
29.4
29.0
28.9
hardware and seasonal
27.1
26.9
27.6
paint, flooring and wall covering
19.3
19.7
20.3
total
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
we
buy our store merchandise from suppliers located throughout the world and are not dependent on any single supplier. most of our merchandise is purchased directly from manufacturers, which
eliminates "middleman" costs. we believe that competitive sources of supply are readily available for substantially all of the products we sell in the home depot stores.
to
complement and enhance our product selection, we have formed strategic alliances and exclusive relationships with selected suppliers to market products under a variety of
well-recognized brand names. during fiscal 2005, we offered a number of proprietary and exclusive brands across a wide range of departments including, but not limited to, behr premium
plus paint, charmglow gas grills, hampton bay lighting, mills pride cabinets, vigoro lawn care products, husky hand tools,
ridgid and ryobi power tools, pegasus faucets, traffic master carpet, glacier bay bath fixtures and veranda decking
products. we may consider additional strategic alliances and relationships with other suppliers and will continue to assess opportunities to expand the range of products available under brand names
that are exclusive to the home depot.
in
2005, innovative and distinctive products continued to be a growth driver supporting our merchandising strategy. the following successes helped differentiate the home depot in the marketplace:
an
enhanced grill lineup led by our proprietary charmglow brand and the exclusive ducane stainless steel grills;
flooring
innovation through our dupont realtouch elite laminate flooring;
introduction
of lg appliances and a broadened assortment of maytag and ge products;
expanded
patio lineup led by our proprietary hampton bay set;
broadened
assortment of paint, including colores origenes, bellagio faux paint, and the ralph lauren metallic and suede paint;
innovative
products from ryobi, including the ryobi one+ system, ryobi multitaskit and ryobi gas pressure washer; and
growing
power tool lineup, including the introduction of exclusive makita and milwaukee lithium-ion power tools for professional and d-i-y customers.
we
maintain a global sourcing merchandise program to source high-quality products directly from manufacturers. this gives our customers a broader selection of innovative products and
better value, while enhancing our gross margin. our product development merchants travel internationally to identify opportunities to purchase items directly for our stores. additionally, we have two
sourcing offices located in shanghai and shenzhen, china, and have a quality assurance engineer located in milan,
italy.
we also have product development merchants, as well as a sourcing office, in monterrey, mexico. these initiatives enable us to improve product features and quality, to import products not
currently available to our customers and to offer products at a lower price than would otherwise be available if purchased from third-party importers. we currently source products from more than 600
factories in approximately 35 countries.
services.the home depot and expo design center stores offer a variety of installation services. these services
target d-i-f-m customers who select and purchase products and installation of those products from us. these installation programs include products such as
carpeting, flooring, cabinets, countertops and water heaters. in addition, we provide professional installation of a number of products sold through our in-home sales programs, such as
generators and furnace and central air systems. our wholly-owned subsidiaries, thd at-home services,inc. and home depot installation services,inc., sell and install our
roofing, siding and window programs. with the exception of home depot installation services,inc., which employs its own qualified installers, the home depot's installation services are
provided by qualified independent contractors throughout the u.s. and canada. we also arrange for the provision of flooring, countertop, cabinet and window covering installation services to production
home builders through our creative touch interiors brand. during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, we extended our services business by acquiring chem-dry, the world's largest carpet and
upholstery cleaning franchisor. chem-dry has nearly 4,000 franchises worldwide, including 2,500 in the u.s.
store growth
united states.at the end of fiscal 2005, we were operating 1,793 the home depot stores in the u.s., including the territories of
puerto rico and the virgin islands. during fiscal 2005, we opened 140 new the home depot stores, including four relocations, in the u.s. although these new store openings occurred primarily in
existing markets, we continued our geographic expansion by opening stores in a number of new markets.
to
increase customer service levels, gain incremental sales and enhance long-term market penetration, we often open new stores near the edge of market areas served by existing stores.
while these openings may initially have a negative impact on comparable store sales growth, we believe this "cannibalization" strategy increases customer satisfaction and our overall market share by
reducing delays in shopping, increasing utilization by existing customers and attracting new customers to more convenient locations. during fiscal 2005, we believe that approximately 20% of our stores
were cannibalized by certain of our new stores.
canada.at
the end of fiscal 2005, we were operating 137 the home depot stores in ten canadian provinces. of these stores, 21 were opened during fiscal 2005,
including one relocation.
mexico.at
the end of fiscal 2005, we were operating 54 stores in mexico. of these stores, 10 were opened during fiscal 2005.
china.at
the end of fiscal 2004, we entered into an arrangement to lease commercial office space in shanghai to support a retail initiative in china. we are
currently pursuing our strategy for entry into the china home improvement marketplace.
expo design center stores
expo design center stores are designed to be a complete home decorating and remodeling resource for middle- to upper- income d-i-f-m
customers by offering interior design products for kitchens, baths, appliances and flooring, as well as products for lighting, decorating and storage and organization projects, beyond those available
in the home depot stores. in each of the 34 expo design center stores, customers are also offered complete project management and installation services through
associates
who have expertise in designing, planning and completing decorating and remodeling projects.
other businesses
home depot supply
apex supply company
apex supply company is a wholesale distributor of plumbing, hvac, appliances and other related products primarily to trade and mechanical contractors. apex supply employs
approximately 580 associates through 25 locations in the southeast.
contractors' warehouse
contractors' warehouse, acquired in june2005, offers over 10,000 items of building materials and construction supplies to small contractors and remodeling tradesmen
through eight retail stores located in california. contractors' warehouse employs approximately 500 associates.
creative touch interiors
creative touch interiors ("cti") provides builder design center services for production home builders with solutions for flooring, countertops, cabinets, window coverings and
other interior products. cti has relationships with 18 of the top 20 home builders in the u.s., as well as other regional and local home builders. through these operations, cti manages the complete
process, from helping customers make design choices to purchasing, scheduling and installation of its products for entire housing communities. cti currently conducts operations from 37 facilities in
14 states and employs approximately 2,900 associates.
home depot supply stores
home depot supply stores offer personal service to contractors and other professional customers by providing experienced account managers, expanded lumber and building material
assortments, greater quantities of merchandise and expanded delivery services. at the end of fiscal 2005, we were operating three home depot supply retail stores in two states and employed
approximately 150 associates.
home depot supply (formerly maintenance warehouse)
home depot supply is a leading distributor of maintenance, repair and operating supplies to the multi-family housing, hospitality and institutional industries. through its
catalogs, direct mail and field sales representatives, home depot supply offers approximately 16,000 items. home depot supply, which employs approximately 2,200 associates, is a multi-channel business
with a nationwide field sales organization, broad line catalog and user friendly website at www.hdsupply.com. orders are fulfilled through one of home depot supply's 20 distribution centers and are
shipped for same-day or next-day delivery to customers across the u.s.
national waterworks
national waterworks, acquired in august2005, is a leading distributor of a wide range of water and wastewater transmission products, including pipes, fittings, valves,
meters, fire hydrants, service and repair products and related components. through its network of 137 branches in 36 states, national waterworks sells directly to municipalities and to contractors who
serve municipalities and perform residential, commercial and industrial waterworks projects. national waterworks employs approximately 1,500 associates.
white cap construction
white cap construction is a leading supplier of specialty hardware, tools and materials throughout the u.s. white cap employs approximately 2,900 associates and offers a broad
range of products through a network of 103 branch locations in 23 states. white cap markets its products to large- and medium-sized professional contractors who utilize these products in a wide range
of commercial, industrial, residential and infrastructure construction projects. white cap supplies building materials and structural hardware, as well as power and hand tools.
williams bros. lumber company
williams bros. lumber company, acquired in june2005, is a leading supplier of lumber and building materials to professional, residential and commercial builders.
williams bros. operates through 16 branches located throughout georgia and employs 1,600 associates.
home depot direct
home depot direct offers customers expanded merchandise selection and extra time convenience through website and catalog shopping, with direct product delivery to the home,
office or job site. it also provides customers with valuable online information about home improvement topics and merchandise for sale in local the home depot stores.
its
primary website is located at www.homedepot.com. this site offers an assortment of products available for sale, information about its products and projects, calculators to estimate the amount and
kinds of materials needed to complete a project, as well as information about the home depot (including store locations and hours of operation) and links to other home depot direct on-line
businesses. the focus of this website is on providing products, information and customer service. we believe our internet site provides us with an opportunity to build relationships with, and educate,
our customers, improve service, and provide convenient shopping from home and increase store sales.
through
www.homedepot.com, home depot direct offers an assortment of over 30,000 items for sale. these items are selected based on their potential for on-line sales. managing product
selection and pricing nationally allows it to promote the same product and price to all visitors to its websites and allows home depot direct to leverage certain on-line marketing channels
that reach across many or all the home depot store pricing markets.
during
fiscal 2005, home depot direct continued to enhance the content of www.homedepot.com to describe each of the installation services the home depot offers and the capability to allow potential
customers to conveniently sign up on-line for in-home consultations. we anticipate continuing to improve the quality and quantity of services-related content
on-line.
home
depot direct manages other websites in support of the various the home depot brands and businesses. the canadian website, www.homedepot.ca, provides an assortment of products available for sale
online in canada, a store locator, and information on the home depot and its canadian services. the canadian website is bilingual to service the home depot customers in canada's two official
languages, english and french. the contractor services site, www.contractorservices.homedepot.com, allows contractors to browse and purchase store products that can be picked up in the home depot
stores or delivered to their home. customers may obtain store information and locations on expo design center stores at www.expo.com.
home
depot direct's 10 crescent lane site, www.10crescentlane.com, and paces trading company site, www.pacestrading.com, offer their products for sale online using similar photography and content as
found in their respective catalogs to provide a consistent brand experience.
your other warehouse
your other warehouse, which is also a part of home depot direct, is a distributor of special order faucet and plumbing fixtures, lighting, fan and hardware products for the
home depot and expo design center stores and a variety of other third-party resellers. your other warehouse carries over 60,000 products from over 130 suppliers, including kohler,
american standard and other major manufacturers. your other warehouse operates five distribution facilities and a call center and employs approximately 900 associates.
store support services
information technologies.during fiscal 2005, we continued to improve our technology capabilities by opening a
second technology center, located in austin, texas. in addition to providing redundancy, the center allows for growth and expansion. the center currently houses engineers, software developers and
computer operation staff.
in
fiscal 2005, we completed the rollout of back-end scanned receiving to all u.s. and canadian stores, which allows us to simplify, standardize and automate how we receive product. we
commenced vendor certification for certified receiving. we continued installation of self-checkout registers, which, as of the end of fiscal 2005, were in 1,272 stores and we grew
centralized automatic replenishment to 20% of store sales. we also implemented a special order services initiative pilot in 285 stores and we introduced new mobile cart functionality in all stores.
while
our technology investments have been primarily focused in our stores, we invested in technology improvements in other areas. during fiscal 2005, we implemented new financial systems for our
mexico retail operations, upgraded our call centers, improved our websites and launched several new direct-to-consumer brands.
associate development.at the end of fiscal 2005, we employed approximately 345,000 associates, of whom
approximately 26,000 were salaried, with the remainder compensated on an hourly or temporary basis. approximately 68% of our associates are employed on a full-time basis. we believe that
our employee relations are very good. to attract and retain qualified personnel, we seek to maintain competitive salary and wage levels in each market we serve.
we
develop our training programs in a continuing effort to service the needs of our customers and associates. these programs, including mandatory product knowledge training classes, are designed to
increase associates' knowledge of merchandising departments and products, and to educate, develop and test the skills of our associates. because we primarily promote or relocate current associates to
serve as managers and assistant managers for new stores, training and assessment of our associates is essential to our growth. our district managers and store managers typically meet with our human
resources managers to discuss the development of assistant managers and department heads.
we
have implemented programs in our stores and divisional offices to ensure that we hire and promote the most qualified associates in a non-discriminatory way. one of the most significant
programs we have is our annual human resources review process, which assesses and reviews leaders and teams, succession planning and executive pipeline, high potential associates, staffing, retention,
diversity, training and compliance. the program is closely linked to our performance management process, which evaluates the performance, leadership and potential of all associates. we also maintain a
list of qualified associates who are interested in new assignments and of qualified outside applicants that can be reviewed when positions become available.
marketing.we are one of the nation's largest retail advertisers, and utilize a broad range of mass media and
targeted media. we also incorporate major sponsorships into our marketing plan, such as nascar, the u.s. olympic team, the home depot center, espn college game
day, and a number of home and garden shows. we also utilize marketing arrangements with television shows of
strategic
importance, such as trading spaces, while you were out and this old house. we extend our reach and educate our customers through proprietary
publications, such as the 1-2-3 home improvement book series.
we
execute our marketing campaigns on both a national and local basis. because our stores are located throughout the u.s., canada and mexico, we can achieve greater efficiencies than smaller retailers
by using national advertising. at the same time, we tailor our advertising locally to respond to market differences, both in terms of products and the competitive environment. we produce
advertisements in english, spanish and french-canadian.
credit services.we offer credit purchase programs through third-party credit providers to professional,
d-i-y and d-i-f-m customers. in fiscal 2005, approximately 4million new the home depot credit accounts were opened, bringing the
total number of the home depot account holders to approximately 16million. proprietary credit card sales accounted for approximately 26% of store sales in fiscal 2005. we also offer an
unsecured home improvement loan that gives our customers the opportunity to finance the purchase of products and services in our stores. we believe that this loan program not only supports large
sales, such as kitchen and bath remodels, but also generates incremental sales from our customers.
intellectual property.through our wholly-owned subsidiary, homer tlc,inc., we have registered or applied
for registration, in a number of countries, for a variety of internet domain names, service marks and trademarks for use in our businesses, including the home depot; home depot direct;
hampton bay fans, lighting and accessories; glacier bay toilets, sinks and faucets; pegasus faucets and bath accessories; commercial electric
lighting fixtures; workforce tools, tool boxes and shelving; www.10crescentlane.com and www.pacestrading.com. furthermore, through various acquisitions and filings, we have also obtained
and now maintain patent portfolios relating to certain products and services provided by the home depot, and continually seek to patent or otherwise protect selected innovations we incorporate into
our products and business operations. we regard our intellectual property as having significant value and as being an important factor in the marketing of our brand, e-commerce, stores and
new areas of business. we are not aware of any facts that could be expected to have a material adverse affect on our intellectual property.
quality assurance program.we have a quality assurance program for our directly imported globally-sourced products.
through this program, we have established criteria for supplier and product performance, which measures factors such as product quality and timeliness of shipments. the performance record is made
available to the factories to allow them to strive for improvement. the quality assurance program addresses the following three main components:
factory:
the factory development group ensures all direct import factories are assessed and qualified to manufacture quality products that meet the expectations we have
established, as well as to assess their compliance with our policies;
products:
the product engineering group authorizes laboratories to test products prior to purchase and ensures that qualified inspectors conduct inspections at the factory
to ensure consistent compliance with our requirements, applicable national and international standards, and features determined by our merchants; and
packages:
the package-engineering group authorizes laboratories to test packaging prior to purchase and ensures that qualified inspectors inspect packaging at the factory to
ensure consistent compliance with all relevant requirements.
logistics.we use several mechanisms to lower distribution costs and increase our efficiencies. import distribution
centers process our globally-sourced merchandise. at the end of fiscal 2005, we had 16 import distribution centers located in the u.s. and canada. at the end of fiscal 2005, we also had 30 lumber
distribution centers in the u.s. and canada to support the lumber demands of our stores and
transit facilities. at our transit facilities, we receive merchandise from manufacturers and immediately provide transfer onto trucks for delivery to our stores. we believe that the transit
facility network will provide service to approximately 80% of our stores in the continental u.s. by the end of fiscal 2006. we also operate other specialty distribution centers for specific
merchandise needs. the distribution centers and transit facilities allow us to provide high service levels to our stores at relatively low costs. at the end of fiscal 2005, approximately 40% of the
merchandise shipped to our stores was processed through our network of distribution centers and transit facilities. as our networks evolve, we expect to increase the percentage of merchandise
processed by our facilities. the remaining merchandise will be shipped directly from our suppliers to our stores.
in
addition to replenishing merchandise supplies at our stores, we also provide delivery services directly to our customers. we continually assess opportunities to improve our distribution network to
better satisfy the needs of our stores and our customers and to lower costs.
environmental, health& safety ("eh&s").we are committed to maintaining a safe environment for our
customers and associates, and protecting the environment of the communities in which we do business. our eh&s function in the field is directed by trained associates focused primarily on execution of
the eh&s programs. additionally, we have an atlanta-based team of dedicated eh&s professionals who evaluate, develop, implement and enforce policies, processes and programs on a
company-wide basis. our eh&s professionals are responsible for managing our global eh&s program, which is implemented in partnership with store level associates, store and division
management, and the human resources and merchandising departments. the primary elements of our eh&s program are (1)establishment of eh&s standards and processes for all aspects of store
operations and merchandising, (2)effective training of appropriate associates on all applicable standards and (3)verifying compliance with established eh&s standards.
seasonality.our business is seasonal to a certain extent. generally, our highest volume of sales occurs in our
second fiscal quarter and the lowest volume occurs during our fourth fiscal quarter.
competition.our business is highly competitive, based in part on price, store location, customer service and depth
of merchandise. in each of the markets we serve, there are a number of other home improvement stores, electrical, plumbing and building materials supply houses and lumber yards. with respect to some
products, we also compete with discount stores, local, regional and national hardware
stores, mail order firms, warehouse clubs, independent building supply stores and, to a lesser extent, other retailers. in addition to these entities, our expo design center stores compete with
specialty design stores or showrooms, some of which are only open to interior design professionals. moreover, our home depot supply businesses compete with local and regional distributors and
wholesalers and manufacturers that sell products directly to their customer bases. due to the variety of competition we face, we are unable to precisely measure the impact on our sales by our
competitors. we estimate that our share of the u.s. home improvement and professional supply market is approximately 11% and we believe that we are an effective and significant competitor in our
markets.
item 1a. risk factors.
the
risks described below could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. these risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from our
historical experience and from results predicted by forward-looking statements made by us related to conditions or events that we anticipate may occur in the future. those statements may relate to
such matters as net sales growth, increases in comparable store sales, impact of cannibalization, commodity price inflation and deflation, implementation of store initiatives, protection of
intellectual property rights, net earnings performance, earnings per share, stock-based compensation expense, store openings and closures, payments on commercial paper borrowings, the effect of
adopting certain accounting standards, future financial reporting, financing, margins, return on invested capital, operations after the
closing
of the merger with hughes supply, the timing and certainty of closing of the merger with hughes supply, the accounting and financial impact of the merger with hughes supply, strategic
direction and the demand for our products and services. all forward-looking statements by us are qualified by the risks described below. these risks are not the only risks we face. our operations
could also be affected by additional factors that are not presently known to us or by factors that we currently consider immaterial to our business.
rising costs, a reduction in the availability of consumer credit, weather and other conditions in north america could adversely affect our costs of
doing business, demand for our products and services and our average ticket price.
interest rates, fuel and other energy costs, labor and healthcare costs, consumer credit availability, weather, natural disasters, terrorism and other conditions that adversely
affect consumer demand for
our products and services could adversely affect our financial performance. these and other similar factors could:
increase
our costs,
cause
our customers to delay undertaking or determine not to undertake new home improvement projects,
cause
our customers to delay purchasing or determine not to purchase home improvement products and services, and
lead
to a decline in average ticket price.
we rely on third party suppliers, and if we fail to identify and develop relationships with a sufficient number of qualified suppliers, our ability to
timely and efficiently access products that meet our high standards for quality could be adversely affected.
we buy our store merchandise from suppliers located throughout the world. our ability to continue to identify and develop relationships with qualified suppliers who can satisfy
our high standards for quality and our need to access products in a timely and efficient manner is a significant challenge. our ability to access products also can be adversely affected by political
instability, the financial instability of suppliers, suppliers' noncompliance with applicable laws, trade restrictions, tariffs, currency exchange rates, transport capacity and cost and other factors
beyond our control.
if we are unable to effectively manage and expand our alliances and relationships with selected suppliers of brand name products, we may be unable to
effectively execute our strategy to differentiate us from our competitors.
as part of our strategy of differentiation, we have formed strategic alliances and exclusive relationships with selected suppliers to market products under a variety of
well-recognized brand names. if we are unable to manage and expand these alliances and relationships or identify alternative
sources for comparable products, we may not be able to effectively execute our strategy of differentiation.
any inability to open new stores on schedule will delay the contribution of these new stores to our financial performance.
we expect to increase our presence in existing markets and enter new markets. our ability to open new stores will depend primarily on our ability to:
identify
attractive locations,
negotiate
leases or real estate purchase agreements on acceptable terms,
attract
and train qualified employees, and
manage
pre-opening expenses, including construction costs.
our
ability to open new stores also will be affected by environmental regulations, local zoning issues and other laws related to land use. failure to effectively manage these and other similar factors
will affect our ability to open stores on schedule, which will delay the impact of these new stores on our financial performance.
the implementation of our technology initiatives could disrupt our operations in the near term, and our technology initiatives might not provide the
anticipated benefits or might fail.
we have made and will continue to make significant technology investments both in our stores and in our administrative functions. our technology initiatives are designed to
streamline our operations to allow our associates to continue to provide high quality service to our customers and to provide our customers a better in-store experience. the cost and
potential problems and interruptions associated with the implementation of our technology initiatives could disrupt or reduce the efficiency of our operations in the near term. in addition, our new or
upgraded technology might not provide the anticipated benefits, it might take longer than expected to realize the anticipated benefits or the technology might fail altogether.
we may not timely identify or effectively respond to consumer trends, which could adversely affect our relationship with our customers, the demand for
our products and services and our market share.
it is difficult to successfully predict the products and services our customers will demand. the success of our business depends in part on our ability to identify and respond
to evolving trends in demographics and consumer preferences. failure to timely identify or effectively respond to changing consumer tastes, preferences, spending patterns and home improvement needs
could adversely affect our relationship with our customers, the demand for our products and services and our market share.
the inflation or deflation of commodity prices could affect our prices, demand for our products, sales and profit margins.
prices of certain commodity products, including lumber and other raw materials, are historically volatile and are subject to fluctuations arising from changes in domestic and
international supply and demand, labor costs, competition, market speculation, government regulations and periodic delays in delivery. rapid and significant changes in commodity prices may affect our
sales and profit margins.
if we cannot successfully identify and complete acquisition opportunities and integrate the acquired businesses, we may be unable to successfully
execute our expansion strategy.
the success of our expansion strategy depends, in part, on our ability to identify attractive acquisition opportunities, complete acquisitions on financially attractive terms
and integrate them with our other
businesses. integration of our acquisitions presents significant challenges and risks to our business, including:
distraction
of management from regular business concerns,
assimilation
and retention of employees and customers of the acquired business,
integration
of technologies, services and products, and
achievement
of appropriate internal control over financial reporting.
there
is no assurance that we will be able to successfully manage the risks associated with acquiring and integrating other businesses.
if we cannot successfully manage the unique challenges presented by international markets, we may not be successful in expanding our international
operations.
our expansion strategy includes expansion of our operations in existing and new international markets by selective acquisitions, strategic alliances and the opening of new
stores. our ability to successfully execute our expansion strategy in international markets is affected by many of the same operational risks we face in expanding our u.s. operations. in addition, our
international expansion may be adversely affected by our ability to identify and gain access to local suppliers as well as by local laws and customs, legal and regulatory constraints, political and
economic conditions and currency regulations of the countries or regions in which we currently operate or intend to operate in the future. risks inherent in our international operations also include,
among others, the costs and difficulties of managing international operations, adverse tax consequences and greater difficulty in enforcing intellectual property rights. additionally, foreign currency
exchange rates and fluctuations may have an impact on our future costs or on future cash flows from our international operations.
our success depends upon our ability to attract, train and retain highly qualified associates.
to be successful, we must attract, train and retain a large and growing number of highly qualified associates while controlling related labor costs. our ability to control
labor costs is subject to numerous external factors, including prevailing wage rates and health and other insurance costs. in addition, many of our associates are in hourly positions with historically
high turnover rates. we compete with other retail and non-retail businesses for these associates and invest significant resources in training and motivating them. we also depend on our
executives and other key associates for our success. there is no assurance that we will be able to attract or retain highly qualified associates in the future.
changes in accounting standards and subjective assumptions, estimates and judgments by management related to complex accounting matters could
significantly affect our financial results.
generally accepted accounting principles and related accounting pronouncements, implementation guidelines and interpretations with regard to a wide range of matters that are
relevant to our business, such as revenue recognition, asset impairment, inventories, self-insurance and litigation, are highly complex and involve many subjective assumptions, estimates
and judgments by our management. changes in these rules or their interpretation or changes in underlying assumptions, estimates or judgments by our management could significantly change our reported
or expected financial performance.
increased competition could adversely affect prices and demand for our products and services and could decrease our market share.
our business is highly competitive, based principally on price, store location, customer service and depth of merchandise. in each of the markets we serve, there are a number
of other home improvement stores, electrical, plumbing and building materials supply houses and lumber yards. with respect to some products, we also compete with discount stores, local, regional and
national hardware stores, mail order firms, warehouse clubs, independent building supply stores and other retailers. in addition, we compete with specialty design stores or showrooms, some of which
are only open to interior design professionals, local and regional distributors, and wholesalers and manufacturers that sell products directly to their customer bases. moreover, our home depot supply
businesses compete with local and regional distributors and wholesalers and manufacturers that sell products directly to their customer bases. intense competitive pressures from one or more of our
competitors could affect prices or demand for our products and services. if we are unable to timely and appropriately respond to these pressures, our financial performance and our market share could
be adversely affected.
we are involved in a number of legal proceedings, and while we cannot predict the outcomes of such proceedings and other contingencies with certainty,
some of these outcomes may adversely affect our operations or increase our costs.
we are involved in a number of legal proceedings, including consumer, employment, tort and other litigation. we cannot predict the outcomes of these legal proceedings and other
contingencies, including environmental remediation and other proceedings commenced by government authorities, with certainty. the outcome of some of these legal proceedings and other contingencies
could require us to take or refrain from taking actions which could adversely affect our operations or could require us to pay substantial amounts of money. additionally, defending against these
lawsuits and proceedings may involve significant expense and diversion of management's attention and resources from other matters.
our costs of doing business could increase as a result of changes in federal, state or local regulations.
changes in the federal, state or local minimum wage or living wage requirements or changes in other wage or workplace regulations could increase our costs of doing business. in
addition, changes in federal, state or local regulations governing the sale of some of our products could increase our costs of doing business.
item 1b. unresolved staff comments.
not
applicable.
item 2. properties.
the
following tables show locations of the 1,793 the home depot stores located in the u.s. and its territories and the 191 stores outside of the u.s. at the end of fiscal 2005:
u.s. locations
number of stores
alabama
alaska
arizona
arkansas
california
colorado
connecticut
delaware
district of columbia
florida
georgia
hawaii
idaho
illinois
indiana
iowa
kansas
kentucky
louisiana
maine
maryland
massachusetts
michigan
minnesota
mississippi
missouri
montana
nebraska
nevada
new hampshire
new jersey
new mexico
new york
north carolina
north dakota
ohio
oklahoma
oregon
pennsylvania
puerto rico
rhode island
south carolina
south dakota
tennessee
texas
utah
vermont
virgin islands
virginia
washington
west virginia
wisconsin
wyoming
total u.s.
1,793
international locations
number of stores
canada:
alberta
british columbia
manitoba
new brunswick
new foundland
nova scotia
ontario
prince edward island
quebec
saskatchewan
total canada
mexico:
baja california
baja california sur
chihuahua
coahuila
distrito federal
durango
guanajuato
guerrero
hidalgo
jalisco
michoacan
morelos
nuevo len
puebla
queretaro
quintana roo
san luis potosi
sinaloa
sonora
state of mexico
tabasco
tamaulipas
veracruz
yucatan
total mexico
additionally, at the end of fiscal 2005, we had 58 other retail store locations, which includes 34 expo design center stores located in arizona, california, florida, georgia, illinois, maryland,
massachusetts, missouri, new jersey, new york, tennessee, texas and virginia; three home depot supply stores located in california and arizona; 11 the home depot landscape supply stores located in
georgia and texas; two the home depot floor stores located in florida and texas; and eight contractors' warehouse stores located in california.
apex
supply company has 25 locations, of which two are located in florida, 17 are located in georgia, two are located in south carolina and four are located in tennessee.
creative
touch interiors conducts its operations through 37 locations in arizona, california, colorado, delaware, florida, indiana, maryland, michigan, nevada, new jersey, new mexico, ohio,
pennsylvania and virginia.
home
depot supply has 20 distribution centers located in arizona, california, colorado, florida, georgia, illinois, maryland, massachusetts, missouri, new jersey, ohio, texas, virginia and washington.
national
waterworks has 137 branch locations in alabama, arizona, arkansas, california, colorado, delaware, florida, georgia, idaho, illinois, indiana, iowa, kansas, kentucky, louisiana, maryland,
massachusetts, michigan, minnesota, missouri, nebraska, nevada, new jersey, new mexico, north carolina, ohio, oklahoma, oregon, pennsylvania, south carolina, tennessee, texas, utah, virginia,
washington and wisconsin.
white cap construction has 103 branch locations in arizona, arkansas, california, colorado, florida, georgia, hawaii, illinois, indiana, iowa, kentucky, maryland, missouri, nebraska, nevada, new
mexico, ohio, oregon, texas, utah, virginia, washington and wyoming.
williams
bros. lumber company has 16 branch locations in georgia.
your
other warehouse has five distribution centers located in louisiana, maryland and nevada.
of
our 2,042 stores, at fiscal 2005year end approximately 87% were owned (including those owned subject to a ground lease) consisting of approximately 186.6million square feet, and
approximately 13% of such stores were leased consisting of approximately 28.2million square feet. in recent years, we have increased the relative percentage of new stores that are owned. we
generally prefer to own stores because of greater operating control and flexibility, generally lower occupancy costs and certain other economic advantages.
our
executive, corporate staff, divisional staff and financial offices occupy approximately 1.9million square feet of leased and owned space in atlanta, georgia. at the end of fiscal 2005, we
occupied an aggregate of approximately 4.2million square feet, of which approximately 2.3million square feet is owned and approximately 1.9million square feet is leased, for
divisional store support centers, subsidiary store support centers and subsidiary customer support centers. at the end of fiscal 2005, our primary support centers were located in orange, california;
washington, d.c.; tampa, florida; atlanta, georgia; arlington heights, illinois; canton, massachusetts; south plainfield, new jersey; austin, texas; dallas, texas; tukwila, washington; toronto,
ontario and quebec, canada; monterrey and juarez, mexico; and shenzhen and shanghai, china.
at
the end of fiscal 2005, we utilized approximately 31.2million square feet of warehousing and distribution space, of which approximately 3.2million is owned and approximately
28.0million is leased.
we
believe that at the end of existing lease terms, our current leased space can be either relet or replaced by alternate space for lease or purchase that is readily available.
item 3. legal proceedings.
in
august2005, the company received an informal request from the staff of the securities and exchange commission for information related to the company's
return-to-vendor policies and procedures. the company has responded to this and subsequent requests and continues to fully cooperate with the sec staff. the sec has informed
the company that the informal inquiry is not an indication that any violations of law have occurred. although the company cannot predict the outcome of this matter, it does not expect that this
informal inquiry will have a material adverse effect on the company's consolidated financial position or its results of operations.
in
compliance with sec disclosure requirements, the environmental proceedings set forth below involve potential monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. although the company cannot predict the outcome
of these proceedings, it does not expect any such outcome to have a material adverse effect on the company's consolidated financial position or its results of operations.
in
january2003, home depot u.s.a.inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the company, received a request for information from the u.s. environmental protection agency ("epa") regarding
alleged pollutant discharges during construction activities at certain the home depot stores. the epa subsequently referred this matter to the u.s. department of justice ("doj"). the doj and the
company are currently discussing settlement of this matter.
in
april2005, the company received subpoenas from the state of new york's office of attorney general seeking documents and testimony related to the sale and handling of pesticides. the company
is
cooperating fully with the office of attorney general and believes it is indemnified if monetary sanctions are imposed.
in
july2005, the company received a grand jury subpoena from the united states attorney's office in los angeles, california, seeking documents and information relating to the company's
handling, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. california state and local government authorities are also investigating this matter. in january2006, the company received an administrative
subpoena from the district attorney of riverside county, california seeking records and documents in connection with such investigation. the company is cooperating fully with the respective
authorities.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders.
not
applicable.
item 4a. executive officers of the company.
executive
officers of the company are appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the board of directors. at the end of fiscal 2005, the executive officers of the company were as follows:
robert
l. nardelli, age 57, has been president and chief executive officer since december2000 and chairman since january1, 2002. prior thereto, mr.nardelli served as president
and chief executive officer of ge power systems, a division of general electric company, since 1995.
francis
s. blake, age 56, has been executive vice president business development and corporate operations since march2002. he was formerly the deputy secretary of energy
from may2001 until march2002. from june2000 until may2001, he was a senior vice president at general electric company and was vice president of ge power systems from
february1996 until june2000. mr.blake serves as a director of the southern company.
joseph
deangelo, age 44, has been executive vice president home depot supply since august2005. from january 2005 through august 2005, he served as senior vice
president home depot supply, pro business and tool rental, and from april 2004 through january 2005, he served as senior vice president pro business and tool
rental. mr.deangelo previously served as executive vice president of the stanley works, a tool manufacturing company, from april2003 through april2004. from 1986 until
april2004, mr.deangelo held various positions with general electric company. his final position with ge was as president and chief executive officer of ge tip/modular space, a division
of ge capital.
robert
p. derodes, age 55, has been executive vice president information technology and chief information officer since february2002. he previously served as president and
chief executive officer of delta technology,inc. and chief information officer for delta air lines,inc.
from september1999 until february2002. from february1995 to september1999, he served as senior technology officer at citibank for the card products group. from
february1993 to february1995, he was president of sabre development services for the sabre group holdings,inc., a subsidiary of american airlines,inc.
dennis
m. donovan, age 57, has been executive vice president human resources since april2001. from october1998 until that time he served as senior vice
president human resources of raytheon company, a worldwide provider of defense and government electronics and aircraft. from 1972 until september1998, mr.donovan
held various positions in human resources with the general electric company having been named an officer of ge in 1991. his final position with ge was as vice president human
resources of ge power systems.
marvin
r. ellison, age 41, has been northern division president since january2006. from october2004 through january2006, he served as senior vice president
logistics. from june2002
through
october2004, he served as vice president loss prevention. from 1987 until june2002, mr.ellison held various management and executive level
positions with target corporation, a merchandise retailer. his final position with target was director, assets protection.
frank
l. fernandez, age 55, has been executive vice president corporate secretary& general counsel since april2001. from 1990 until that time, he was managing
partner at the law firm of fernandez, burstein, tuczinski and collura, p.c., and also served as lecturer, assistant professor and director of the ms tax program at the state university of new york at
albany.
carl
c. liebert, iii, age 40, has been executive vice president the home depot stores since august2005. from june2004 through august2005, he served as
senior vice president operations. from august2003 until june2004, he served as vice president operations. from 2001 until 2003, he served as a
division president of circuit city stores,inc., an electronics retailer.
bruce
a. merino, age 52, has been west coast division president since may2000 and president, expo design center since october2005. from october1996 through may2000 he
served as merchandising vice president.
julian
paul raines, age 41, has been southern division president since february2005. prior thereto he served as regional vice president florida from april2003
through january2005. from december2002 through march2003, mr.raines served as vice
president store operations, and from april2000 through november2002, mr.raines served as director of labor management.
thomas
v. taylor, age 40, has been executive vice president merchandising and marketing since august2005. from december2004 through august2005, he served
as executive vice president the home depot stores. from january2002 until december2004, mr.taylor was eastern division president. prior thereto he served
as senior vice president pro business from may2001 until january2002. from november1999 until may2001, he served as northwest division president.
mr.taylor was the northwest merchandising vice president from june1999 through november1999 and regional vice president in the southwest division from september1996
until june1999.
carol
b. tom, age 49, has been executive vice president and chief financial officer since may2001, and prior thereto had been senior vice president finance
and accounting/treasurer since february2000. from 1995 until 2000, she served as vice president and treasurer. from 1992 until 1995, when she joined the company, ms.tom
was vice president and treasurer of riverwood international corporation, a provider of paperboard packaging. ms.tom serves as a director of united parcel service,inc.
annette
m. verschuren, age 49, has been president, the home depot canada since march1996. from february2003 through october2005, she also served as president, expo design
center.
part ii
item 5.market for registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities.
since
april19, 1984, our common stock has been listed on the new york stock exchange, trading under the symbol "hd." the company paid its first cash dividend on june22, 1987, and has
paid dividends during each subsequent quarter. future dividend payments will depend on the company's earnings, capital requirements, financial condition and other factors considered relevant by the
board of directors.
the
table below sets forth the high and low sales prices of our common stock on the new york stock exchange and the quarterly cash dividends declared per share of common stock during the periods
indicated.
price range
cash dividends
declared
high
low
fiscal year 2005
first quarter ended may 1, 2005
$
42.99
$
34.56
$
0.100
second quarter ended july 31, 2005
$
43.98
$
35.54
$
0.100
third quarter ended october 30, 2005
$
43.39
$
37.14
$
0.100
fourth quarter ended january 29, 2006
$
43.27
$
39.65
$
0.150
fiscal year 2004
first quarter ended may 2, 2004
$
37.84
$
35.01
$
0.085
second quarter ended august 1, 2004
$
36.30
$
32.34
$
0.085
third quarter ended october 31, 2004
$
41.50
$
32.39
$
0.085
fourth quarter ended january 30, 2005
$
44.30
$
40.28
$
0.100
as
of march28, 2006, there were approximately 190,000 shareholders of record and approximately 1,900,000 additional shareholders holding stock under nominee security position listings.
issuer purchases of equity securities
since fiscal 2002, the company repurchased shares of its common stock having a value of approximately $9.7billion. the number and average price of shares purchased in
each fiscal month of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005 are set forth in the table below:
period
totalnumberof
sharespurchased(1)
average
pricepaid
per share
total number of
shares purchased as
part of publicly
announcedprogram(2)
approximatedollar
value of shares
that may yet be
purchased under
the program
oct. 31, 2005 nov. 27, 2005
1,805,471
$
41.39
1,781,800
$
1,437,778,030
nov. 28, 2005 dec. 25, 2005
2,309,456
$
41.87
2,299,700
$
1,341,447,474
dec. 26, 2005 jan. 29, 2006
1,367,790
$
39.94
1,343,600
$
1,287,793,027
(1) these amounts include repurchases pursuant to the company's 1997 and 2005 omnibus stock incentive plans (the "plans"). under the plans, participants may exercise stock options by
surrendering shares of common stock that the participants already own as payment of the exercise price. participants in the plans may also surrender shares as payment of applicable tax withholding on
the vesting of restricted stock and deferred share awards. shares so surrendered by participants in the plans are repurchased pursuant to the terms of the plans and applicable award agreement and not
pursuant to publicly announced share repurchase programs. for the quarter ended january29, 2006, the following shares of the home depot common stock were surrendered by participants in the
plans and included in the total number of shares purchased: oct.31, 2005 nov.27, 2005 23,671 shares at an average price per share of $41.86;
nov.28, 2005 dec.25, 2005 9,756 shares at an average price per share of $41.44; dec.26, 2005 jan.29,
2006 24,190 shares at an average price per share of $41.40.
(2) the company's common stock repurchase program was initially announced on july15, 2002. as of the beginning of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, the board had
approved
purchases up to $11.0billion. on february23, 2006, the board authorized an additional $1.0billion in common stock repurchases for a total authorization of $12.0billion.
the program does not have a prescribed expiration date.
sales of unregistered securities
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, the company issued 1,960 deferred stock units under the home depot,inc. nonemployee directors' deferred stock compensation
plan pursuant to the exemption from registration provided by section4(2) of the securities act of 1933, as amended. the deferred stock units convert to shares of common stock on a
one-for-one basis following a termination of service as described in this plan.
equity compensation plan information
the information required by this item is incorporated in item 12 hereof by reference to the section entitled "executive compensation" in the company's proxy statement for the
2006 annual meeting of shareholders.
item 6.selected financial data.
the
information required by this item is incorporated by reference to pages f-1 and f-2 of this report.
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.
executive summary and selected consolidated statements of earnings data
for fiscal year ended january29, 2006 ("fiscal 2005"), we reported net earnings of $5.8billion and diluted earnings per share of $2.72 compared to net earnings
of $5.0billion and diluted earnings per share of $2.26 for fiscal year ended january30, 2005 ("fiscal 2004"). net sales increased 11.5% to $81.5billion for fiscal 2005 from
$73.1billion for fiscal 2004. comparable store sales increased 3.8% for fiscal 2005. we also achieved a record gross profit margin of 33.5% and a record operating margin of 11.5% for fiscal
2005. these results were achieved through the continued execution of our strategy to enhance the core, extend the business and expand the market.
we
enhanced our core business by continuing to introduce new and innovative merchandise that reflects emerging consumer trends, supported by continued investments in store modernization and
technology. significant merchandising enhancements in fiscal 2005 include:
an
enhanced grill lineup led by our proprietary charmglow brand and the exclusive ducane stainless steel grills;
flooring
innovation through our dupont realtouch elite laminate flooring;
introduction
of lg appliances and a broadened assortment of maytag and ge products;
expanded
patio lineup led by our proprietary hampton bay set;
broadened
assortment of paint, including colores origenes, bellagio faux paint, and the ralph lauren metallic and suede paint;
innovative
products from ryobi, including the ryobi one+ system, ryobi multitaskit and ryobi gas pressure washer; and
growing
power tool lineup, including the introduction of exclusive makita and milwaukee lithium-ion power tools for professional and
do-it-yourself customers.
our
store modernization efforts included improved signage, point-of-purchase information and merchandise resets across a variety of categories. during fiscal 2005, we also
achieved the following accomplishments related to our technology initiatives:
completed
the rollout of our back-end scanned receiving to all stores in the united states ("u.s.") and canada;
commenced
vendor certification for certified receiving;
continued
installation of self-check out registers, in 1,272 stores at the end of fiscal 2005;
grew
centralized automatic replenishment to 20% of store sales; and
implemented
the new in-store special order services initiative pilot in 285 stores.
these
investments in our business are paying off as evidenced by improvement in key operating performance measurements, including average ticket, which increased 5.6% to a record $57.98 for fiscal
2005.
we
invested $3.9billion in capital expenditures during fiscal 2005 for store modernization and technology as well as for 179 new store openings. we further extended our business by offering a
variety of installation and home maintenance programs to our do-it-for-me customers through our stores. our services revenue increased 21.4% to $4.3billion
for fiscal 2005. we saw sustained growth in categories such as countertops, roofing, kitchens, windows and hvac. during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, we extended our services business by
acquiring chem-dry, the world's largest carpet and
upholstery
cleaning franchisor. chem-dry has nearly 4,000 franchises worldwide, including 2,500 in the u.s.
we
opened 179 new stores in fiscal 2005, including five relocations, and closed 22 stores, bringing our total store count at the end of fiscal 2005 to 2,042 compared to 1,890 at the end of fiscal
2004. as of the end of fiscal 2005, 191 of our stores were located in canada and mexico compared to 161 at the end of fiscal 2004. in fiscal 2005, we closed 20 of our expo design center ("expo")
stores, four of which are being converted to the home depot store format. we recorded $91million of asset impairment and lease obligation charges in selling, general and administrative expense
in fiscal 2005 related to the disposition of our interest in the underlying real estate and store conversions. additionally, we recorded $29million of expense in cost of sales related to
inventory markdowns in fiscal 2005. affected expo customers are being served by existing the home depot and expo stores. in fiscal 2005, we also closed two home depot supply stores which did not have
a material impact on our financial results. in fiscal 2005, we increased our offerings on www.homedepot.com to over 30,000 products; the site now averages 3million hits per week. additionally,
we launched two unique direct-to-customer brands: 10 crescent lane
(www.10crescentlane.com) and paces trading company (www.pacestrading.com) which offer quality home dcor and lighting options, respectively, through innovative new catalogs and
e-commerce sites.
we
have expanded our business by capturing a growing share of the professional residential, commercial and heavy construction markets, which operate under home depot supply. as part of this expansion
in fiscal 2005, we completed 18 acquisitions that operate under home depot supply, including national waterworks,inc. ("national waterworks"), the nation's leading distributor of products used
to build, repair and maintain water and wastewater transmission systems, and williams bros. lumber company, a leading supplier of lumber and building materials. in total for fiscal 2005, we completed
21 acquisitions and the total cash paid for businesses acquired in fiscal 2005 was $2.5billion. in january2006, we announced our intent to acquire hughes supply,inc. ("hughes
supply" nyse "hug"), a leading distributor of construction and repair products. we expect to complete this acquisition in the first quarter of fiscal 2006.
we
generated $6.5billion of cash flow from operations in fiscal 2005. we used this cash flow to fund, in part, $3.9billion in capital expenditures, $2.5billion for acquisitions
and $3.9billion of dividends and share repurchases. at the end of fiscal 2005, our long-term debt-to-equity ratio was 9.9%, reflecting the
august2005 issuance of $1.0billion of 45/8% senior notes due august15, 2010. our return on invested capital (computed on beginning long-term debt and
equity for the trailing four quarters) was 22.4% compared to 21.5% for fiscal 2004, a 90 basis point improvement.
we believe the selected sales data, the percentage relationship between net sales and major categories in the consolidated statements of earnings and the percentage change in the dollar amounts of
each of the items presented as follows is important in evaluating the performance of our business operations. we operate in one operating segment and believe the information presented in our
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations provides an understanding of our operating segment, our operations and our financial condition.
% of net sales
% increase
(decrease)
in dollar amounts
fiscal year(1)
vs. 2004
vs. 2003
net sales
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
11.5
%
12.8
%
gross profit
33.5
33.4
31.8
11.8
18.7
operating expenses:
selling, general and administrative
20.2
20.9
19.6
8.1
20.0
depreciation and amortization
1.8
1.7
1.6
17.9
22.2
total operating expenses
22.0
22.6
21.2
8.8
20.2
operating income
11.5
10.8
10.6
18.1
15.8
interest income (expense):
interest and investment income
0.1
0.1
0.1
10.7
(5.1
)
interest expense
(0.2
)
(0.1
)
(0.1
)
104.3
12.9
interest, net
(0.1
)
478.6
366.7
earnings before provision for
income taxes
11.4
10.8
10.6
17.3
15.6
provision for income taxes
4.2
4.0
4.0
18.3
14.7
net earnings
7.2
%
6.8
%
6.6
%
16.7
%
16.2
%
selected sales data
number of customer transactions (000s)(2)
1,329,873
1,295,185
1,245,721
2.7
%
4.0
%
average ticket(2)
$
57.98
$
54.89
$
51.15
5.6
7.3
weighted average weekly sales per
operating store(2)
$
763,000
$
766,000
$
763,000
(0.4
)
0.4
weighted average sales per square foot(2)
$
377.01
$
375.26
$
370.87
0.5
1.2
comparable store sales increase (%)(3)
3.8
%
5.4
%
3.8
%
n/a
n/a
(1)fiscal years 2005, 2004 and 2003 refer to the fiscal years ended january 29, 2006, january 30, 2005 and february 1, 2004, respectively. fiscal years 2005, 2004
and 2003 include 52 weeks.
(2) excludes all non-store locations since their inclusion may cause distortion of the data presented due to operational differences from our retail stores. the total
number of the
excluded locations and their total square footage are immaterial to our total number of locations and total square footage.
(3) includes net sales at locations open greater than 12 months, including relocated and remodeled stores, and net sales of all the subsidiaries of the home depot, inc.
stores and
subsidiaries become comparable on the monday following their 365th day of operation and include certain locations acquired in the current year by existing subsidiaries. comparable store
sales is intended only as supplemental information and is not a substitute for net sales or net earnings presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
results of operations
for an understanding of the significant factors that influenced our performance during the past three fiscal years, the following discussion should be read in conjunction with
the consolidated financial statements and the notes to consolidated financial statements presented in this annual report.
fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004
net sales
net
sales for fiscal 2005 increased 11.5% to $81.5billion from $73.1billion for fiscal 2004. fiscal 2005 net sales growth was driven by an increase in comparable store sales of 3.8%,
sales from new stores opened during fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004 and sales from our newly acquired businesses. assuming the acquisition of hughes supply closes in the first quarter of 2006, we expect
sales growth of 14% to 17% for fiscal 2006, driven by comparable store sales growth, sales from new stores opened during fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2006 and sales from newly acquired businesses, including
hughes supply.
the
increase in comparable store sales in fiscal 2005 reflects a number of factors. the retail stores contributed 3.0% of comparable store sales growth and home depot supply contributed 80 basis
points of comparable store sales growth. in the retail stores, our average ticket, which increased 5.6%
to a record $57.98, increased in all selling departments and our comparable store sales growth in fiscal 2005 was positive in 9 of 10 selling departments. building materials had the strongest
comparable store sales increase through sales growth of gypsum, roofing, concrete and insulation, due in part to the impact of one of the most destructive hurricane seasons in modern u.s. history. we
experienced strong comparable store sales growth in kitchen and bath driven by continued growth in appliances and kitchen installations. we also experienced strong comparable store sales in our pro
categories, including plumbing, electrical and hardware in fiscal 2005. the impact of cannibalization partially offset our fiscal 2005 comparable store sales growth.
in
order to meet our customer service objectives, we strategically open stores near market areas served by existing stores ("cannibalize") to enhance service levels, gain incremental sales and
increase market penetration. as of the end of fiscal 2005, certain new stores cannibalized approximately 20% of our existing stores and we estimate that store cannibalization reduced fiscal 2005
comparable store sales by approximately 1.8%. additionally, we believe that our sales performance has been, and could continue to be, negatively impacted by the level of competition that we encounter
in various markets. however, due to the highly-fragmented u.s. home improvement and professional supply industry, in which we estimate our market share is approximately 11%, measuring the impact on
our sales by our competitors is extremely difficult.
the
growth in net sales for fiscal 2005 reflects growth in services revenue, which increased 21.4% to $4.3billion for fiscal 2005 from $3.6billion for fiscal 2004. the growth in
services revenue was driven by strength in a number of areas including countertops, roofing, kitchens, windows and hvac. we continued to drive our services programs, which focus primarily on providing
products and services to our do-it-for-me customers. we also arrange for the provision of flooring, countertop, cabinet, and window covering installation services
to production home builders through our creative touch interiors brand. our services revenue is expected to benefit from the growing percentage of aging "baby-boomers" as they rely more
heavily on installation services.
we
continue to invest in our stores to improve store efficiency and the overall customer shopping experience. in fiscal 2005, we completed the rollout of our back-end automation and
re-engineering ("bear") project to all stores in the u.s. and canada. among other things, this initiative improves operational execution and productivity through the automation of our
receiving process in the stores, enabling us to reallocate resources to the selling floor. during fiscal 2005, we continued the implementation or expansion of a number of other in-store
initiatives. we continued the installation of
self-checkout
registers, in 1,272 stores as of the end of fiscal 2005, grew our centralized automatic replenishment program, commenced vendor certification for certified receiving and
implemented an in-store special order services initiative pilot in 285 stores as of the end of fiscal 2005. we believe these initiatives will enhance our customers' shopping experience as
they are fully implemented in our stores.
gross profit
gross
profit increased 11.8% to $27.3billion for fiscal 2005 from $24.4billion for fiscal 2004. gross profit as a percent of net sales increased 10 basis points to 33.5% for fiscal
2005, the highest annual rate in our company's history. our gross profit margin was impacted by a number of factors during the year including a change in the mix of merchandise sold, markdowns taken
in connection with our decision to close or convert 20 expo stores, the increasing penetration of our home depot supply business and the cost of our deferred interest programs. through our private
label credit card we offer no interest/no payment programs. the deferred interest associated with these programs is included in cost of sales. we believe these programs deliver long-term
benefits, including higher average ticket and customer loyalty. for fiscal 2005, the penetration of our private label credit sales was 25.6% compared to 24.1% for fiscal 2004.
operating expenses
operating
expenses increased 8.8% to $18.0billion for fiscal 2005 from $16.5billion for fiscal 2004. operating expenses as a percent of net sales were 22.0% for fiscal 2005 compared to
22.6% for fiscal 2004.
selling,
general and administrative expenses ("sg&a") increased 8.1% to $16.5billion for fiscal 2005 from $15.3billion for fiscal 2004. as a percent of net sales, sg&a was 20.2% for
fiscal 2005 compared to 20.9% for fiscal 2004. the reduction of sg&a as a percent of net sales for fiscal 2005 was primarily a result of continued focus on cost take-out initiatives and
driving productivity gains throughout the company. we also continue to see benefits from our private label credit card, which carries a lower discount rate than other forms of credit, like bank cards.
in fiscal 2005, we recorded $52million of income related to gift card breakage as a reduction of sg&a. fiscal 2005 was the first year in which we recognized gift card breakage, and therefore,
the amount recognized in fiscal 2005 includes the breakage income related to gift cards sold since the inception of our gift card program. while we expect to continue to recognize gift card breakage
in future periods, the amounts will be significantly less than in fiscal 2005 due to the one-time multi-year inclusion in fiscal 2005. finally, for fiscal 2005, we recorded
$91million of impairment charges and expense related to lease obligations in connection with our decision to close or convert 20 expo stores.
depreciation
and amortization increased 17.9% to $1.5billion for fiscal 2005 from $1.2billion for fiscal 2004. depreciation and amortization as a percent of net sales was 1.8% for
fiscal 2005 and 1.7% for fiscal 2004. the increase as a percent of net sales was primarily due to our investments in store modernization and technology.
interest, net
in
fiscal 2005, we recognized $81million of net interest expense compared to $14million in fiscal 2004. net interest expense as a percent of net sales was 0.1% for fiscal 2005 and less
than 0.1% for fiscal 2004. interest expense increased to $143million for fiscal 2005 from $70million for fiscal 2004 primarily due to additional interest incurred related to the
august2005 $1.0billion issuance of 45/8% senior notes and the september2004 $1.0billion issuance of 33/4% senior notes. interest and
investment income increased 10.7% to $62million for fiscal 2005 from $56million for fiscal 2004 due primarily to a higher interest rate environment.
provision for income taxes
our
combined federal and state effective income tax rate increased to 37.1% for fiscal 2005 from 36.8% for fiscal 2004. the majority of the increase in our effective income tax rate was due to an
increase in the state effective tax rate in fiscal 2005.
the
american jobs creation act of 2004 ("ajc act") provides a one-time 85% dividends-received deduction that applies to qualified cash dividends received from controlled foreign
corporations if the funds are reinvested in the united states. the deduction can result in an effective income tax rate of 5.25% on the repatriation of foreign earnings, a rate much lower than the
normal statutory tax rate of 35%. the company has determined that it will not repatriate earnings of foreign subsidiaries under the ajc act.
the
ajc act also provides a new deduction for qualified domestic production activities. when fully phased-in, the deduction will be up to 9% of the lesser of qualified production
activities income or taxable income. because this provision is targeted toward manufacturing activities, the company does not expect to recognize a material benefit in the current or future tax years.
diluted earnings per share
diluted
earnings per share were $2.72 and $2.26 for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. diluted earnings per share were favorably impacted in both fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004 as a result of the
repurchase of shares of our common stock under our $11.0billion repurchase authorization. over the past four fiscal years, we have repurchased approximately 277million shares of our
common stock for a total of $9.7billion. on february23, 2006 our board of directors authorized an additional $1.0billion for share repurchases, bringing our total authorization
to $12.0billion. in fiscal 2006, we estimate diluted earnings per share growth of 10% to 14%.
fiscal 2004 compared to fiscal year ended february1, 2004 ("fiscal 2003")
net sales
net
sales for fiscal 2004 increased 12.8% to $73.1billion from $64.8billion for fiscal 2003. fiscal 2004 net sales growth was driven by an increase in comparable store sales of 5.4%,
sales from the 183 net new stores opened during fiscal 2004, sales from the 175 net new stores opened during fiscal 2003 and sales from our newly acquired businesses.
the
increase in comparable store sales in fiscal 2004 reflects a number of factors. our average ticket, which increased 7.3% to $54.89, increased in all selling departments and our comparable store
sales growth in fiscal 2004 was positive in all selling departments. we experienced strong comparable store sales increases in building materials due in part to the impact of several hurricanes in the
southeastern u.s. lumber was another strong category during fiscal 2004, driven primarily by commodity price inflation. additionally, we had strong sales growth in our kitchen and bath categories,
driven by
appliances, bath fixtures, vanities and sinks. finally, our comparable store sales growth in fiscal 2004 reflects the impact of cannibalization. as of the end of fiscal 2004, certain new stores
cannibalized approximately 17% of our existing stores and we estimate that store cannibalization reduced fiscal 2004 comparable store sales by approximately 2.2%.
the
growth in net sales for fiscal 2004 reflects growth in services revenue, which increased 28% to $3.6billion for fiscal 2004 from $2.8billion for fiscal 2003, driven by strength in
a number of areas including countertops, hvac, kitchens and our flooring companies.
gross profit
gross
profit increased 18.7% to $24.4billion for fiscal 2004 from $20.6billion for fiscal 2003, an increase of 167 basis points. gross profit as a percent of net sales was 33.4% for
fiscal 2004, compared to 31.8% for fiscal 2003. the adoption of emerging issues task force 02-16, "accounting by a customer (including a reseller) for certain consideration received from a
vendor" ("eitf02-16"), reduced our cost of sales by co-op advertising allowances of $891million, or 122 basis points, in fiscal 2004 and $40million, or
6 basis points, in fiscal 2003. see section "impact of the adoption of eitf02-16." excluding the impact of the adoption of eitf02-16, our gross profit as a
percent of net sales would have been 32.2% for fiscal 2004 compared with 31.7% for fiscal 2003. improved inventory management, which resulted in lower shrink levels, contributed 18 basis points of our
increase in gross profit. finally, 33 basis points resulted from benefits arising from a change in merchandising mix, offset by the cost of our deferred interest programs.
operating expenses
operating
expenses increased 20.2% to $16.5billion for fiscal 2004 from $13.7billion for fiscal 2003. operating expenses as a percent of net sales were 22.6% for fiscal 2004 compared
to 21.2% for fiscal 2003.
sg&a
increased 20.0% to $15.3billion for fiscal 2004 from $12.7billion for fiscal 2003. as a percent of net sales, sg&a was 20.9% for fiscal 2004 compared to 19.6% for fiscal 2003. the
increase in sg&a in fiscal 2004 includes $1.0billion of advertising expense related to the adoption of eitf02-16. excluding the impact of eitf02-16,
sg&a increased 12.2% to $14.3billion, or 19.5% of net sales, in fiscal 2004 compared with 19.6% of net sales in fiscal 2003. the decrease in sg&a as a percent of net sales for fiscal 2004,
excluding the impact of eitf02-16, was due to an increase in labor productivity and benefits from our private label credit card, which carries a lower discount rate than other
forms of credit, like bank cards. labor productivity, as measured by sales per labor hour, reached an all-time high in fiscal 2004, as we moved our associates from tasking to selling
activities. this reduction in costs was partially offset by higher expenses associated with incentive programs, like our success sharing program and our management incentive plan and stock-based
compensation expense. in addition, our planned investment in store modernization and technology caused remodel and repair expenses to rise at a faster rate than our net sales growth.
depreciation
and amortization increased 22.2% to $1.2billion for fiscal 2004 from $1.0billion for fiscal 2003. depreciation and amortization as a percent of net sales was 1.7% for
fiscal 2004 and 1.6% for fiscal 2003. the increase in fiscal 2004 was primarily due to our investment in store modernization and technology.
interest, net
in
fiscal 2004, we recognized $14million of net interest expense compared to $3million in fiscal 2003. net interest expense as a percent of net sales was less than 0.1% for both fiscal
2004 and fiscal 2003. interest expense increased 12.9% to $70million for fiscal 2004 from $62million for fiscal 2003 primarily due to an increase in outstanding indebtedness and a
reduction in the amount of capitalized interest. interest expense also increased due to the addition of $38million in capital leases during the year. interest and investment income decreased
5.1% to $56million for fiscal 2004 from $59million for fiscal 2003 primarily due to a lower interest rate environment.
provision for income taxes
our
combined federal and state effective income tax rate decreased to 36.8% for fiscal 2004 from 37.1% for fiscal 2003. the majority of this reduction was due to the reversal of a $31million
valuation
allowance
as we were able to recognize previous capital losses for which no tax benefit had been recorded at the time the capital loss was incurred.
diluted earnings per share
diluted
earnings per share were $2.26 and $1.88 for fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003, respectively. the adoption of eitf02-16 negatively impacted diluted earnings per share for fiscal
2004 by $0.04 per share. diluted earnings per share were favorably impacted in fiscal 2004 as a result of the repurchase of shares of our common stock in fiscal 2003 and fiscal 2004.
impact of the adoption of eitf02-16
in fiscal 2003, we adopted eitf02-16 which states that certain cash consideration received from a vendor is presumed to be a reduction of the prices of the
vendor's products or services and should, therefore, be recorded as a reduction of cost of sales when recognized in our consolidated statements of earnings. that presumption is overcome when the
consideration is either a reimbursement of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred to sell the vendor's products or a payment for assets or services delivered to the vendor. we receive
consideration in the form of advertising co-op allowances from our vendors pursuant to annual agreements, which are generally on a calendar year basis. as permitted by
eitf02-16, we elected to apply its provisions prospectively to all agreements entered into or modified after december31, 2002. therefore, the impact of us adopting
eitf02-16 in fiscal 2003 was limited to advertising co-op allowances earned pursuant to vendor agreements entered into in late 2003, which became effective in
january2004.
the
one-month impact of the adoption of eitf02-16 in fiscal 2003 resulted in a reduction of cost of sales of $40million, an increase in sg&a of
$47million and a reduction of earnings before provision for income taxes of $7million. the impact on our diluted earnings per share was immaterial.
the
impact of the adoption of eitf02-16 in fiscal 2004 resulted in a reduction of cost of sales of $891million, an increase in sg&a of $1.0billion and a reduction
of earnings before provision for income taxes of $158million. the impact on our diluted earnings per share for fiscal 2004 was a reduction of $0.04 per share.
eitf02-16
did not have a material impact on our fiscal 2005 consolidated results of operations or financial condition as of january29, 2006.
prior
to the adoption of eitf02-16 in fiscal 2003, the entire amount of advertising co-op allowances received was offset against advertising expense and resulted in a
reduction of sg&a. we continue to earn certain advertising co-op allowances that are recorded as an offset against advertising expenses as they are reimbursements of specific, incremental
and identifiable costs incurred to promote vendors' products. in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, net advertising expense was $1.1billion, $1.0billion and $58million, respectively,
which was recorded in sg&a.
the
following table illustrates the full-year effect on cost of sales, gross profit, sg&a, operating income and diluted earnings per share as if advertising co-op allowances
had always been treated as a reduction of cost of sales in accordance with eitf02-16 (amounts in millions, except per share data):
fiscal year ended
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
cost of sales
as reported
$
54,191
$
48,664
$
44,236
pro forma
54,191
48,524
43,295
gross profit
as reported
27,320
24,430
20,580
pro forma
27,320
24,570
21,521
selling, general and administrative expenses
as reported
16,485
15,256
12,713
pro forma
16,485
15,256
13,654
operating income
as reported
9,363
7,926
6,846
pro forma
9,363
8,066
6,846
diluted earnings per share
as reported
$
2.72
$
2.26
$
1.88
pro forma
$
2.72
$
2.30
$
1.88
liquidity and capital resources
cash flow generated from operations provides a significant source of liquidity. for fiscal 2005, net cash provided by operating activities was $6.5billion as compared
to $6.9billion for fiscal 2004. the decrease in fiscal 2005 was primarily due to a reduction in deferred income taxes resulting from the reversal of certain temporary differences and no
increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities partially offset by stronger net earnings.
net
cash used in investing activities increased to $4.6billion for fiscal 2005 from $4.5billion for fiscal 2004. this increase was due to an increase in payments for businesses
acquired, partially offset by a decrease in the net proceeds from sales, maturities and purchases of investments. we paid $2.5billion to complete 21 acquisitions in fiscal 2005, primarily
adding professional service capabilities to home depot supply. in january2006, we announced our intent to acquire hughes supply for aggregate consideration of $3.5billion. we expect to
complete this acquisition in the first quarter of fiscal 2006.
additionally
in fiscal 2005, we had $3.9billion of capital expenditures, allocated as follows: 66% for new stores, 10% for store modernization, 9% for technology and 15% for other initiatives.
in fiscal 2005, we opened 179 new stores, including five relocations.
net
cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2005 was $1.6billion compared with $3.1billion for fiscal 2004. the decrease in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due
to the issuance of $1.0billion of long-term debt in august2005 and $900million of short-term debt in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005 under our
commercial paper program. in may2005, we filed a shelf registration statement with the securities and exchange commission for the future issuance of up to $5.0billion of debt
securities. in august2005, we issued $1.0billion of 45/8% senior notes (see note3 in "notes to consolidated financial statements") at a discount of
$5million. the net proceeds of $995million were used to pay for a portion of the acquisition price of national waterworks. commercial paper borrowings in the fourth quarter of fiscal
2005 supported short-term liquidity needs.
in
february2005 and august2005, our board of directors authorized an additional $2.0billion and $1.0billion, respectively, in our share repurchase program, bringing the
total authorization by our board of directors since inception of the program in 2002 to $11.0billion as of january29, 2006. pursuant to this authorization, we have repurchased
approximately 277million shares of our common stock for a total of $9.7billion as of january29, 2006. during fiscal 2005, we repurchased approximately 76million shares
of our common stock for $3.0billion and during fiscal 2004 we repurchased 84million shares of our common stock for $3.1billion. as of january29, 2006, approximately
$1.3billion remained under our previously authorized share repurchase program. subsequent to the end of fiscal 2005, our board of directors authorized an additional $1.0billion
bringing the total authorization since the inception of the share repurchase program to $12.0billion. during fiscal 2005, we also increased dividends paid by 19.2% to $857million from
$719million in fiscal 2004.
we
have a commercial paper program that allows for borrowings up to a maximum of $2.5billion. in connection with the program, we have a back-up credit facility with a consortium of
banks for borrowings up to $2.0billion. as of january29, 2006, there was $900million outstanding under the program. we expect to repay this amount during the first quarter of
2006. the credit facility, which
expires in december2010, contains various restrictions, none of which is expected to impact our liquidity or capital resources.
we
use capital and operating leases to finance a portion of our real estate, including our stores, distribution centers and store support centers. the net present value of capital lease obligations is
reflected in our consolidated balance sheets in long-term debt. in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the operating leases are not reflected in our consolidated
balance sheets. as of the end of fiscal 2005, our long-term debt-to-equity ratio was 9.9% compared to 8.9% at the end of fiscal 2004. this increase reflects the net
increase in long-term debt as a result of the august2005 issuance of 45/8% senior notes due august15, 2010.
as
of january29, 2006, we had $807million in cash and short-term investments. we believe that our current cash position and cash flow generated from operations should be
sufficient to enable us to complete our capital expenditure programs and any required long-term debt payments through the next several fiscal years. in addition, we have funds available
from the $2.5billion commercial paper program and the ability to obtain alternative sources of financing for future acquisitions and other requirements. in march2006, we used the
remaining availability under our shelf registration statement to issue $1.0billion of 5.20% senior notes due march1, 2011 and $3.0billion of 5.40% senior notes due
march1, 2016. we intend to use the proceeds to fund our pending acquisition of hughes supply and to refinance our $500million of 53/8% senior notes due april1,
2006.
the following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of january29, 2006 (amounts in millions):
payments due by fiscal year
contractual obligations(1)
total
2007-2008
2009-2010
thereafter
total debt(2)
$
4,192
$
1,521
$
$
2,143
$
capital lease obligations(3)
1,248
operating leases
8,449
1,287
1,093
5,363
subtotal
$
13,889
$
2,299
$
1,932
$
3,383
$
6,275
amount of commitment expiration per fiscal year
commercial commitments(4)
total
2007-2008
2009-2010
thereafter
letters of credit
$
1,292
$
1,257
$
$
$
purchase obligations(5)
2,315
1,067
subtotal
3,607
2,203
1,102
total
$
17,496
$
4,502
$
3,034
$
3,685
$
6,275
(1)contractual obligations include short-term debt, long-term debt comprised primarily of $2.5billion of senior notes further discussed in "quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk" and future minimum lease payments under capital and operating leases used in the normal course of business. the amounts listed do not include aggregate
consideration of $3.5billion related to our pending acquisition of hughes supply, expected to close in the first quarter of fiscal 2006 or any debt issued subsequent to the end of fiscal 2005.
(2) excludes present value of capital lease obligations of $381 million. includes $479million of interest payments and $8million of unamortized discount.
(3) includes $867 million of imputed interest.
(4) commercial commitments include letters of credit from certain business transactions, purchase obligations and commitments to purchase store assets. we issue letters
of credit for
insurance programs, purchases of import merchandise inventories and construction contracts. our purchase obligations consist of commitments for both merchandise and services.
(5) purchase obligations include all legally binding contracts such as firm commitments for inventory purchases, utility purchases, capital expenditures, software
acquisition and license
commitments and legally binding service contracts. purchase orders that are not binding agreements are excluded from the table above. additionally, we have included a commitment to purchase the
underlying asset under an off-balance sheet lease related to certain stores for $282 million during 2008.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
our exposure to market risk results primarily from fluctuations in interest rates. although we have international operating entities, our exposure to foreign currency rate
fluctuations is not significant to our financial condition and results of operations. our primary objective for entering into derivative instruments is to manage our exposure to interest rates, as
well as to maintain an appropriate mix of fixed and variable rate debt.
as
of january29, 2006 we had, net of discounts, $996million of 45/8% senior notes, $996million of 33/4% senior notes and $500million of
53/8% senior notes outstanding. the market values of the publicly traded 45/8%, 33/4% and 53/8% senior notes as of january29, 2006,
were approximately $985million, $976million and $500million, respectively. we have several outstanding interest rate
swap
agreements, with notional amounts totaling $475million, that swap fixed rate interest on our $500million 53/8% senior notes for variable interest rates equal to
libor plus 30 to 245 basis points and expire on april1, 2006. at january29, 2006, the fair market value of these agreements was a liability of $1million, which is the estimated
amount that we would have paid to settle similar interest rate agreements at current interest rates.
impact of inflation, deflation and changing prices
we have experienced inflation and deflation related to our purchase of certain commodity products. during fiscal 2005, lumber prices decreased our comparable store sales by
approximately 13 basis points. we do not believe that changing prices for other commodities have had a material effect on our net sales or results of operations. although we cannot accurately
determine the precise overall effect of inflation and deflation on operations, we do not believe inflation and deflation have had a material effect on our results of operations.
critical accounting policies
our significant accounting policies are disclosed in note1 of our consolidated financial statements. the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting
policies, which are those that are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require significant judgment or use of complex estimates.
revenue recognition
we recognize revenue, net of estimated returns, at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise or receives services. we estimate the liability for sales returns
based on our historical return levels. the methodology used is consistent with other retailers. we believe that our estimate for sales returns is an accurate reflection of future returns. we have
never recorded a significant adjustment to our estimated liability for sales returns. however, if these estimates are significantly below the actual amounts, our sales could be adversely impacted.
when we receive payment from
customers before the customer has taken possession of the merchandise or the service has been performed, the amount received is recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance
sheets until the sale or service is complete.
merchandise inventories
our merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market, with approximately 86% valued under the retail inventory
method and the remainder under the cost method. retailers like the home depot, with many different types of merchandise at low unit cost and a large number of transactions, frequently use the retail
inventory method. under the retail inventory method, merchandise inventories are stated at cost, which is determined by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the ending retail
value of inventories. as our inventory retail value is adjusted regularly to reflect market conditions, our inventory valued under the retail method approximates the lower of cost or market. we
evaluate our inventory valued under the cost method at the end of each quarter to ensure that it is carried at the lower of cost or market. the valuation allowance for merchandise inventories valued
under the cost method was not material to the company as of the end of fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004.
independent
physical inventory counts or cycle counts are taken on a regular basis in each store, distribution center and home depot supply location to ensure that amounts reflected in the
accompanying consolidated financial statements for merchandise inventories are properly stated. during the period between physical inventory counts in our stores, we accrue for estimated losses
related to shrink on a store-by-store basis. shrink (or in the case of excess inventory, "swell") is the
difference
between the recorded amount of inventory and the physical inventory. shrink may occur due to theft, loss, inaccurate records for the receipt of inventory or deterioration of goods, among
other things. we estimate shrink as a percent of net sales using the average shrink results from the previous two physical inventories. the estimates are evaluated quarterly and adjusted based on
recent shrink results and current trends in the business.
self-insurance
we are self-insured for certain losses related to general liability, product liability, automobile, workers' compensation and medical claims. our liability
represents an estimate of the ultimate cost of claims incurred as of the balance sheet date. the estimated liability is not discounted and is established based upon analysis of historical data and
actuarial estimates, and is reviewed by management and third-party actuaries on a quarterly basis to ensure that the liability is appropriate.
while we believe these estimates are reasonable based on the information currently available, if actual trends, including the severity or frequency of claims, medical cost inflation, or fluctuations
in premiums, differ from our estimates, our results of operations could be impacted.
recent accounting pronouncements
in december2004, the financial accounting standards board ("fasb") issued statement of financial accounting standards ("sfas") no.123(r), "share-based payment"
("sfas123(r)"). this statement revises sfas statement no.123, "accounting for stock-based compensation" ("sfas123") and supersedes accounting principles board ("apb") opinion
no.25, "accounting for stock issued to employees." sfas123(r) requires all public entities to recognize compensation expense for all share-based payments as measured by the fair value
on the grant date over the requisite service period. in april2005, the securities and exchange commission issued guidance delaying the effective date of sfas123(r), therefore it will
now be effective for the home depot in the first quarter of fiscal 2006.
effective
february3, 2003, we adopted the fair value based method of recording stock-based compensation expense in accordance with sfas123. we selected the prospective method of
adoption as described in sfas no.148, "accounting for stock-based compensation transition and disclosure," and accordingly, stock-based compensation expense was recorded
for all share-based payments granted or modified after the beginning of fiscal 2003. historically, we have used the black-scholes option pricing model to estimate the value of stock options granted to
employees. sfas123(r) requires that all share-based payments granted prior to the adoption date that remain unvested at the adoption date also be expensed over the remaining service period. we
currently intend to adopt sfas123(r) using the modified-prospective method, therefore in addition to continuing to recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payments
awarded since our adoption of sfas123 in fiscal 2003, we will also begin expensing unvested options granted prior to 2003 upon the adoption of sfas123(r). we currently estimate the
impact of adopting sfas123(r) will be a reduction of earnings before provision for income taxes of approximately $40million for fiscal 2006.
in
october2005, the fasb issued fasb staff position ("fsp") 13-1, "accounting for rental costs incurred during a construction period" ("fsp 13-1"). fsp 13-1
requires rental costs associated with operating leases that are incurred during a construction period be recognized as rental expense and included in income from continuing operations. fsp
13-1 becomes effective for the first reporting period beginning after december15, 2005, and will therefore be effective for the home depot in the first quarter of fiscal 2006. the
adoption of fsp 13-1 is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
the
information required by this item is incorporated by reference to item7. "management's discussion and analysis of financial conditions and results of operations" of this report.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data.
management's responsibility for financial statements
the financial statements presented in this annual report have been prepared with integrity and objectivity and are the responsibility of the management of the home
depot,inc. these financial statements have been prepared in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles and properly reflect certain estimates and judgments based upon the
best available information.
the
financial statements of the company have been audited by kpmg llp, an independent registered public accounting firm. their accompanying report is based upon an audit conducted in accordance with
the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).
the
audit committee of the board of directors, consisting solely of outside directors, meets five times a year with the independent registered public accounting firm, the internal auditors and
representatives of management to discuss auditing and financial reporting matters. in addition, a telephonic meeting is held prior to each quarterly earnings release. the audit committee retains the
independent registered public accounting firm and regularly reviews the internal accounting controls, the activities of the independent registered public accounting firm and internal auditors and the
financial condition of the company. both the company's independent registered pubic accounting firm and the internal auditors have free access to the audit committee.
management's report on internal control over financial reporting
our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in rule13a-15(f)
promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended. under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our principal executive officer and principal financial
officer, we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in internal control
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on our evaluation, our management concluded that our internal
control over financial reporting was effective as of january29, 2006. our management's assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of january29,
2006 has been audited by kpmg llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in its report which is included herein.
/s/ robert l. nardelli
/s/ carol b. tom
robert l. nardelli
chairman, president&
chief executive officer
carol b. tom
executive vice president&
chieffinancialofficer
report of independent registered public accounting firm
the
board of directors and stockholders
the home depot,inc.:
we
have audited management's assessment, included in the accompanying management's report on internal control over financial reporting, that the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries maintained
effective internal control over financial reporting as of january29, 2006, based on criteria established in internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the company's management is responsible for maintaining effective internal
control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on management's assessment and an
opinion on the effectiveness of the company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
we
conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over
financial reporting, evaluating management's assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
a
company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a company's internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)pertain
to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company's assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
in
our opinion, management's assessment that the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of january29, 2006, is fairly
stated, in all material respects, based on criteria established in internal control integrated framework issued by the committee of
sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). also, in our opinion, the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over
financial reporting as of january29, 2006, based on criteria established in internal control integrated framework issued by
the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso).
we
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated balance sheets of the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries
as of january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, and the related consolidated statements of earnings, stockholders' equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the fiscal
years in the three-year period ended january29, 2006, and our report dated march22, 2006, except as to note12 which is as of march24, 2006, expressed an
unqualified opinion on those consolidated financial statements.
/s/
kpmg llp
atlanta,
georgia
march 22, 2006
report of independent registered public accounting firm
the
board of directors and stockholders
the home depot,inc.:
we
have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries as of january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, and the related consolidated
statements of earnings, stockholders' equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended january29, 2006. these
consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the company's management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
we
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
in
our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries as of
january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended january29,
2006, in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles.
as
discussed in note1 to the consolidated financial statements, effective february3, 2003, the company changed its method of accounting for cash consideration received from a vendor to
conform to emerging issues task force no.02-16 and adopted the fair value method of recording stock-based compensation expense in accordance with statement of financial accounting
standards no.123.
we
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the effectiveness of the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries' internal
control over financial reporting as of january29, 2006, based on criteria established in internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso), and our report dated march22, 2006 expressed an unqualified
opinion on management's assessment of, and the effective operation of, internal control over financial reporting.
/s/
kpmg llp
atlanta,
georgia
march 22, 2006, except as to note12
which is as of march24, 2006
the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated statements of earnings
fiscal year ended(1)
amounts in millions, except per share data
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
net sales
$
81,511
$
73,094
$
64,816
cost of sales
54,191
48,664
44,236
gross profit
27,320
24,430
20,580
operating expenses:
selling, general and administrative
16,485
15,256
12,713
depreciation and amortization
1,472
1,248
1,021
total operating expenses
17,957
16,504
13,734
operating income
9,363
7,926
6,846
interest income (expense):
interest and investment income
interest expense
(143
)
(70
)
(62
)
interest, net
(81
)
(14
)
(3
)
earnings before provision for income
taxes
9,282
7,912
6,843
provision for income taxes
3,444
2,911
2,539
net earnings
$
5,838
$
5,001
$
4,304
weighted average common shares
2,138
2,207
2,283
basic earnings per share
$
2.73
$
2.27
$
1.88
diluted weighted average common shares
2,147
2,216
2,289
diluted earnings per share
$
2.72
$
2.26
$
1.88
(1) fiscal years ended january29, 2006, january30, 2005 and february1, 2004 include 52weeks.  see accompanying notes to consolidated
financial statements.
the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated balance sheets
amounts in millions, except per share data
january 29,
january 30,
assets
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
short-term investments
1,659
receivables, net
2,396
1,499
merchandise inventories
11,401
10,076
other current assets
total current assets
15,346
14,273
property and equipment, at cost:
land
7,924
6,932
buildings
14,056
12,325
furniture, fixtures and equipment
7,073
6,195
leasehold improvements
1,207
1,191
construction in progress
1,404
capital leases
31,530
28,437
less accumulated depreciation and amortization
6,629
5,711
net property and equipment
24,901
22,726
notes receivable
cost in excess of the fair value of net assets acquired
3,286
1,394
other assets
total assets
$
44,482
$
39,020
liabilities and stockholders' equity
current liabilities:
short-term debt
$
$
accounts payable
6,032
5,766
accrued salaries and related expenses
1,176
1,055
sales taxes payable
deferred revenue
1,757
1,546
income taxes payable
current installments of long-term debt
other accrued expenses
1,647
1,504
total current liabilities
12,901
10,455
long-term debt, excluding current installments
2,672
2,148
other long-term liabilities
deferred income taxes
1,023
1,388
stockholders' equity
common stock, par value $0.05; authorized: 10,000 shares; issued
2,401 shares at january29, 2006 and 2,385 shares at january30, 2005;
outstanding 2,124 shares at january29, 2006 and 2,185 shares at
january30, 2005
paid-in capital
7,287
6,650
retained earnings
28,943
23,962
accumulated other comprehensive income
unearned compensation
(138
)
(108
)
treasury stock, at cost, 277 shares at january29, 2006 and 200 shares
at january30, 2005
(9,712
)
(6,692
)
total stockholders' equity
26,909
24,158
total liabilities and stockholders' equity
$
44,482
$
39,020
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of stockholders'
equity and comprehensive income
common stock
treasury stock
accumulated
other
comprehensive
income (loss)(1)
paid-in
capital
retained
earnings
unearned
compensation
total
stockholders'
equity
comprehensive
income(2)
amounts in millions, except per share data
shares
amount
shares
amount
balance,
february2, 2003
2,362
$
$
5,858
$
15,971
$
(82
)
$
(63
)
(69
)
$
(2,000
)
$
19,802
net earnings
4,304
4,304
$
4,304
shares issued under
employee stock
plans
(26
)
tax effect of sale of
option shares by
employees
translation adjustments
stock options, awards
and amortization
of restricted stock
repurchase of common
stock
(47
)
(1,590
)
(1,590
)
cash dividends ($0.26
per share)
(595
)
(595
)
comprehensive income
$
4,476
balance,
february1, 2004
2,373
$
$
6,184
$
19,680
$
$
(76
)
(116
)
$
(3,590
)
$
22,407
net earnings
5,001
5,001
$
5,001
shares issued under
employee stock
plans
(54
)
tax effect of sale of
option shares
by employees
translation adjustments
stock options, awards
and amortization
of restricted stock
repurchase of common
stock
(84
)
(3,102
)
(3,102
)
cash dividends ($0.325
per share)
(719
)
(719
)
comprehensive income
$
5,138
balance,
january30, 2005
2,385
$
$
6,650
$
23,962
$
$
(108
)
(200
)
$
(6,692
)
$
24,158
net earnings
5,838
5,838
$
5,838
shares issued under
employee stock
plans
(63
)
tax effect of sale of
option shares
by employees
translation adjustments
stock options, awards
and amortization
of restricted stock
repurchase of common
stock
(77
)
(3,020
)
(3,020
)
cash dividends ($0.40
per share)
(857
)
(857
)
comprehensive income
$
6,020
balance,
january29, 2006
2,401
$
$
7,287
$
28,943
$
$
(138
)
(277
)
$
(9,712
)
$
26,909
(1)balance at january 29, 2006 consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
(2) components of comprehensive income are reported net of related income taxes.   see accompanying notes to consolidated financial
statements.
the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated statements of cash flows
fiscal year ended(1)
amounts in millions
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
cash flows from operating activities:
net earnings
$
5,838
$
5,001
$
4,304
reconciliation of net earnings to net cash provided
by operating activities:
depreciation and amortization
1,579
1,319
1,076
impairment related to disposition of expo real estate
stock-based compensation expense
changes in assets and liabilities, net of the effects of
acquisitions:
(increase) decrease in receivables, net
(358
)
(266
)
increase in merchandise inventories
(971
)
(849
)
(693
)
decrease (increase) in other current assets
(49
)
increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities
increase in deferred revenue
increase (decrease) in income taxes payable
(27
)
(decrease) increase in deferred income taxes
(609
)
increase in other long-term liabilities
other
(75
)
net cash provided by operating activities
6,484
6,904
6,545
cash flows from investing activities:
capital expenditures, net of $51, $38 and $47 of non-cash
capital expenditures in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively
(3,881
)
(3,948
)
(3,508
)
purchase of assets from off-balance sheet financing
arrangement
(598
)
payments for businesses acquired, net
(2,546
)
(727
)
(215
)
proceeds from sales of property and equipment
purchases of investments
(18,230
)
(25,890
)
(38,649
)
proceeds from sales and maturities of investments
19,907
25,990
38,534
net cash used in investing activities
(4,586
)
(4,479
)
(4,171
)
cash flows from financing activities:
proceeds from short-term borrowings, net
proceeds from long-term borrowings, net of discount
repayments of long-term debt
(24
)
(510
)
(9
)
repurchase of common stock
(3,040
)
(3,106
)
(1,554
)
proceeds from sale of common stock, net
cash dividends paid to stockholders
(857
)
(719
)
(595
)
net cash used in financing activities
(1,612
)
(3,055
)
(1,931
)
increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(630
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash
equivalents
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
1,103
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
$
$
1,103
supplemental disclosure of cash
payments made for:
interest, net of interest capitalized
$
$
$
income taxes
$
3,860
$
2,793
$
2,037
(1)fiscal years ended january 29, 2006, january 30, 2005 and february 1, 2004 include 52 weeks.  see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
notes to consolidated financial statements
1.summary of significant accounting policies
business, consolidation and presentation
the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries (the "company") operate the home depot stores, which are full-service, warehouse-style stores averaging approximately
105,000 square feet in size. the stores stock approximately 35,000 to 45,000 different kinds of building materials, home improvement supplies and lawn and garden products that are sold to
do-it-yourself customers, do-it-for-me customers, home improvement contractors, tradespeople and building maintenance professionals. in
addition, the company operates expo design center stores ("expo"), which offer products and services primarily related to design and renovation projects, the home depot landscape supply stores, which
service landscape professionals and garden enthusiasts with lawn, landscape and garden products and home depot supply stores and contractors' warehouse stores serving primarily professional customers.
the company also operates the home depot floor stores, which offer primarily flooring products and installation services. at the end of fiscal 2005, the company was operating 2,042 stores in total,
which included 1,793 the home depot stores, 34 expo design center stores, 11 the home depot landscape supply stores, eight contractors' warehouse stores, three home depot supply stores and two the
home depot floor stores in the united states, including the territories of puerto rico and the virgin islands ("u.s."); 137 the home depot stores in canada and 54 the home depot stores in mexico.
additionally,
home depot supply, through the company's wholly-owned subsidiaries, distributes products and sells installation services primarily to professional business contractors, businesses and
municipalities and operates in three primary areas. maintenance, repair and operations ("mro") supplies maintenance, repair and operating products primarily to multi-family housing, hospitality and
lodging facilities. the second area, builder, provides products and arranges installation services for
production home builders. professional supply, the third area, distributes specialty hardware, tools and materials to construction contractors. the consolidated financial statements include the
accounts of the company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. all significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
fiscal year
the company's fiscal year is a 52 or 53-week period ending on the sunday nearest to january31. fiscal years ended january29, 2006 ("fiscal 2005"),
january30, 2005 ("fiscal 2004") and february1, 2004 ("fiscal 2003") include 52 weeks.
use of estimates
management of the company has made a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities, and reported amounts of revenues and expenses in preparing these financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles. actual results could differ from these
estimates.
fair value of financial instruments
the carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, receivables, short-term debt and accounts payable approximate fair value due to the short-term
maturities of these financial instruments. the fair value of the company's investments is discussed under the caption "short-term investments" in this note1. the fair value of the
company's long-term debt is discussed in note3.
cash equivalents
the company considers all highly liquid investments purchased with maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. the company's cash and cash equivalents are
carried at fair market value and consist primarily of high-grade commercial paper, money market funds, u.s. government agency securities and tax-exempt notes and bonds.
short-term investments
short-term investments at the end of fiscal 2004 are primarily auction rate securities. the interest rates on these securities are typically reset to market
prevailing rates every 35days or less, and in all cases every 90days or less, but have longer stated maturities. short-term investments are recorded at fair value based on
current market rates and are classified as available-for-sale. changes in the fair value are included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of applicable taxes
in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
accounts receivable
the company has an agreement with a third-party service provider who manages the company's private label credit card program and directly extends credit to customers. in
addition, certain subsidiaries of the company extend credit directly to customers in the ordinary course of business. the receivables due from customers were $865million and
$321million as of january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, respectively. the company's valuation reserve related to accounts receivable was not material as of january29,
2006 and january30, 2005.
merchandise inventories
the majority of the company's merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market, as determined by the retail
inventory method. as the inventory retail value is adjusted regularly to reflect market conditions, the inventory valued using the retail method approximates the lower of cost or market. certain
subsidiaries and distribution centers record merchandise inventories at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market, as determined by the cost method. these merchandise
inventories represent approximately 14% of the total merchandise inventories balance. the company evaluates the inventory valued using the cost method at the end of each quarter to ensure that it is
carried at the
lower of cost or market. the valuation allowance for merchandise inventories valued under the cost method was not material to the company as of the end of fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004.
independent
physical inventory counts or cycle counts are taken on a regular basis in each store, distribution center and home depot supply location to ensure that amounts reflected in the
accompanying consolidated financial statements for merchandise inventories are properly stated. during the period between physical inventory counts in stores, the company accrues for estimated losses
related to shrink on a store-by-store basis based on historical shrink results and current trends in the business. shrink (or in the case of excess inventory, "swell") is the difference between the
recorded amount of inventory and the physical inventory. shrink may occur due to theft, loss, inaccurate records for the receipt of inventory or deterioration of goods, among other things.
income taxes
the company provides for federal, state and foreign income taxes currently payable, as well as for those deferred due to timing differences between reporting income and
expenses for financial statement purposes versus tax purposes. federal, state and foreign tax benefits are recorded as a reduction of income taxes. deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized
for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing
assets
and liabilities and their respective tax bases. deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted income tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those
temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. the effect of a change in income tax rates is recognized as income or expense in the period that includes the enactment date.
the
company and its eligible subsidiaries filea consolidated u.s. federal income tax return. non-u.s. subsidiaries and certain u.s. subsidiaries, which are consolidated for
financial reporting purposes, are not eligible to be included in the company's consolidated u.s. federal income tax return. separate provisions for income taxes have been determined for these
entities. the company intends to reinvest the unremitted earnings of its non-u.s. subsidiaries and postpone their remittance indefinitely. accordingly, no provision for u.s. income taxes
for non-u.s. subsidiaries was recorded in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings.
the
american jobs creation act of 2004 ("ajc act") provides a one-time 85% dividends-received deduction that applies to qualified cash dividends received from controlled foreign
corporations if the funds are reinvested in the united states. the deduction can result in an effective income tax rate of 5.25% on the repatriation of foreign earnings, a rate much lower than the
normal
statutory tax rate of 35%. the company has determined that it will not repatriate earnings of foreign subsidiaries under the ajc act.
the
ajc act also provides a new deduction for qualified domestic production activities. when fully phased-in, the deduction will be up to 9% of the lesser of qualified production
activities income or taxable income. because this provision is targeted toward manufacturing activities, the company does not expect to recognize a material benefit in the current or future tax years.
depreciation and amortization
the company's buildings, furniture, fixtures and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. leasehold
improvements are amortized using the straight-line method over the original term of the lease or the useful life of the improvement, whichever is shorter. the company's property and
equipment is depreciated using the following estimated useful lives:
life
buildings
10-45 years
furniture, fixtures and equipment
3-20 years
leasehold improvements
5-30 years
capitalized software costs
the company capitalizes certain costs related to the acquisition and development of software and amortizes these costs using the straight-line method over the
estimated useful life of the software, which is three to six years. these costs are included in furniture, fixtures and equipment in
the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. certain development costs not meeting the criteria for capitalization are expensed as incurred.
revenues
the company recognizes revenue, net of estimated returns, at the time the customer takes possession of merchandise or receives services. the liability for sales returns is
estimated based on historical return levels. when the company receives payment from customers before the customer has taken possession of the merchandise or the service has been performed, the amount
received is recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets until the sale or service is complete. the company also records deferred revenue for the sale of gift cards and
recognizes this
revenue
upon the redemption of gift cards in net sales. gift card breakage income is recognized based upon historical redemption patterns and represents the balance of gift cards for which the company
believes the likelihood of redemption by the customer is remote. during fiscal 2005, the company recognized $52million of gift card breakage income. fiscal 2005 was the first year in which the
company recognized gift card breakage income, and therefore, the amount recognized includes the gift card breakage income related to gift cards sold since the inception of the gift card program. this
income is recorded as other income and is included in the consolidated statement of earnings as a reduction in selling, general and administrative expenses ("sg&a").
services revenue
net sales include services revenue generated through a variety of installation and home maintenance programs. in these programs, the customer selects and purchases material for
a project and the company provides or arranges professional installation. these programs are offered through the company's stores and focus primarily on providing products and services to
do-it-for-me customers. the company also arranges for the provision of flooring, countertop, cabinet and window covering installation services to production home
builders through its creative touch interiors brand. under certain programs, when the company provides or arranges the installation of a project and the subcontractor provides material as part of the
installation, both the material and labor are included in services revenue. the company recognizes this revenue when the service for the customer is complete.
all
payments received prior to the completion of services are recorded in deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. services revenue, including the impact of deferred revenue,
was $4.3billion, $3.6billion and $2.8billion for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
self-insurance
the company is self-insured for certain losses related to general liability, product liability, automobile, workers' compensation and medical claims. the expected
ultimate cost for claims incurred as of the balance sheet date is not discounted and is recognized as a liability. the expected ultimate cost of claims is estimated based upon analysis of historical
data and actuarial estimates.
prepaid advertising
television and radio advertising production costs along with media placement costs are expensed when the advertisement first appears. included in other current assets in the
accompanying consolidated balance sheets are $42million and $33million, respectively, at the end of fiscal 2005 and 2004 relating to prepayments of production costs for print and
broadcast advertising.
vendor allowances
the company currently receives two types of vendor allowances: volume rebates that are earned as a result of attaining certain purchase levels and advertising co-op
allowances for the promotion of vendors' products that are typically based on guaranteed minimum amounts with additional amounts being earned for attaining certain purchase levels. all vendor
allowances are accrued as earned, and those allowances received as a result of attaining certain purchase levels are accrued over the incentive period based on estimates of purchases.
in
fiscal 2003, the company adopted emerging issues task force no.02-16, "accounting by a customer (including a reseller) for certain consideration received from a vendor"
("eitf02-16"), which states that cash consideration received from a vendor is presumed to be a reduction of the prices of the vendor's products or services and should, therefore,
be characterized as a reduction of cost of sales when recognized in the company's consolidated statements of earnings. that presumption is overcome when the consideration is either a reimbursement of
specific, incremental and identifiable
costs
incurred to sell the vendor's product or a payment for assets or services delivered to the vendor. the company receives consideration in the form of advertising co-op allowances from
its vendors pursuant to annual agreements, which are generally on a calendar year basis. as permitted by eitf02-16, the company elected to apply the provisions of
eitf02-16 prospectively to all agreements entered into or modified after december31, 2002.
there
was no material impact to the company's consolidated statements of earnings or consolidated balance sheets for fiscal 2005. the impact of eitf02-16 in fiscal 2004 and fiscal
2003 resulted in a reduction of cost of sales of $891million and $40million, an increase to sg&a of $1.0billion and $47million and a reduction to earnings before
provision for income taxes of $158million and $7million, respectively. the impact on the company's diluted earnings per share was a reduction of $0.04 in fiscal 2004. there was no
material impact on the company's diluted earnings per share in fiscal 2003.
volume
rebates and advertising co-op allowances earned are initially recorded as a reduction in merchandise inventories and a subsequent reduction in cost of sales when the related product
is sold. prior to the adoption of eitf 02-16 in january2004, advertising co-op allowances earned had been offset against advertising expense to the extent of
advertising costs incurred, with the excess treated as a reduction of cost of sales.
the
company continues to earn certain advertising co-op allowances that are recorded as an offset against advertising expense as they are reimbursements of specific, incremental and
identifiable costs incurred to promote vendors' products. in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, net advertising expense was $1.1billion, $1.0billion and $58million, respectively,
which was recorded in sg&a.
cost of sales
cost of sales includes the actual cost of merchandise sold and services performed, the cost of transportation of merchandise from vendors to the company's stores, locations or
customers, the operating cost of the company's distribution centers and the cost of deferred interest programs offered through the company's private label credit card program.
the
cost of handling and shipping merchandise from the company's stores, locations or distribution centers to the customer is classified as sg&a. the cost of shipping and handling, including internal
costs and payments to third parties, classified as sg&a was $563million, $499million and $387million in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
cost in excess of the fair value of net assets acquired and other intangible assets
goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over fair value of net assets acquired. the company does not amortize goodwill, but does assess the recoverability of goodwill
in the third quarter of each year by determining whether the fair value of each reporting unit supports its carrying value. the fair values of the company's identified reporting units were estimated
using the expected present value of discounted cash flows. the company recorded no impairment charges for fiscal 2005, 2004 or 2003.
the
company amortizes the cost of other intangible assets over their estimated useful lives, which range from 1 to 12years, unless such lives are deemed indefinite. intangible assets with
indefinite lives are tested in the third quarter of each year for impairment and written down to fair value as required. the company recorded no impairment charges for fiscal 2005, 2004 or 2003.
impairment of long-lived assets
the company evaluates the carrying value of long-lived assets when management makes the decision to relocate or close a store, or when circumstances indicate the
carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. losses related to the impairment of long-lived assets are recognized to the extent the sum
of
undiscounted estimated future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset are less than the asset's carrying value. if the carrying value is greater than the future cash flows, a
provision is made to write down the related assets to the estimated net recoverable value. impairment losses were recorded as a component of sg&a in the accompanying consolidated statements of
earnings. when a location closes, the company also recognizes in sg&a the net present value of future lease obligations, less estimated sublease income.
in
fiscal 2005, the company closed 20 of its expo stores, four of which are being converted to the home depot store format. in fiscal 2005, the company charged $91million to sg&a related to
the
dispositions, of which $78million was for asset impairment charges and $13million was for lease obligations. the company remains contingently liable for future minimum lease payments
related to the affected stores, for which the amounts are not material. additionally, the company incurred $29million of expense in cost of sales in fiscal 2005 related to inventory markdowns
in these stores. affected customers are being served by existing the home depot and expo stores. in fiscal 2005, the company also closed two home depot supply stores which did not have a material
impact to the company's financial results.
stock-based compensation
effective february3, 2003, the company adopted the fair value method of recording stock-based compensation expense in accordance with sfas no.123, "accounting
for stock-based compensation" ("sfas123"). the company selected the prospective method of adoption as described in sfas no.148, "accounting for stock-based
compensation transition and disclosure" and accordingly, stock-based compensation expense was recognized related to stock options granted, modified or settled and expense related
to the employee stock purchase plan ("espp") after the beginning of fiscal 2003. the fair value of stock options and espp as determined on the date of grant using the black-scholes option-pricing
model is being expensed over the vesting period of the related stock options and espp. prior to february3, 2003, the company elected to account for its stock-based compensation plans under
accounting principles board opinion no.25, "accounting for stock issued to employees" ("apb 25"), which requires the recording of stock-based compensation expense for some, but not all,
stock-based compensation.
the
per share weighted average fair value of stock options granted during fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 was $12.83, $13.57 and $9.79, respectively. the fair value of these options was determined at the
date of grant using the black-scholes option-pricing model with the following assumptions:
fiscal year ended
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
risk-free interest rate
4.3
%
2.6
%
3.0
%
assumed volatility
33.7
%
41.3
%
44.6
%
assumed dividend yield
1.1
%
0.8
%
1.0
%
assumed lives of option
5years
5years
5years
the
following table illustrates the effect on net earnings and earnings per share as if the company had applied the fair value recognition provisions of sfas123 to all stock-based compensation
in each period (amounts in millions, except per share data):
fiscal year ended
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
net earnings, as reported
$
5,838
$
5,001
$
4,304
add: stock-based compensation expense
included in reported net earnings, net of
related tax effects
deduct: total stock-based compensation
expense determined under fair value based
method for all awards, net of related
tax effects
(197
)
(237
)
(279
)
pro forma net earnings
$
5,751
$
4,843
$
4,067
earnings per share:
basic as reported
$
2.73
$
2.27
$
1.88
basic pro forma
$
2.69
$
2.19
$
1.78
diluted as reported
$
2.72
$
2.26
$
1.88
diluted pro forma
$
2.68
$
2.19
$
1.78
in
april2005, the securities and exchange commission issued guidance delaying the effective date of sfas no.123 (revised 2004), "share-based payment" ("sfas123(r)"), therefore
it will now be effective for the home depot in the first quarter of fiscal 2006. the company intends to adopt sfas123(r) using the modified-prospective method, therefore, in addition to
continuing to recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payments awarded since the adoption of sfas123 in fiscal 2003, the company will also begin expensing unvested
options granted prior to 2003 upon the adoption of sfas123(r). the company currently estimates the impact of adopting sfas123(r) will be a reduction of earnings before provision for
income taxes of approximately $40million for fiscal 2006.
derivatives
the company measures its derivatives at fair value and recognizes these assets or liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets. the company's primary objective for entering
into derivative instruments is to manage its exposure to interest rate fluctuations, as well as to maintain an appropriate mix of fixed and variable rate debt. at january29, 2006, the company
had several outstanding interest rate swaps, accounted for as fair value hedges, with a notional amount of $475million that swap fixed rate interest on the company's $500million
53/8% senior notes for variable interest rates equal to libor plus 30 to 245 basis points and expire on april1, 2006. at january29, 2006, the fair market value of these
agreements was a liability of $1million, which is the estimated amount that the company would have paid to settle similar interest rate swap agreements at current interest rates.
comprehensive income
comprehensive income includes net earnings adjusted for certain revenues, expenses, gains and losses that are excluded from net earnings under generally accepted accounting
principles. adjustments to net earnings are primarily for foreign currency translation adjustments.
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in a foreign currency are translated into u.s. dollars at the current rate of exchange on the last day of the reporting period. revenues and
expenses are generally translated at a daily exchange rate and equity transactions are translated using the actual rate on the day of the transaction.
segment information
the company operates within a single operating segment within north america. net sales for canada and mexico were $5.3billion, $4.2billion and
$3.4billion during fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. long-lived assets in canada and mexico totaled $2.2billion and $1.7billion as of january29,
2006 and january30, 2005, respectively.
reclassifications
certain amounts in prior fiscal years have been reclassified to conform with the presentation adopted in the current fiscal year.
2.intangible assets
the
company's intangible assets at the end of fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, which are included in other assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, consisted of the following (amounts in
millions):
january 29,
january 30,
customer relationships
$
$
trademarks and franchises
other
less accumulated amortization
(35
)
(7
)
total
$
$
amortization
expense related to intangible assets was $29million and $4million for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. estimated future amortization expense for intangible
assets recorded as of january29, 2006 is $60million, $59million, $55million, $52million and $48million for fiscal 2006 through fiscal 2010,
respectively.
3.debt
as
of january29, 2006, the company had $900million of short-term debt outstanding under its commercial paper program. in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, the company
increased the maximum capacity for borrowing under its commercial paper program to $2.5billion as well as increased the related back-up credit facility with a consortium of banks
to $2.0billion. since the initial borrowing on january17, 2006, the maximum amount outstanding under the commercial paper program was $900million and the weighted average
interest rate was 4.3%. the credit facility, which expires in december2010, contains various restrictions, none of which is expected to materially impact the company's liquidity or capital
resources.
the company's long-term debt at the end of fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004 consisted of the following (amounts in millions):
january 29, 2006
january 30, 2005
45/8% senior notes; due august 15, 2010; interest
payable semi-annually on february 15 and august 15
$
$
33/4% senior notes; due september 15, 2009; interest
payable semi-annually on march 15 and september 15
53/8% senior notes; due april 1, 2006; interest
payable semi-annually on april 1 and october 1
capital lease obligations; payable in varying
installments through january 31, 2055
other
total long-term debt
3,185
2,159
less current installments
long-term debt, excluding current installments
$
2,672
$
2,148
in
may2005, the company filed a shelf registration statement with the securities and exchange commission for the future issuance of up to $5.0billion of debt securities. in
august2005, the company issued $1.0billion of 45/8% notes due august15, 2010 ("45/8% senior notes") at a discount of $5million. interest
on the 45/8% senior notes is payable semi-annually on february15 and august15 of each year. the net proceeds of $995million were used to pay for a
portion of the acquisition price of national waterworks,inc. the $5million discount associated with the issuance is being amortized to interest expense over the term of the
45/8% senior notes using the effective interest rate method. issuance costs of $7million are being amortized to interest expense over the term of the 45/8% senior
notes using the straight-line method.
in
september2004, the company issued $1.0billion of 33/4% senior notes due september15, 2009 ("33/4% senior notes") at a discount of
$5million with interest payable semi-annually on march15 and september15 of each year. the net proceeds of $995million were used in part for the repayment
of the company's outstanding 61/2% senior notes due september2004 in the aggregate principal amount of $500million. the remainder of the net proceeds was used for
general corporate purposes. the $5million discount associated with the issuance is being amortized to interest expense over the term of the 33/4% senior notes using the
effective interest rate method. issuance costs of $7million are being amortized to interest expense over the term of the 33/4% senior notes using the straight-line
method.
the
company also had $500million of unsecured 53/8% senior notes outstanding as of january29, 2006, collectively referred to with the 45/8% senior notes
and the 33/4% senior notes as "senior notes." the senior notes may be redeemed by the company at any time, in whole or in part, at a redemption price plus accrued interest up to the
redemption date. the redemption price is equal to the greater of (1)100% of the principal amount of the senior notes to be redeemed, or (2)the sum of the present values of the
remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest to maturity. the company is generally not limited under these indentures in its ability to incur additional indebtedness nor required to maintain
financial ratios or specified levels of net worth or liquidity. however, the indentures governing the senior notes contain various restrictive covenants, none of which are expected to impact the
company's liquidity or capital resources. the senior notes are not subject to sinking fund requirements.
interest
expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings is net of interest capitalized of $51million, $40million and $50million in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively.
maturities
of long-term debt are $513million for fiscal 2006, $16million for fiscal 2007, $300million for fiscal 2008, $1.0billion for fiscal 2009,
$1.0billion for fiscal 2010 and $328million thereafter.
as
of january29, 2006, the market values of the publicly traded 45/8% senior notes, 33/4% senior notes and 53/8% senior notes were approximately
$985million, $976million and $500million, respectively. the
estimated fair value of all other long-term borrowings, excluding capital lease obligations, was approximately $314million compared to the carrying value of $312million.
these fair values were estimated using a discounted cash flow analysis based on the company's incremental borrowing rate for similar liabilities.
4.income taxes
the
components of earnings before provision for income taxes for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 are as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
united states
$
8,736
$
7,508
$
6,440
foreign
total
$
9,282
$
7,912
$
6,843
the
provision for income taxes consisted of the following (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
current:
federal
$
3,394
$
2,153
$
1,520
state
foreign
4,057
2,571
1,934
deferred:
federal
(527
)
state
(111
)
foreign
(16
)
(613
)
total
$
3,444
$
2,911
$
2,539
the
company's combined federal, state and foreign effective tax rates for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, net of offsets generated by federal, state and foreign tax benefits, were approximately 37.1%,
36.8% and 37.1%, respectively.
the
reconciliation of the provision for income taxes at the federal statutory rate of 35% to the actual tax expense for the applicable fiscal years is as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
income taxes at federal statutory rate
$
3,249
$
2,769
$
2,395
state income taxes, net of federal
income tax benefit
foreign rate differences
(10
)
(17
)
(29
)
change in valuation allowance
(23
)
(31
)
other, net
(51
)
(25
)
(44
)
total
$
3,444
$
2,911
$
2,539
the
tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to significant portions of the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities as of january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, were
as follows (amounts in millions):
january 29,
january 30,
current:
deferred tax assets:
accrued self-insurance liabilities
$
$
other accrued liabilities
other
current deferred tax assets
deferred tax liabilities:
accelerated inventory deduction
(271
)
(234
)
other
(17
)
(25
)
current deferred tax liabilities
(288
)
(259
)
current deferred tax assets, net
noncurrent:
deferred tax assets:
accrued self-insurance liabilities
other accrued liabilities
net operating losses
valuation allowance
(23
)
noncurrent deferred tax assets
deferred tax liabilities:
property and equipment
(1,160
)
(1,425
)
goodwill and other intangibles
(209
)
(33
)
other
(8
)
noncurrent deferred tax liabilities
(1,369
)
(1,466
)
noncurrent deferred tax liabilities, net
(994
)
(1,358
)
net deferred tax liabilities
$
(756
)
$
(1,309
)
current
deferred tax assets and current deferred tax liabilities are netted by tax jurisdiction and noncurrent deferred tax assets and noncurrent deferred tax liabilities are netted by tax
jurisdiction, and are included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets as follows (amounts in millions):
january 29,
january 30,
other current assets
$
$
other assets
other accrued expenses
(60
)
(34
)
deferred income taxes
(1,023
)
(1,388
)
net deferred tax liabilities
$
(756
)
$
(1,309
)
as
a result of acquisitions that were accounted for under the purchase method of accounting, deferred tax liabilities of $132million were recorded in fiscal 2005 representing the difference
between the book value and the tax basis of acquired assets.
at
january29, 2006, the company had foreign net operating loss carry-forwards to reduce future taxable income of certain foreign subsidiaries of $5million, which will expire at various
dates from 2009 to 2015. management has concluded that it is more likely than not that these tax benefits related to the net operating losses will be realized and hence no valuation allowance has been
provided. the company has not provided for u.s. deferred income taxes on $1.1billion of undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries because of its intention to indefinitely reinvest
these earnings outside the u.s. the determination of the amount of the unrecognized deferred u.s. income tax liability related to the undistributed earnings is not practicable; however, unrecognized
foreign income tax credits would be available to reduce a portion of this liability.
at
january30, 2005, the company had a valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets totaling $23million. during fiscal 2005, the company reversed this valuation allowance of
$23million because management concluded that it is more likely than not that these tax benefits will be realized. during fiscal 2004, the company reversed a valuation allowance of
$31million for deferred tax assets that were realized due to the company's ability to fully utilize capital losses. the likelihood of realizing the benefit of deferred tax assets is assessed
on an ongoing basis. consequently, future changes in the valuation allowance are possible.
the
company's income tax returns are routinely under audit by domestic and foreign tax authorities. these audits include questions regarding its tax filing positions, including the timing and amount
of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. in 2005, the irs completed its examination of the company's u.s. federal income tax returns through fiscal 2002. as a result
of these examinations, certain deferred tax assets increased by $72million. certain issues relating to the examinations of fiscal years 2001 and 2002 are under appeal, the outcome of which is
not expected to have a material impact on the company's financial statements.
5.employee stock plans
the
home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan ("2005 plan") and the home depot,inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan ("1997 plan") (collectively the "plans") provide that
incentive stock options, non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted shares, performance shares, performance units and deferred shares may be issued to selected
associates, officers and directors of the company. under the 2005 plan, the maximum number of shares of the company's common stock authorized for issuance is 255million shares, with any award
other than a stock option reducing the number of shares available for issuance by 2.11 shares. as of january29, 2006, there were 251million shares available for future grant under the
2005 plan. no additional equity awards may be issued from the 1997 plan after the adoption of the 2005 plan on may26, 2005.
under
the plans, as of january29, 2006, the company had granted incentive and non-qualified stock options for 192million shares, net of cancellations (of which
110million had been exercised). incentive stock options and non-qualified stock options are priced at the fair market value of the company's stock on the date of the grant and
typically vest at the rate of 25% per year commencing on the first anniversary date of the grant and expire on the tenth anniversary date of the grant. the company recognized $133million,
$86million and $40million of stock-based compensation expense in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively, related to stock options granted, modified or settled and expense related to
the espp after the beginning of 2003 (see note1 under the caption "stock-based compensation").
under
the plans, as of january29, 2006, the company had issued 6million shares of restricted stock with a weighted average grant date value of $35.76 per share net of cancellations
(the restrictions on 741,000 shares have lapsed). generally, the restrictions on the restricted stock lapse according to one of the following schedules: (1)the restrictions on 25% of the
restricted stock lapse upon the third and sixth year anniversaries of the date of issuance with the remaining 50% of the restricted stock lapsing
upon the associate's attainment of age 62, or (2)the restrictions on 100% of the restricted stock lapse at 3 or 5years. the fair value of the restricted stock is expensed over the
period during which the restrictions lapse. the company recorded stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock of $32million, $22million and $13million in fiscal
2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
the
company maintains two employee stock purchase plans (u.s. and non-u.s. plans). the plan for u.s. associates is a tax-qualified plan under section423 of the internal
revenue code. the non-u.s. plan is not a section423 plan. the espps allow associates to purchase up to 152million shares of common stock, of which 117million shares
(adjusted for subsequent stock splits) have been purchased from inception of the plans. prior to july1, 2004, shares under the espps were purchased at a price equal to the lower of 85% of the
stock's fair market value on the first day or the last day of the purchase period. beginning july1, 2004, the purchase price of shares under the espps was equal to 85% of the stock's fair
market value on the last day of the purchase period. these shares were included in the pro forma calculation of stock-based compensation expense included in note1 under the caption
"stock-based compensation." during fiscal 2005, 3million shares were purchased under the espps at an average price of $33.72 per share. under the outstanding espps as of january29,
2006, employees have contributed $10million to purchase shares at 85% of the stock's fair market value on the last day (june30, 2006) of the purchase period. the company had
35million shares available for issuance under the espps at january29, 2006.
as
of january29, 2006, there were 3million non-qualified stock options and 1million deferred stock units outstanding under non-qualified stock option
and deferred stock unit plans that are not part of the plans. during fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, the company did not grant any deferred stock units under the deferred stock unit plans that are not
part of the plans. in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, there were 461,000, 461,000 and 635,000 deferred stock units, respectively, granted under the plans. the weighted average grant date value of the
outstanding deferred stock units at january29, 2006 was $37.75 per share. each deferred stock unit entitles the associate to one share of common stock to be received up to five years after the
vesting date of the deferred stock unit, subject to certain deferral rights of the associate. the fair value of the deferred stock units on the grant dates was $18million, $16million
and $19million for deferred units granted in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. these amounts are being expensed over the vesting periods. the company recorded stock-based compensation
expense related to deferred stock units of $10million, $14million and $13million in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
in
total, the company recorded stock-based compensation expense, including the expense of stock options, espps, restricted stock and deferred stock units, of $175million, $125million
and $67million, in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
the
following table summarizes stock options outstanding at january29, 2006, january30, 2005 and february1, 2004, and changes during the fiscal years ended on these dates
(shares in thousands):
number of
shares
weighted
average option
price
outstanding at february 2, 2003
83,166
$
37.09
granted
19,234
24.97
exercised
(4,708
)
16.03
canceled
(9,913
)
38.54
outstanding at february 1, 2004
87,779
$
35.40
granted
16,713
36.46
exercised
(7,825
)
25.94
canceled
(10,273
)
38.27
outstanding at january 30, 2005
86,394
$
36.12
granted
17,721
37.96
exercised
(11,457
)
28.83
canceled
(8,626
)
38.65
outstanding at january 29, 2006
84,032
$
37.24
the
following table summarizes information regarding stock options outstanding at january29, 2006 (shares in thousands):
range of
exercise prices
options outstanding
weighted average
remaining life (yrs.)
weighted average
outstanding option
price
options exercisable
weighted average
exercisable option
price
$9.61to21.29
4,187
1.5
$
16.70
4,187
$
16.70
22.63to31.56
10,129
7.0
24.65
3,284
24.68
31.92to36.84
20,600
7.5
35.53
7,374
35.00
37.29to40.95
31,284
7.0
38.81
15,392
39.71
42.55to53.00
17,832
5.5
48.44
13,477
49.06
84,032
6.5
$
37.24
43,714
$
38.47
6.leases
the
company leases certain retail locations, office space, warehouse and distribution space, equipment and vehicles. while most of the leases are operating leases, certain locations and equipment are
leased under capital leases. as leases expire, it can be expected that, in the normal course of business, certain leases will be renewed or replaced.
certain
lease agreements include escalating rents over the lease terms. the company expenses rent on a straight-line basis over life of the lease which commences on the date the company
has the right to control the property. the cumulative expense recognized on a straight-line basis in excess of the cumulative payments is included in other accrued expenses and other
long-term liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
the
company has a lease agreement under which the company leases certain assets totaling $282million. this lease was originally created under a structured financing arrangement and involves
two special purpose entities. the company financed a portion of its new stores opened in fiscal years
through 2003 under this lease agreement. under this agreement, the lessor purchased the properties, paid for the construction costs and subsequently leased the facilities to the company. the
company records the rental payments under the terms of the operating lease agreements as sg&a in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings.
the
$282million lease agreement expires in 2008 with no renewal option. the lease provides for a substantial residual value guarantee limited to 79% of the initial book value of the assets and
includes
a purchase option at the original cost of each property. as the leased assets were placed into service, the company estimated its liability under the residual value guarantee. the maximum amount of
the residual value guarantee relative to the assets under the lease agreement described above is estimated to be $223million. events or circumstances that would require the company to perform
under the residual value guarantee include (1)initial default on the lease with the assets sold for less than book value, or (2)the company's decision not to purchase the assets at the
end of the lease and the sale of the assets results in proceeds less than the initial book value of the assets. during 2005, the company committed to exercise its option to purchase the assets under
this lease for $282million at the end of the lease term in 2008.
in
the first quarter of fiscal 2004, the company adopted the revised version of fasb interpretation no.46, "consolidation of variable interest entities" ("fin 46"). fin 46 requires
consolidation of a variable interest entity if a company's variable interest absorbs a majority of the entity's expected losses or receives a majority of the entity's expected residual returns, or
both.
in
accordance with fin 46, the company was required to consolidate one of the two aforementioned special purpose entities that, before the effective date of fin 46, met the requirements for
non-consolidation. the second special purpose entity that owns the assets leased by the company totaling $282million is not owned by or affiliated with the company, its management
or its officers. pursuant to fin 46, the company was not deemed to have a variable interest, and therefore was not required to consolidate this entity.
fin
46 requires the company to measure the assets and liabilities at their carrying amounts, which amounts would have been recorded if fin 46 had been effective at the inception of the transaction.
accordingly, during the first quarter of 2004, the company recorded long-term debt of $282million and long-term notes receivable of $282million on the
consolidated balance sheets. the company continues to record the rental payments under the operating lease agreements as sg&a in the consolidated statements of earnings. the adoption of fin 46 had no
economic impact on the company.
total
rent expense, net of minor sublease income for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 was $782million, $684million and $570million, respectively. certain store leases also provide
for contingent rent payments based on percentages of sales in excess of specified minimums. contingent rent expense for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 was approximately $9million,
$11million and $7million, respectively. real estate taxes, insurance, maintenance and operating expenses applicable to the leased property are obligations of the company under the
lease agreements.
the
approximate future minimum lease payments under capital and all other leases at january29, 2006 were as follows (in millions):
fiscal year
capital
leases
operating
leases
$
$
thereafter through 2097
5,363
1,248
$
8,449
less imputed interest
net present value of capital lease obligations
less current installments
long-term capital lease obligations, excluding current
installments
$
short-term
and long-term obligations for capital leases are included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets in current installments of long-term debt and
long-term debt, respectively. the assets under capital leases recorded in property and equipment, net of amortization, totaled $304million and $283million at
january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, respectively.
7.employee benefit plans
the
company maintains active defined contribution retirement plans for its employees ("the benefit plans"). all associates satisfying certain service requirements are eligible to participate in the
benefit plans. the company makes cash contributions each payroll period up to specified percentages of associates' contributions as approved by the board of directors.
the
company also maintains a restoration plan to provide certain associates deferred compensation that they would have received under the benefit plans as a matching contribution if not for the
maximum compensation limits under the internal revenue code. the company funds the restoration plan through contributions made to a grantor trust, which are then used to purchase shares of the
company's common stock in the open market.
the
company's contributions to the benefit plans and the restoration plan were $132million, $114million and $106million for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. at
january29, 2006, the benefit plans and the restoration plan held a total of 31million shares of the company's common stock in trust for plan participants.
8.basic and diluted weighted average common shares
the
reconciliation of basic to diluted weighted average common shares for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 was as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january 29,
january 30,
february 1,
weighted average common shares
2,138
2,207
2,283
effect of potentially dilutive securities:
stock plans
diluted weighted average common shares
2,147
2,216
2,289
stock
plans include shares granted under the company's employee stock plans as described in note5 to the consolidated financial statements. options to purchase 55.1million,
49.1million and 67.9million shares of common stock at january29, 2006, january30, 2005 and february1, 2004, respectively, were excluded from the computation of
diluted earnings per share because their effect would have been anti-dilutive.
9.commitments and contingencies
at
january29, 2006, the company was contingently liable for approximately $1.3billion under outstanding letters of credit issued for certain business transactions, including insurance
programs, trade and construction contracts. the company's letters of credit are primarily performance-based and are not based on changes in variable components, a liability or an equity security of
the other party.
the
company is involved in litigation arising from the normal course of business. in management's opinion, this litigation is not expected to materially impact the company's consolidated results of
operations or financial condition.
10.acquisitions
the
following acquisitions completed by the company were all accounted for under the purchase method of accounting. pro forma results of operations for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 would not be
materially different as a result of these acquisitions and therefore are not presented.
in
august2005, the company acquired national waterworks,inc., a leading distributor of products used to build, repair and maintain water and wastewater transmission systems. the
aggregate purchase price of this acquisition was $1.4billion.
the
company completed several other acquisitions during fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, primarily adding professional service capabilities to home depot supply. the total aggregate purchase price for
acquisitions, including national waterworks,inc., in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 was $2.6billion, $729million and $248million, respectively. accordingly, the company
recorded cost in excess of the fair value of net assets acquired related to the acquisitions of $1.9billion, $554million and $231million for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively, in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
the
following table summarizes the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the dates of acquisition for the fiscal 2005 acquisitions (in millions):
cash
$
receivables
inventories
property and equipment
intangible assets(1)
goodwill
1,869
other assets
total assets acquired
3,203
current liabilities
other liabilities
total liabilities assumed
net asset acquired
$
2,636
(1)includes $273 million of customer relationships and $87 million of tradenames and franchises.
in january2006, the company announced its intent to acquire hughes supply,inc., a leading distributor of construction and repair products, for aggregate
consideration of $3.5billion. the company expects to complete this acquisition in the first quarter of fiscal 2006.
11.quarterly financial data (unaudited)
the
following is a summary of the quarterly consolidated results of operations for the fiscal years ended january29, 2006 and january30, 2005 (dollars in millions, except per share
data):
net sales
gross profit
net earnings
basic
earnings per
share
diluted
earnings per
share
fiscal year ended january 29, 2006:
first quarter
$
18,973
$
6,355
$
1,247
$
0.58
$
0.57
second quarter
22,305
7,409
1,768
0.83
0.82
third quarter
20,744
6,963
1,538
0.72
0.72
fourth quarter
19,489
6,593
1,285
0.61
0.60
fiscal year
$
81,511
$
27,320
$
5,838
$
2.73
$
2.72
fiscal year ended january 30, 2005:
first quarter
$
17,550
$
5,768
$
1,098
$
0.49
$
0.49
second quarter
19,960
6,661
1,545
0.70
0.70
third quarter
18,772
6,252
1,317
0.60
0.60
fourth quarter
16,812
5,749
1,041
0.48
0.47
fiscal year
$
73,094
$
24,430
$
5,001
$
2.27
$
2.26
note: the quarterly data may not sum to fiscal year totals due to rounding.
12.subsequent events
on
march24, 2006, the company issued $1.0 billion of 5.20% senior notes due march1, 2011 at a discount of $1million and $3.0billion of 5.40% senior notes due
march1, 2016 at a discount of $15million. interest on these senior notes is due semi-annually on march1 and september1, of each year.
additionally
in march2006, the company entered into forward starting interest rate swap agreements with a notional amount of $2.0billion accounted for as a cash flow hedge to hedge
interest rate fluctuations in anticipation of the issuance of the 5.40% senior notes due march1, 2016. upon issuance of the 5.40% senior notes due march1, 2016, the company settled its
forward starting interest rate swap agreements and recorded a $19million decrease to accumulated other comprehensive income, which will be amortized to interest expense over the life of the
5.40% senior notes due march1, 2016.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure.
none.
item 9a. controls and procedures.
disclosure controls and procedures
the company maintains disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the company's securities exchange act reports
is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the securities and exchange commission's rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated
to the company's management, including the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
the
company's chief executive officer and chief financial officer have evaluated the effectiveness of the design and operation of the company's disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the securities exchange act) as of the end of the period covered by this report. based on such evaluation, such officers have
concluded that, as of the end of the period covered by this report, the company's disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
internal control over financial reporting
there have not been any changes in the company's internal control over financial reporting (as such term is defined in rules13a-15(e) and
15d-15(e) under the securities exchange act) during the fiscal quarter ended january29, 2006 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the
company's internal control over financial reporting.
management's report on internal control over financial reporting
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to item 8. "financial statements and supplementary data" of this report.
item 9b. other information.
none.
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant.
information
concerning the board of directors of the company, the members of the company's audit committee, the company's audit committee financial expert, the company's code of ethics and compliance
with section16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934 is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled "election of directors and director biographies," "board of directors
information" and "general section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance" in the company's proxy statement for the 2006 annual meeting of shareholders (the "proxy
statement").
executive officers
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to item 4a. "executive officers of the company" of this report.
item 11. executive compensation.
the
information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled "executive compensation," "leadership development and compensation committee report," "board of
directors information" and "general leadership development and compensation committee interlocks and insider participation" in the company's proxy statement.
item 12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.
the
information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled "beneficial ownership of common stock" and "executive compensation" in the company's proxy statement.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions.
the
information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled "executive compensation" and "general insider transactions" in the company's proxy
statement.
item 14. principal accountant fees and services.
the
information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled "audit committee report and fees paid to independent registered public accounting firm" in the company's
proxy statement.
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules.
(a)(1)financial
statements
the
following financial statements are set forth in item 8 hereof:
consolidated
statements of earnings for the fiscal years ended january29, 2006, january30, 2005 and february1, 2004;
consolidated
balance sheets as of january29, 2006 and january30, 2005;
consolidated
statements of stockholders' equity and comprehensive income for the fiscal years ended january29, 2006, january30, 2005 and february1,
2004;
consolidated
statements of cash flows for the fiscal years ended january29, 2006, january30, 2005 and february1, 2004;
notes
to consolidated financial statements;
management's
responsibility for financial statements and management's report on internal control over financial reporting; and
reports
of independent registered public accounting firm.
(2)financial
statement schedules
all
schedules are omitted as the required information is inapplicable or the information is presented in the consolidated financial statements or related notes.
(3)exhibits
exhibits
marked with an asterisk (*) are incorporated by reference to exhibits or appendices previously filed with the securities and exchange commission, as indicated by the references in brackets.
all other exhibits are filed herewith.
*3.1
amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the home depot, inc. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august4, 2002, exhibit 3.1]
*3.2
by-laws, as amended and restated [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august3, 2003, exhibit 3.2 and form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august1, 2004, exhibit 3.1]
*4.1
indenture dated as of april12, 2001 between the home depot, inc. and the bank of new york. [forms-4 (file no. 333-61548) filed may24, 2001, exhibit 4.1]
*4.2
indenture dated as of september16, 2004 between the home depot, inc. and the bank of new york. [form8-k filed september17, 2004, exhibit 4.1]
*4.3
indenture, dated as of may4, 2005, between the home depot, inc. and the bank of new york trust company, n.a., as trustee [forms-3 (file no. 333-124699) filed may6, 2005, exhibit 4.1]
*4.4
form of 53/8% note due april1, 2006. [forms-4 (file no. 333-61584) filed may24, 2001, exhibit 4.1]
*4.5
formof 3.75% senior note due september 15, 2009. [form8-k filed on september17, 2004, exhibit 4.2]
4.6
form of 45/8% senior note due august 15, 2010.
*4.7
form of 5.20% senior note due march1, 2011 [form 8-k filed march23, 2006, exhibit4.1]
*4.8
form of 5.40% senior note due march 1, 2016 [form 8-k filed march23, 2006, exhibit4.2]
*10.1
the home depot, inc. amended and restated employee stock purchase plan, as amended and restated effective july1, 2003. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended november2, 2003, exhibit 10.1]
*10.2
amendment no.1 to the home depot, inc. amended and restated employee stock purchase plan, effective july1, 2004. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august1, 2004, exhibit 10.2]
*10.3
the home depot, inc. non-u.s. employee stock purchase plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.36]
*10.4
the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august4, 2002, exhibit 10.1]
*10.5
form of executive officer restricted stock award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004, exhibit 10.1]
*10.6
form of executive officer nonqualified stock option award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004, exhibit 10.2]
*10.7
form of outside director nonqualified stock option award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004, exhibit 10.3]
*10.8
form of executive officer long-term incentive program performance unit award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004, exhibit
10.4]
*10.9
the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on may27, 2005, exhibit 10.8]
*10.10
formof restricted stock award (u.s. officers) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on february27, 2006, exhibit 10.1]
*10.11
form of deferred share award (nonemployee directors) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on may27, 2005, exhibit 10.2]
*10.12
form of deferred share award (u.s. officers) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on may27, 2005, exhibit 10.3]
*10.13
form of deferred share award (canada officers) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on february27, 2006, exhibit 10.4]
*10.14
form of ltip performance unit award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on february27, 2006, exhibit 10.3]
*10.15
form of nonqualified stock option (u.s. officers) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on february27, 2006, exhibit 10.2]
*10.16
form of nonqualified stock option (nonemployee directors) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on may27, 2005, exhibit10.7]
*10.17
the home depot futurebuilder restoration plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january28, 2001, exhibit 10.10]
*10.18
third amendment to the home depot futurebuilder restoration plan, effective march1, 2004. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august1, 2004, exhibit 10.1]
*10.19
non-qualified stock option and deferred stock unit plan and agreement dated as of december 4, 2000. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january28, 2001, exhibit 10.20]
*10.20
the home depot futurebuilder for puerto rico. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.35]
*10.21
first amendment to the home depot futurebuilder for puerto rico, effective july5, 2004. [forms-8 (file no. 333-125332) filed may27, 2005, exhibit 10.3]
*10.23
the home depot futurebuilder, a 401(k) and stock ownership plan, as amended and restated effective july1, 2004. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004, exhibit 10.5]
*10.24
the home depot long-term incentive plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.42]
*10.25
senior officers' bonus pool plan, as amended. [appendix a to proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders held may 26, 1999]
*10.26
executive officers' bonus plan. [appendix b to proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders held may 27, 1998]
*10.27
supplemental executive choice program, effective january1, 1999. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february3, 2002, exhibit 10.15]
*10.28
home depot u.s.a., inc. deferred compensation plan for officers. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.38]
*10.29
the home depot executive life insurance, death benefit only plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.39]
*10.30
the home depot executive physical program. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.40]
*10.31
the home depot management incentive plan. [appendix a to proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders held on may30, 2003]
*10.32
the home depot, inc. management incentive plan fiscal year 2006 performance measures. [form8-k filed on february27, 2006, exhibit 10.5]
*10.33
the home depot, inc. non-employee directors' deferred stock compensation plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.37]
*10.34
employment agreement between robert l. nardelli and the home depot, inc. dated as of december 4, 2000. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october28, 2001, exhibit10.1]
*10.35
promissory note between robert l. nardelli and the home depot, inc. dated as of december 4, 2000. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january28, 2001, exhibit 10.18]
*10.36
deferred stock units plan and agreement between robert l. nardelli and the home depot, inc., effective as of september 17, 2001. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october28, 2001, exhibit 10.2]
*10.37
restricted stock exchange agreement dated as of august21, 2003 between the home depot, inc. and robert l. nardelli. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august 3, 2003, exhibit 10.2]
*10.38
employment agreement between dennis m. donovan and the home depot, inc. dated march 16, 2001. [form s-4 (file no. 333-61548) filed may24, 2001, exhibit 10.1]
*10.39
deferred stock units plan and agreement between dennis m. donovan and the home depot, inc. dated as of may31, 2001. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february3, 2002, exhibit 10.25]
*10.40
promissory note between dennis m. donovan and the home depot, inc. dated june 7, 2001. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february3, 2002, exhibit 10.26]
*10.41
description of employment arrangement between carol b. tom and the home depot, inc., effective may 4, 2001. ["executive compensation" in 2006 proxy statement for annual meeting of shareholders]
*10.42
non-competition agreement between home depot u.s.a., inc. and carol tom dated as of march24, 2003. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.30]
*10.43
employment agreement between frank l. fernandez and the home depot, inc. dated april2, 2001. [form s-4 (file no. 333-61548) filed may24, 2001, exhibit 10.2]
*10.44
deferred stock units plan and agreement between frank l. fernandez and the home depot, inc. dated april2, 2001. [forms-4 (file no.333-61548) filed may24, 2001, exhibit10.3]
*10.45
promissory note between frank l. fernandez and the home depot, inc. dated june 18, 2001. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february3, 2002, exhibit10.27]
*10.46
employment agreement between frank blake and the home depot, inc., effective as of march9, 2002. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended november3, 2002, exhibit10.1]
*10.47
employment agreement between robert derodes and the home depot, inc., effective as of february7, 2002. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended november3, 2002, exhibit10.2]
*10.48
separation agreement and release between home depot u.s.a., inc. and dennis j. carey, effective as of august21, 2002. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit10.31]
*10.49
consulting agreement between home depot u.s.a., inc. and dennis j. carey, effective as of august14, 2002. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit10.32]
*10.50
promissory note between bill patterson and home depot u.s.a., inc. dated october 29, 2001. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february1, 2004, exhibit10.41]
*10.51
separation agreement & release by and between the home depot, inc. and john h. costello, dated september8, 2005. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october30, 2005, exhibit10.1]
*10.52
participation agreement dated as of october22, 1998 among the home depot, inc. as guarantor; home depot u.s.a., inc. as lessee; hd real estate funding corp. ii as facility lender; credit suisse leasing 92a l.p. as lessor; the bank of new york
as indenture trustee; and credit suisse first boston corporation and invemed associates, inc. as initial purchasers. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january31, 1999, exhibit10.10.]
*10.53
master modification agreement dated as of april 20, 1998 among the home depot, inc. as guarantor; home depot u.s.a., inc., as lessee and construction agent; hd real estate funding corp., as facility lender; credit suisse leasing 92a l.p. as lessor;
the lenders named on the schedule thereto as lenders; and credit suisse first boston corporation as agent bank. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january31, 1999, exhibit10.13]
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
list of subsidiaries of the company.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
31.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
32.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
management
contract or compensatory plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to this form pursuant to item 15(a) of this report.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the home depot, inc.
by:
/s/robert l. nardelli
(robert l. nardelli, chairman, president & ceo)
date:
march 27, 2006
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant, the home depot,inc., and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/robert l. nardelli (robert l. nardelli)
chairman, president & ceo (principal executive officer)
march27,2006
/s/carol b. tom (carol b. tom)
executive vice president and chief financial officer (principal financial officer and principal accounting officer)
march 27, 2006
/s/gregory d. brenneman (gregory d. brenneman)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/richard h. brown (richard h. brown)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/john l. clendenin (john l. clendenin)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/claudio x. gonzlez (claudio x. gonzlez)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/milledge a. hart, iii (milledge a. hart, iii)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/bonnie g. hill (bonnie g. hill)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/laban p. jackson, jr. (laban p. jackson, jr.)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/lawrence r. johnston (lawrence r. johnston)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/kenneth g. langone (kenneth g. langone)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/angelo r. mozilo (angelo r. mozilo)
director
march 27, 2006
/s/thomas j. ridge (thomas j. ridge)
director
march 27, 2006
index of attached exhibits
4.6
form of 45/8% note due august 15, 2010.
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
list of subsidiaries of the company.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
31.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
32.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
10-year summary of financial and operating results
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries
amounts in millions, except where noted
10-year
compoundannual
growthrate
statement of earnings data
net sales
18.1
%
$
81,511
$
73,094
net sales increase (%)
11.5
12.8
earnings before provision for income taxes
22.8
9,282
7,912
net earnings
23.1
5,838
5,001
net earnings increase (%)
16.7
16.2
diluted earnings per share ($)(2)
23.1
2.72
2.26
diluted earnings per share increase (%)
20.4
20.2
diluted weighted average number of common shares
2,147
2,216
gross margin % of sales
33.5
33.4
total operating expenses % of sales
22.0
22.6
net interest income (expense) % of sales
(0.1
)
earnings before provision for income taxes % of
sales
11.4
10.8
net earnings % of sales
7.2
6.8
balance sheet data and financial ratios
total assets
19.7
%
$
44,482
$
39,020
working capital
6.9
2,445
3,818
merchandise inventories
18.0
11,401
10,076
net property and equipment
18.8
24,901
22,726
long-term debt
14.0
2,672
2,148
stockholders' equity
18.4
26,909
24,158
book value per share ($)
18.5
12.67
11.06
long-term debt-to-equity (%)
9.9
8.9
total debt-to-equity (%)
15.2
8.9
current ratio
1.19:1
1.37:1
inventory turnover
4.8x
4.9x
return on invested capital (%)
22.4
21.5
statement of cash flows data
depreciation and amortization
24.2
%
$
1,579
$
1,319
capital expenditures(3)
11.5
3,881
3,948
cash dividends per share ($)
25.3
0.400
0.325
store data(4)
number of stores
17.1
%
2,042
1,890
square footage at fiscal year-end
17.2
increase in square footage (%)
7.0
9.8
average square footage per store (in thousands)
store sales and other data
comparable store sales increase (%)(5)(6)(7)
3.8
5.4
weighted average weekly sales per operating store
(in thousands)
(0.3
)%
$
$
weighted average sales per square foot ($)(4)(5)
(0.3
)
number of customer transactions(4)
13.6
1,330
1,295
average ticket ($)(4)
3.3
57.98
54.89
number of associates at fiscal year-end
15.6
344,810
323,149
(1)fiscal years 2001 and 1996 include 53 weeks; all other fiscal years reported include 52 weeks.  (2) diluted earnings
per share for fiscal 1997, excluding a $104 million non-recurring charge, were $0.55.  (3) excludes payments for businesses acquired (net, in millions) for fiscal years 2005
($2,546), 2004 ($727), 2003 ($215), 2002 ($235), 2001 ($190), 2000 ($26), 1999 ($101), 1998 ($6) and
1997 ($61).  (4) excludes all non-store locations since their inclusion may cause distortion of the data presented due to operational differences from our retail stores. the
total number of the
excluded locations and their total square footage are immaterial to our total number of locations and total square footage.  (5) adjusted to reflect the first 52 weeks of the
53-week fiscal years in 2001 and 1996.
f-1
2001(1)
1996(1)
statementofearningsdata
net sales
$
64,816
$
58,247
$
53,553
$
45,738
$
38,434
$
30,219
$
24,156
$
19,535
net sales increase (%)
11.3
8.8
17.1
19.0
27.2
25.1
23.7
26.3
earnings before provision for income taxes
6,843
5,872
4,957
4,217
3,804
2,654
1,898
1,535
net earnings
4,304
3,664
3,044
2,581
2,320
1,614
1,160
net earnings increase (%)
17.5
20.4
17.9
11.3
43.7
31.9
23.7
28.2
diluted earnings per share ($)(2)
1.88
1.56
1.29
1.10
1.00
0.71
0.52
0.43
diluted earnings per share increase (%)
20.5
20.9
17.3
10.0
40.8
29.1
20.9
26.5
diluted weighted average number of common shares
2,289
2,344
2,353
2,352
2,342
2,320
2,287
2,195
gross margin % of sales
31.8
31.1
30.2
29.9
29.7
28.5
28.1
27.8
total operating expenses % of sales
21.2
21.1
20.9
20.7
19.8
19.7
19.8
20.0
net interest income (expense) % of sales
0.1
0.1
earnings before provision for income taxes  % of
sales
10.6
10.1
9.3
9.2
9.9
8.8
7.9
7.9
net earnings % of sales
6.6
6.3
5.7
5.6
6.0
5.3
4.8
4.8
balance sheet data and financial ratios
total assets
$
34,437
$
30,011
$
26,394
$
21,385
$
17,081
$
13,465
$
11,229
$
9,342
working capital
3,774
3,882
3,860
3,392
2,734
2,076
2,004
1,867
merchandise inventories
9,076
8,338
6,725
6,556
5,489
4,293
3,602
2,708
net property and equipment
20,063
17,168
15,375
13,068
10,227
8,160
6,509
5,437
long-term debt
1,321
1,250
1,545
1,566
1,303
1,247
stockholders' equity
22,407
19,802
18,082
15,004
12,341
8,740
7,098
5,955
book value per share ($)
9.93
8.38
7.71
6.46
5.36
3.95
3.23
2.75
long-term debt-to-equity (%)
3.8
6.7
6.9
10.3
6.1
17.9
18.4
20.9
total debt-to-equity (%)
6.1
6.7
6.9
10.3
6.1
17.9
18.4
20.9
current ratio
1.40:1
1.48:1
1.59:1
1.77:1
1.75:1
1.73:1
1.82:1
2.01:1
inventory turnover
5.0x
5.3x
5.4x
5.1x
5.4x
5.4x
5.4x
5.6x
return on invested capital (%)
20.4
18.8
18.3
19.6
22.5
19.3
16.1
16.3
statement of cash flows data
depreciation and amortization
$
1,076
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
capital expenditures(3)
3,508
2,749
3,393
3,574
2,618
2,094
1,464
1,248
cash dividends per share ($)
0.26
0.21
0.17
0.16
0.11
0.08
0.06
0.05
store data(4)
number of stores
1,707
1,532
1,333
1,134
square footage at fiscal year-end
increase in square footage (%)
10.2
14.1
18.5
22.6
23.5
22.8
23.1
21.6
average square footage per store (in thousands)
store sales and other data
comparable store sales increase (%)(5)(6)(7)
3.8
weighted average weekly sales per operating store
(in thousands)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
weighted average sales per square foot ($)(4)(5)
number of customer transactions(4)
1,246
1,161
1,091
average ticket ($)(4)
51.15
49.43
48.64
48.65
47.87
45.05
43.63
42.09
number of associates at fiscal year-end
298,800
280,900
256,300
227,300
201,400
156,700
124,400
98,100
(6)includes net sales at locations open greater than 12months, including relocated and remodeled stores, and net sales of all the subsidiaries of the home
depot,inc. stores and subsidiaries became comparable on the monday following their 365th day of operation and include certain locations acquired in the current year by existing
subsidiaries. comparable store sales is intended only as supplemental information and is not a substitute for net sales or net earnings presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles.  (7) beginning in fiscal 2003, comparable store sales increases were reported to the nearest one-tenth of a percentage. comparable store sales increases in fiscal
years prior
to 2003 were not adjusted to reflect this change.
f-2
quicklinks
table of contents
cautionary statement pursuant to the private securities litigation reform act of 1995
part i
part ii
report of independent registered public accounting firm
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries consolidated statements of earnings
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries consolidated balance sheets
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries consolidated statements of cash flows
part iii
part iv
signatures
