10-k
a2176777z10-k.htm
form 10-k
quicklinks
-- click here to rapidly navigate through this document
united states
securities and exchange commission washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended january28, 2007
or
o
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934
commission file number 1-8207
the home depot,inc. (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware (state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
95-3261426 (i.r.s. employer identification no.)
2455 paces ferry road, n.w., atlanta, georgia 30339 (address of principal executive offices) (zip code)
registrant's
telephone number, including area code: (770)433-8211
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b)of the act:
titleof each class
name of each exchange
on which registered
commonstock,$0.05parvaluepershare
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section 12(g)of the act: none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities
act.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d)of the
act.yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the
best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of "accelerated filer
and large accelerated filer" in rule12b-2 of the exchange act.
large
accelerated fileraccelerated
fileronon-accelerated filero
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesono
the aggregate market value of the common stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the registrant on july30, 2006 was $70.6billion.
the
number of shares outstanding of the registrant's common stock as of march26, 2007 was 1,969,535,236 shares.
documents incorporated by reference
portions of the registrant's proxy statement for the 2007 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k to
the extent described herein.
the home depot,inc.
fiscal year 2006 form 10-k
table of contents
part i
item 1.
business
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
item4a.
executive officers of the company
part ii
item 5.
market for the registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
item9b.
other information
part iii
item 10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item 14.
principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
index of exhibits
cautionary statement pursuant to the  private securities litigation reform act of 1995
certain statements regarding our future performance made in this report are forward-looking statements. forward-looking statements may relate to such matters as net sales
growth, comparable store sales, impact of cannibalization, state of the residential construction and housing markets, commodity price inflation and deflation, implementation of store initiatives,
protection of intellectual property rights, net earnings performance, including depreciation and amortization expense, earnings per share, stock-based compensation expense, store openings and
closures, capital allocation and expenditures, the effect of adopting certain accounting standards, return on invested capital, management of our purchasing or customer credit policies, strategic
direction, including whether or not a sale or initial public offering of hd supply will occur or, if a transaction is undertaken, its terms or timing, and the demand for our products and services.
these
statements are based on currently available information and our current assumptions, expectations and projections about future events. while we believe that our assumptions, expectations and
projections are reasonable in view of the currently available information, you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements. these statements are not guarantees of
future performance. they are subject to future events, risks and uncertainties many of which are beyond our control as well as potentially inaccurate
assumptions, that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations and projections. some of the material risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ
materially from our expectations and projections are described in item 1a. "risk factors." you should read that information in conjunction with "management's discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations" in item 7 of this report and our consolidated financial statements and related notes in item 8 of this report. we note such information for investors as permitted
by the private securities litigation reform act of 1995. there also may be other factors that we cannot anticipate or that are not described in this report, generally because we do not perceive them
to be material, that could cause results to differ materially from our expectations.
forward-looking
statements speak only as of the date they are made, and we do not undertake to update these forward-looking statements. you are advised, however, to review any further disclosures we
make on related subjects in our periodic filings with the securities and exchange commission ("sec").
part i
item 1. business.
introduction
the home depot,inc. is the world's largest home improvement retailer and the second largest retailer in the united states ("u.s."), based on net sales for the fiscal
year ended january28, 2007 ("fiscal 2006"). as of the end of fiscal 2006, we were operating 2,147 stores, most of which are the home depot stores.
the
home depot stores sell a wide assortment of building materials, home improvement and lawn and garden products and provide a number of services. the home depot stores average approximately 105,000
square feet of enclosed space, with approximately 23,000 additional square feet of outside garden area. as of the end of fiscal 2006, we had 2,100 the home depot stores located throughout the u.s.
(including the territories of puerto rico and the virgin islands), canada, china and mexico. in addition, at the end of fiscal 2006, the company operated 34 expo design center stores, 11 the home
depot landscape supply stores and two the home depot floor stores.
in
addition to our retail stores, our business includes hd supply, which distributes products and sells installation services primarily to business-to-business customers,
including home builders, professional contractors, municipalities and maintenance professionals. hd supply consists of four major platforms: 1)infrastructure, including waterworks and
utilities; 2)construction, including construction supply, lumber and building materials, electrical, plumbing/hvac and interiors; 3)maintenance, including facilities maintenance and
industrial pvf; and 4)repair and remodel.
in
february2007, the company announced its decision to evaluate strategic alternatives for hd supply, including a possible sale or initial public offering of the business. there can be no
assurance that any transaction will occur or, if one is undertaken, its terms or timing.
the
home depot,inc. is a delaware corporation that was incorporated in 1978. our store support center (corporate office) is located at 2455 paces ferry road, n.w., atlanta, georgia 30339. our
telephone number is (770)433-8211.
we
maintain an internet website at www.homedepot.com. we make available on our website, free of charge, our annual reports to shareholders, annual reports on form10-k, quarterly
reports on form10-q, current reports on form8-k, proxy statements and forms 3, 4 and 5 as soon as reasonably practicable after filing such documents with, or
furnishing such documents to, the sec.
we
include our website addresses throughout this filing only as textual references. the information contained on our websites is not incorporated by reference into this form10-k.
our business
we operate in two reportable segments, retail and hd supply. you will find information concerning the financial results and the total assets of each segment in note12
to the consolidated financial statements. financial information about our operations outside the united states is also reported in note12 to the consolidated financial statements.
retail segment
operating strategy.our operating strategy is to offer a broad assortment of high-quality merchandise
and services at competitive prices using knowledgeable, service-oriented personnel and strong marketing and credit promotions. we believe that our associates' knowledge of products and home
improvement techniques and applications is very important to our marketing approach and our ability to maintain and enhance customer satisfaction.
customers.the home depot stores serve three primary customer groups:
do-it-yourself ("d-i-y") customers: these customers are typically home owners
who purchase products and complete their own projects and installations. to complement the expertise of our associates, the home depot stores offer "how-to" clinics taught by associates
and merchandise vendors.
do-it-for-me ("d-i-f-m") customers: these customers
are typically home owners who purchase materials themselves and hire third parties to complete the project and/or installation. we arrange for the installation of a variety of the home depot products
through qualified independent contractors.
professional customers: these customers are professional remodelers, general contractors, repairmen and tradesmen. in many
stores, we offer a variety of programs to these customers, including additional delivery and will-call services, dedicated staff, extensive merchandise selections and expanded credit
programs, all of which we believe increase sales to these customers.
products.a typical the home depot store stocks 35,000 to 45,000 products during the year, including both national
brand name and proprietary items. the following table shows the percentage of net sales of each major product group (and related services) for each of the last three fiscalyears:
percentage of net sales for
fiscal year ended
product group
january28,
january29,
january30,
building materials, lumber and millwork
23.6
%
24.2
%
24.4
%
plumbing, electrical and kitchen
30.8
29.4
29.0
hardware and seasonal
27.0
27.1
26.9
paint, flooring and wall covering
18.6
19.3
19.7
total
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
to
complement and enhance our product selection, we have formed strategic alliances and exclusive relationships with selected suppliers to market products under a variety of
well-recognized brand names. during fiscal 2006, we offered a number of proprietary and exclusive brands across a wide range of departments including, but not limited to, behr premium
plus paint, charmglow gas grills, hampton bay lighting, mills pride cabinets, vigoro lawn care products, husky hand tools,
ridgid and ryobi power tools, pegasus faucets, traffic master carpet, glacier bay bath fixtures and veranda decking
products. we may consider additional strategic alliances and relationships with other suppliers and will continue to assess opportunities to expand the range of products available under brand names
that are exclusive to the home depot.
in
fiscal 2006, innovative and distinctive products continued to be a growth driver supporting our merchandising strategy. the following successes helped differentiate the home depot in the
marketplace:
introduced
the most comprehensive lineup of top brand lawn tractors and mowers available nationwide, including cub cadet, toro, john
deere and honda;
launched
an expanded outdoor living assortment, including hampton bay patio and charmglow grills;
launched
an exclusive line-up of lithium-ion power tools from milwaukee, ridgid and makita; and
launched
the lg steamwasher and the maytag epic washer and dryer.
we
maintain a global sourcing merchandise program to source high-quality products directly from manufacturers. our product development merchants travel internationally to identify
opportunities to purchase items directly for our stores. additionally, we have four sourcing offices located in shanghai, shenzhen, dalian, and chengdu, china, as well as one office in gurgaon, india.
we also have a quality assurance engineer located in milan, italy and we have product development merchants, as well as a sourcing office, in monterrey, mexico. we currently source products from more
than 800 factories in approximately 35 countries.
services.the home depot and expo design center stores offer a variety of installation services. these services
target d-i-f-m customers who select and purchase products and installation of those products from us. these installation programs include products such as
carpeting, flooring, cabinets, countertops and water heaters. in addition, we provide professional installation of a number of products sold through our in-home sales programs, such as
generators and furnace and central air systems.
store growth
united states.at the end of fiscal 2006, we were operating 1,872 the home depot stores in the u.s., including the territories of
puerto rico and the virgin islands. during fiscal 2006, we opened 86 new the home depot stores, including eight relocations, in the u.s.
canada.at
the end of fiscal 2006, we were operating 155 the home depot stores in ten canadian provinces. of these stores, 20 were opened during fiscal 2006,
including two relocations.
mexico.at
the end of fiscal 2006, we were operating 61 the home depot stores in mexico. of these stores, seven were opened during fiscal 2006.
china.in
fiscal 2006, we acquired the home way, a chinese home improvement retailer, including 12 stores in six cities.
credit services.we offer credit purchase programs through third-party credit providers to professional,
d-i-y and d-i-f-m customers. in fiscal 2006, approximately 4.5million new the home depot credit accounts were opened, bringing the
total number of the home depot account holders to approximately 17million. proprietary credit card sales accounted for approximately 28% of store sales in fiscal 2006. we also offer an
unsecured home improvement loan program through third-party credit providers that gives our customers the opportunity to finance the purchase of products and services in our stores. we believe this
loan program not only supports large sales, such as kitchen and bath remodels, but also generates incremental sales from our customers.
logistics.our logistics programs are designed to ensure excellent product availability for customers, effective
use of our investment in inventory and low total supply chain costs. at the end of fiscal 2006, we operated 18 import distribution centers located in the u.s. and canada. at the end of fiscal 2006, we
also operated 30 lumber distribution centers in the u.s. and canada to support the lumber demands of our stores and 10 transit facilities to receive merchandise from manufacturers for immediate
delivery to our stores. at the end of fiscal 2006, approximately 40% of the merchandise shipped to our stores flowed through our network of distribution centers and transit facilities. as our networks
evolve, we expect to increase our flow-through. the remaining merchandise will be shipped directly from our suppliers to our stores. in addition to replenishing merchandise supplies at our
stores, we also provide delivery services directly to our customers.
seasonality.our business is seasonal to a certain extent. generally, our highest volume of sales occurs in our
second fiscal quarter and the lowest volume occurs during our fourth fiscal quarter.
competition.our business is highly competitive, based in part on price, store location, customer service and depth
of merchandise. in each of the markets we serve, there are a number of other home improvement stores, electrical, plumbing and building materials supply houses and lumber yards. with respect to some
products, we also compete with discount stores, local, regional and national hardware stores, mail order firms, warehouse clubs, independent building supply stores and, to a lesser extent, other
retailers. in addition to these entities, our expo design center stores compete with specialty design stores or showrooms, some of which are only open to interior design professionals. due to the
variety of competition we face, we are unable to precisely measure the impact on our sales by our competitors.
hd supply segment
operating strategy.our operating strategy is to provide a total solution for every phase of a building project,
from infrastructure to construction to lifetime maintenance and repair and remodel. we believe that our broad product and service offering, our highly knowledgeable sales force and our reputation for
superior customer service enable us to be a single-source supplier to our customers for the entire project lifecycle.
customers.we distribute products and offer services primarily to builders, contractors, government entities,
industrial businesses and maintenance professionals. our customers typically select their vendors primarily on the basis of product availability, relationships with and expertise of sales personnel,
price and the quality and scope of services offered. additionally, professional customers generally purchase large volumes, are repeat buyers because of their involvement in longer-term
projects and require specialized services. we complement our product offering with customer-driven, value-added services, such as integrated supply, design assistance, kitting, assembly and
fabrication services.
products and services.our products and services are focused around the following four major categories that are
related to different phases of a building project:
infrastructure:
this category covers the products and services to construct and support the public works systems for residential and commercial projects.
construction:
this category covers the interior and exterior structural building components for residential and commercial projects.
maintenance:
this category covers products and services for the routine maintenance, repair and operations needs of multifamily housing, hospitality, healthcare, government
and industrial facilities.
repair
and remodel: this category covers home improvement products and building materials, serving the consumer, professional handyman and light remodeler markets.
inventories.we maintain extensive inventories to meet the rapid delivery requirements of our customers. our
inventories are based on the needs, delivery schedules and lead times of our customers. we focus on distributing products that leverage our strengths in inventory management, purchasing, specialized
sales force, distribution and logistics, credit management and information technology.
credit services.over 90% of our sales volume is facilitated through the extension of credit to our customers. our
businesses offer credit to customers, either through unsecured credit that is based solely upon the creditworthiness of the customer, or secured credit for materials sold for a specific job where the
security lies in lien rights associated with the material going into the job. the type of credit offered depends both on the financial strength of the customer and the nature of the business in which
the customer is involved. end users, resellers and other non-contractor customers generally purchase more on unsecured credit than secured credit. these lines of credit are granted only
after a sufficient review of the creditworthiness of the customer. in addition, on a regular basis, large unsecured credit lines are reviewed to ensure they are still financially sound.
logistics.our distribution network consists of over 1,000 combined branches and central distribution centers in
the united states. the efficient operation of our distribution network is critical in providing quality service to our customer base. our central distribution centers and branches use warehouse
management technology to optimize receiving, inventory control and picking, packing and shipping functions. in addition, we leverage several of our larger branches as distribution points for certain
product lines.
the
majority of customer orders are shipped from inventory at our branches. in order to maintain complete control of the delivery process, we use over 4,000 vehicles from our total vehicle fleet to
deliver products to our customers. we also accommodate special orders from our customers and facilitate the shipment of certain large volume orders directly from the manufacturer to the customer.
orders for larger construction projects normally require long-term delivery schedules throughout the period of construction, which in some cases may continue for severalyears.
seasonality.our business is seasonal to a certain extent. generally, our highest volume of sales occurs in our
second fiscal quarter and the lowest volume occurs during our fourth fiscal quarter.
competition.we are one of the largest wholesale distributors of our range of products in the united states, and we
believe that no other company competes against us across all of our product lines. however, there is significant competition in each of our individual product lines. our competition includes other
wholesalers, manufacturers that sell products directly to their respective customer base and some of our customers that resell our products. to a limited extent, retailers of plumbing, electrical
fixtures and supplies, building materials, maintenance repair and operations supplies and contractors' tools also compete with us. competition varies depending on product line, customer classification
and geographic area. the principal competitive factors in our business include, but are not limited to, availability of materials and supplies; technical product knowledge and expertise as to
application and usage; advisory or other service capabilities; ability to build and maintain customer relationships; same-day delivery capabilities in certain product lines; pricing of
products and provision of credit.
support services
information technologies.during fiscal 2006, we continued to make significant information technology investments
to support better customer service and provide an improved shopping environment in our stores. we completed the deployment of self-checkout registers to all our u.s. stores and the
majority of our stores in canada and enhanced our coupon processing at all check-outs. we also began implementing in-store call boxes and installed voice over internet phone
systems in order to provide customers faster assistance from our associates. to support the continued growth of our appliance business, we upgraded our proprietary depot direct appliance fulfillment
system.
in
addition to significant investments in store technology, we upgraded our order management system, which improves the speed and accuracy of online order processing and provides customers the ability
to check special order status on the internet. we also defined a set of common enterprise system platforms for our hd supply wholesale businesses and began migrating the hd supply businesses to these
platforms, beginning with the payroll and financial functions.
we
also began work on the strategic effort to implement a new retail systems platform to further improve the performance of our merchandising functions and store operations. we also commenced the
effort to add new automation into our supply chain functions focusing on new systems for warehouse distribution, transportation management and enhancements to support greater order penetration through
our centralized replenishment systems.
associates.at the end of fiscal 2006, we employed approximately 364,000 associates, of whom approximately 26,000
were salaried, with the remainder compensated on an hourly or temporary basis. approximately 68% of our associates are employed on a full-time basis. we believe that our employee relations
are very good. to attract and retain qualified personnel, we seek to maintain competitive salary and wage levels in each market we serve.
intellectual property.through our wholly-owned subsidiary, homer tlc,inc., we have registered or applied
for registration, in a number of countries, for a variety of internet domain names, service marks and trademarks for use in our businesses, including the home depot; hd supply; hampton
bay fans, lighting and accessories; glacier bay toilets, sinks and faucets; pegasus faucets and bath accessories; commercial electric lighting
fixtures; workforce tools, tool boxes and shelving; www.hdsupply.com and www.doitherself.com. furthermore, we have also obtained and now maintain patent portfolios relating to certain
products and services provided by the home depot, and continually seek to patent or otherwise protect selected innovations we incorporate into our products and business operations. we regard our
intellectual property as having significant value to each business segment and as being an important factor in the marketing of our brand, e-commerce, stores
and
new areas of business. we are not aware of any facts that could be expected to have a material adverse affect on our intellectual property.
quality assurance program.we have a quality assurance program for our directly imported globally-sourced products.
through this program, we have established criteria for supplier and product performance, which measures factors such as product quality and timeliness of shipments. the performance record is made
available to the factories to allow them to strive for improvement. the program addresses quality assurance at the factory, product and packaging levels.
environmental, health& safety ("eh&s").we are committed to maintaining a safe environment for our
customers and associates, and protecting the environment of the communities in which we do business. our eh&s function in the field is directed by trained associates focused primarily on execution of
the eh&s programs. additionally, we have an atlanta-based team of dedicated eh&s professionals who evaluate, develop, implement and enforce policies, processes and programs on a
company-wide basis.
item 1a. risk factors.
the risks and uncertainties described below could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations and could cause actual results to
differ materially from our expectations and projections. while we believe that our assumptions, expectations and projections are reasonable in view of the currently available information, you are
cautioned not to place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements. these statements are not guarantees of future performance. they are subject to future events, risks and
uncertainties many of which are beyond our control as well as potentially inaccurate assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our
expectations and projections. forward-looking statements may relate to such matters as net sales growth, comparable store sales, impact of cannibalization, state of the residential construction and
housing markets, commodity price inflation and deflation, implementation of store initiatives, protection of intellectual property rights, net earnings performance, including depreciation and
amortization expense, earnings per share, stock-based compensation expense, store openings and closures, capital allocation and expenditures, the effect of adopting certain accounting standards,
return on invested capital, management of our purchasing or customer credit policies, strategic direction, including whether or not a sale or initial public offering of hd supply will occur or, if a
transaction is undertaken, its terms or timing, and the demand for our products and services. you should read these risk factors in conjunction with "management's discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations" in item 7 of this report and our consolidated financial statements and related notes in item 8 of this report. there also may be other factors that we cannot
anticipate or that are not described in this report, generally because we do not perceive them to be material, that could cause results to differ materially from our expectations. forward-looking
statements speak only as of the date they are made, and we do not undertake to update these forward-looking statements. you are advised, however, to review any further disclosures we make on related
subjects in our periodic filings with the sec.
rising costs, a reduction in the availability of financing, weather and other conditions in north america could adversely affect our costs of doing
business, demand for our products and services and our average ticket price.
interest rates, fuel and other energy costs, labor and healthcare costs, availability of financing, employment, state of the residential construction and housing markets,
consumer confidence and general economic outlook, weather, natural disasters, terrorism and other conditions that adversely
affect
consumer demand for our products and services could adversely affect our financial performance. these and other similar factors could:
increase
our costs,
cause
our customers to delay undertaking or determine not to undertake new home improvement projects,
cause
our customers to delay purchasing or determine not to purchase home improvement products and services,
cause
our customers to delay or determine not to undertake new spending in the commercial, residential, industrial and public infrastructure markets, and
lead
to a decline in customer transactions and in average ticket price.
we rely on third party suppliers, and if we fail to identify and develop relationships with a sufficient number of qualified suppliers, our ability to
timely and efficiently access products that meet our high standards for quality could be adversely affected.
we buy our products and supplies from suppliers located throughout the world. our ability to continue to identify and develop relationships with qualified suppliers who can
satisfy our high standards for quality and our need to access products and supplies in a timely and efficient manner is a significant challenge. our ability to access products and supplies also can be
adversely affected by political instability, the financial instability of suppliers, suppliers' noncompliance with applicable laws, trade restrictions, tariffs, currency exchange rates, transport
capacity and cost and other factors beyond our control.
if we are unable to effectively manage and expand our alliances and relationships with selected suppliers of brand name products, we may be unable to
effectively execute our strategy to differentiate us from our competitors.
as part of our strategy of differentiation, we have formed strategic alliances and exclusive relationships with selected suppliers to market products under a variety of
well-recognized brand names. if we are unable to manage and expand these alliances and relationships or identify alternative sources for comparable products, we may not be able to
effectively execute our strategy of differentiation.
any inability to open new stores on schedule will delay the contribution of these new stores to our financial performance.
we expect to increase our presence in existing markets and enter new markets. our ability to open new stores will depend primarily on our ability to:
identify
attractive locations,
negotiate
leases or real estate purchase agreements on acceptable terms,
attract
and train qualified employees, and
manage
pre-opening expenses, including construction costs.
our
ability to open new stores also will be affected by environmental regulations, local zoning issues and other laws related to land use. failure to effectively manage these and other similar factors
will affect our ability to open stores on schedule, which will delay the impact of these new stores on our financial performance.
the implementation of our technology initiatives could disrupt our operations in the near term, and our technology initiatives might not provide the
anticipated benefits or might fail.
we have made, and will continue to make, significant technology investments both in our stores and branches and in our administrative functions. our technology initiatives are
designed to streamline our operations to allow our associates to continue to provide high quality service to our customers and to provide our customers a better experience. the cost and potential
problems and interruptions associated with the implementation of our technology initiatives could disrupt or reduce the efficiency of our operations in the near term. in addition, our new or upgraded
technology might not provide the anticipated benefits, it might take longer than expected to realize the anticipated benefits or the technology might fail altogether.
we may not timely identify or effectively respond to consumer trends, which could adversely affect our relationship with our customers, the demand for
our products and services and our market share.
it is difficult to successfully predict the products and services our customers will demand. the success of our business depends in part on our ability to identify and respond
to evolving trends in demographics and consumer preferences. failure to design attractive stores and to timely identify or effectively respond to changing consumer tastes, preferences, spending
patterns and home improvement needs could adversely affect our relationship with our customers, the demand for our products and services and our market share.
the inflation or deflation of commodity prices could affect our prices, demand for our products, sales and profit margins.
prices of certain commodity products, including lumber and other raw materials, are historically volatile and are subject to fluctuations arising from changes in domestic and
international supply and demand, labor costs, competition, market speculation, government regulations and periodic delays in delivery. rapid and significant changes in commodity prices may affect our
sales and profit margins.
if we cannot successfully manage the unique challenges presented by international markets, we may not be successful in expanding our international
operations.
our strategy includes expansion of our operations in existing and new international markets by selective acquisitions, strategic alliances and the opening of new stores and
branches. our ability to successfully execute our strategy in international markets is affected by many of the same operational risks we face in expanding our u.s. operations. in addition, our
international expansion may be adversely affected by our ability to identify and gain access to local suppliers as well as by local laws and customs, legal and regulatory constraints, political and
economic conditions and currency regulations of the countries or regions in which we currently operate or intend to operate in the future. risks inherent in our international operations also include,
among others, the costs and difficulties of managing international operations, adverse tax consequences and greater difficulty in enforcing intellectual property rights. additionally, foreign currency
exchange rates and fluctuations may have an impact on our future costs or on future cash flows from our international operations.
our success depends upon our ability to attract, train and retain highly qualified associates.
to be successful, we must attract, train and retain a large and growing number of highly qualified associates while controlling related labor costs. our ability to control
labor costs is subject to numerous external factors, including prevailing wage rates and health and other insurance costs. in addition, many of our associates are in hourly positions with historically
high turnover rates. we compete with other retail and non-retail businesses for these associates and invest significant resources in training and
motivating
them. we also depend on our executives and other key associates for our success. there is no assurance that we will be able to attract or retain highly qualified associates in the future.
changes in accounting standards and subjective assumptions, estimates and judgments by management related to complex accounting matters could
significantly affect our financial results.
generally accepted accounting principles and related accounting pronouncements, implementation guidelines and interpretations with regard to a wide range of matters that are
relevant to our business, such as revenue recognition, asset impairment, inventories, self-insurance, tax matters and litigation, are highly complex and involve many subjective
assumptions, estimates and judgments by our management. changes in these rules or their interpretation or changes in underlying assumptions, estimates or judgments by our management could
significantly change our reported or expected financial performance.
increased competition could adversely affect prices and demand for our products and services and could decrease our market share.
we operate in markets in industries that are highly competitive. our retail business competes principally based on price, store location, customer service and depth of
merchandise. our hd supply business competes principally based on ability to provide and deliver supplies, product knowledge and expertise, advisory services and availability of credit. in each market
we serve, there are a number of other home improvement stores, electrical, plumbing and building materials supply houses and lumber yards. with respect to some products, we also compete with discount
stores, local, regional and national hardware stores, mail order firms, warehouse clubs, independent building supply stores and other retailers. in addition, we compete with specialty design stores or
showrooms, some of which are only open to interior design professionals, local and regional distributors, and wholesalers and manufacturers that sell products directly to their customer bases. intense
competitive pressures from one or more of our competitors could affect prices or demand for our products and services. if we are unable to timely and appropriately respond to these pressures, our
financial performance and our market share could be adversely affected.
we are involved in a number of legal proceedings, and while we cannot predict the outcomes of such proceedings and other contingencies with certainty,
some of these outcomes may adversely affect our operations or increase our costs.
we are involved in a number of legal proceedings, including government inquiries and investigations, and consumer, employment, tort and other litigation. we cannot predict the
outcomes of these legal proceedings and other contingencies, including environmental remediation and other proceedings commenced by government authorities, with certainty. the outcome of some of these
legal proceedings and other contingencies could require us to take or refrain from taking actions which could adversely affect our operations or could require us to pay substantial amounts of money.
additionally, defending against these lawsuits and proceedings may involve significant expense and diversion of management's attention and resources from other matters.
our costs of doing business could increase as a result of changes in federal, state or local regulations.
changes in the federal, state or local minimum wage or living wage requirements or changes in other wage or workplace regulations could increase our costs of doing business.
changes in federal, state or local regulations governing the sale of some of our products could increase our costs of doing business. in addition, changes to federal, state and local tax regulations
could increase our costs of doing business.
item 1b. unresolved staff comments.
not applicable.
item 2. properties.
the following tables show locations of the 1,872 the home depot stores and the 830 hd supply locations in the u.s. and its territories and the 228 the home depot stores and the
63 hd supply locations outside of the u.s. at the end of fiscal 2006:
number of locations
u.s. locations
retail
hd supply
alabama
alaska
arizona
arkansas
california
colorado
connecticut
delaware
district of columbia
florida
georgia
hawaii
idaho
illinois
indiana
iowa
kansas
kentucky
louisiana
maine
maryland
massachusetts
michigan
minnesota
mississippi
missouri
montana
nebraska
nevada
new hampshire
new jersey
new mexico
new york
north carolina
north dakota
ohio
oklahoma
oregon
pennsylvania
puerto rico
rhode island
south carolina
south dakota
tennessee
texas
utah
vermont
virgin islands
virginia
washington
west virginia
wisconsin
wyoming
total u.s.
1,872
number of locations
international locations
retail
hd supply
canada:
alberta
british columbia
manitoba
new brunswick
newfoundland
nova scotia
ontario
prince edward island
quebec
saskatchewan
total canada
mexico:
aguascalientes
baja california
baja california sur
chihuahua
coahuila
distrito federal
durango
guanajuato
guerrero
hidalgo
jalisco
michoacn
morelos
nuevo len
puebla
queretaro
quintana roo
san luis potosi
sinaloa
sonora
state of mexico
tabasco
tamaulipas
veracruz
yucatan
total mexico
china:
beijing
henan
liaoning
shaanxi
shandong
tianjin
total china
additionally, at the end of fiscal 2006, we had 47 other retail store locations, which included 34 expo design center stores located in arizona, california,
florida, georgia, illinois, maryland, massachusetts, missouri, new jersey, new york, tennessee, texas and virginia; 11 the home depot landscape supply stores located in georgia and texas; and two the
home depot floor stores located in florida and texas. we also operated seven home decorators collection locations in illinois, kansas, missouri and oklahoma.
of
our 2,147 retail stores at the end of fiscal 2006, approximately 87% were owned (including those owned subject to a ground lease) consisting of approximately 196.0million square feet, and
approximately 13% of such stores were leased consisting of approximately 29.3million square feet. in recentyears, we have increased the relative percentage of new stores that are
owned. we generally prefer to own retail stores because of greater operating control and flexibility, generally lower occupancy costs and certain other economic advantages.
at
the end of fiscal 2006, our retail segment utilized 195 warehouses and distribution centers located in 42 states, consisting of approximately 28.2million square feet, of which approximately
2.0million is owned and approximately 26.2million is leased.
hd
supply consists of four major platforms: infrastructure, construction, maintenance and repair and remodel. the infrastructure platform consists of 325 u.s. branches in 41 states and four branches
in canada. the construction platform consists of 527 u.s. branches in 35 states and 56 branches in canada. the maintenance platform consists of 90 u.s. branches in 25 states and five branches in
canada. finally, the repair and remodel platform consists of 13 u.s. branches in two states. one or more platforms may operate multiple branches at one hd supply location.
of our 893 hd supply locations at the end of fiscal 2006, approximately 13% were owned (including those owned subject to a ground lease) and approximately 87% of such stores were leased. we generally
prefer to lease hd supply locations as it provides flexibility to relocate or expand with our hd supply customer base. additionally, hd supply had 66 u.s. warehouses and distribution centers located
in 19 states and two in canada to support other hd supply locations. the hd supply locations, warehouses and distribution centers utilized approximately 23.7million square feet, of which
approximately 2.8million is owned and approximately 20.9million is leased at the end of fiscal 2006.
our
executive, corporate staff, divisional staff and financial offices occupy approximately 2.0million square feet of leased and owned space in atlanta, georgia. at the end of fiscal 2006, we
occupied an aggregate of approximately 4.4million square feet, of which approximately 2.5million square feet is owned and approximately 1.9million square feet is leased, for
store support centers and customer support centers.
we
believe that at the end of existing lease terms, our current leased space can be either relet or replaced by alternate space for lease or purchase that is readily available.
item 3. legal proceedings.
in august2005, the company received an informal request from the staff of the sec for information related to the company's return-to-vendor
policies and procedures. the company has responded to this and subsequent requests and continues to fully cooperate with the sec staff. the sec has informed the company that the informal inquiry is
not an indication that any violations of law have occurred. although the company cannot predict the outcome of this matter, it does not expect that this informal inquiry will have a material adverse
effect on its consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
in
june2006, the sec commenced an informal inquiry into the company's stock option granting practices, and the office of the u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york has also
requested information on this subject. in addition, a subcommittee of the audit committee reviewed the company's historical stock option practices and engaged independent outside counsel to assist in
this matter. on december6, 2006, the company announced the results of this investigation. the company determined that the unrecorded expense from 1981 through the present is approximately
$227million in the aggregate, including related tax items. in accordance with the provisions of staff accounting bulletin no.108, "considering the effects of prior year misstatements
when quantifying misstatements
in current year financial statements," the company corrected these errors by decreasing beginning retained earnings for fiscal 2006 by $227million, with offsetting entries to
paid-in capital, other accrued expenses and deferred income taxes, within its consolidated financial statements. the company and the subcommittee are continuing to cooperate with the sec
and the office of u.s. attorney. although the company cannot predict the outcome of these matters, it does not believe they will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition
or results of operations.
the
following actions have been filed against the company and, in some cases, against certain of its current and former officers and directors as described below. although the company cannot predict
their outcome, it does not expect these actions, individually or together, will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
in
the second quarter of fiscal 2006, six purported, but as yet uncertified, class actions were filed against the company and certain of its current and former officers and directors in the u.s.
district court for the northern district of georgia in atlanta, alleging certain misrepresentations in violation of sections10(b)and 20(a)of the securities exchange act of 1934
and rule10b-5 thereunder in connection with the company's return-to-vendor practices. these actions were filed by certain current and former shareholders of
the company. in the third quarter of fiscal 2006, one of the shareholders
dismissed
his complaint. the court has preliminarily appointed a lead plaintiff, and the lead plaintiff has filed an amended complaint in each of the remaining five actions. relief sought in the
amended complaint includes unspecified damages and costs and attorney's fees. the defendants have filed a motion to dismiss the amended complaint. the company believes these actions are without merit
and intends to defend them vigorously.
in
the second and third quarters of fiscal 2006, three purported, but as yet uncertified, class actions were filed against the company, the home depot futurebuilder administrative committee and
certain of the company's current and former directors and employees in federal court in brooklyn, new york alleging breach of fiduciary duty in violation of the employee retirement income security act
of 1974 in connection with the company's return-to-vendor and stock option practices. these actions were transferred to the u.s. district court for the northern district of
georgia in atlanta. these actions were brought by certain former employees of the company and seek unspecified damages, costs, attorneys' fees and equitable and injunctive relief. the company believes
these actions are without merit and intends to defend them vigorously.
in
the second and third quarters of fiscal 2006, six shareholder derivative actions were filed nominally on behalf of the company against certain current and former officers and directors in the
superior court of fulton county, georgia, alleging breach of fiduciary duty, abuse of control, gross mismanagement, waste of corporate assets, and unjust enrichment in connection with the company's
return-to-vendor, stock option, and compensation practices. such actions
were filed by alleged shareholders of the company. relief sought in each action includes unspecified damages, injunctive relief, disgorgement of profits, benefits and compensation obtained by the
defendants, costs, and attorney's fees. subsequently, one joint amended complaint was filed on behalf of all plaintiffs encompassing all the various claims and seeking the same relief. the defendants
have moved to dismiss or alternatively stay the litigation.
in
the first quarter of fiscal 2007, one additional shareholder derivative action was filed nominally on behalf of the company against certain of the company's current directors and its former chief
executive officer in the u.s. district court for the northern district of georgia in atlanta, alleging breach of fiduciary duty, abuse of control, gross mismanagement, waste of corporate assets and
unjust enrichment in connection with the company's stock option and compensation practices. the action was filed by alleged shareholders of the company. relief sought in the action includes
unspecified damages, injunctive relief, punitive damages, and costs and attorneys' fees.
in
compliance with sec disclosure requirements, the environmental proceedings set forth below involve potential monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. although the company cannot predict the outcome
of these proceedings, it does not expect any such outcome to have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
in
january2003, home depot u.s.a.,inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the company, received a request for information from the u.s. environmental protection agency ("epa") regarding
alleged pollutant discharges during construction activities at certain the home depot stores. the epa subsequently referred this matter to the u.s. department of justice ("doj"). the doj and the
company are currently discussing the potential settlement of this matter.
in
april2005, the company received subpoenas from the state of new york's office of attorney general seeking documents and testimony related to the sale and handling of pesticides. the company
is cooperating fully with the office of attorney general and believes it is indemnified if monetary sanctions are imposed.
in
july2005, the company received a grand jury subpoena from the united states attorney's office in los angeles, california, seeking documents and information relating to the company's
handling, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. california state and local government authorities are also
investigating
this matter. in january2006, the company received an administrative subpoena from the district attorney of riverside county, california seeking records and documents in
connection with such investigation. the company is cooperating fully with the respective authorities. the california state and local authorities and the company are currently discussing the potential
settlement of this matter.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders.
not applicable.
item 4a. executive officers of the company.
executive officers of the company are appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the board of directors. the current executive officers of the company are as follows:
roger
w. adams, age 50, has been senior vice president and chief marketing officer since october2006. from february2005 through october2006, he served as the company's senior
vice president marketing. mr.adams previously served as executive director of corporate advertising, marketing and crm of general motors corporation from june2004
to january2005. from march1996 to june2004, he served as general manager of general motor's buick, pontiac and gmc division.
francis
s. blake, age 57, has been chairman and chief executive officer since january2007. from march2002 through january 2007, he served as the company's executive vice
president business development and corporate operations. he was formerly the deputy secretary of energy from june2001 until march2002. from june2000 until
may2001, he was a senior vice president at general electric company and was vice president of ge power systems from february1996 until july2000. mr.blake serves as a
director of the southern company.
timothy
m. crow, age 51, has been executive vice president human resources since february2007. from may2002 to february2007, he served as senior vice
president, organization, talent and performance systems. mr.crow previously served as senior vice president human resources of k-mart corporation, a mass
merchandising company, from 1999 through may2002.
joseph
j. deangelo, age 45, has been executive vice president and chief operating officer since january2007. from august2005 through december2006, he served as the company's
executive vice president home depot supply. from january2005 through august2005, he served as senior vice president home depot supply, pro
business and tool rental, and from april2004 through january2005, he served as senior vice president pro business and tool rental. mr.deangelo previously
served as executive vice president of the stanley works, a tool manufacturing company, from april2003 through april2004. from 1986 until april2003, mr.deangelo
held various positions with general electric company. his final position with ge was as president and chief executive officer of ge tip/modular space, a division of ge capital.
robert
p. derodes, age 56, has been executive vice president chief information officer since february2002. he previously served as president and chief executive officer of
delta technology,inc. and chief information officer for delta air lines,inc. from september1999 until february2002. from february1995 to september1999,
he served as senior technology officer at citibank for the card products group. from february1993 to february1995, he was president of sabre development services for the sabre group
holdings,inc., a subsidiary of american airlines,inc.
marvin
r. ellison, age 42, has been president northern division since january2006. from august2005 through january2006, he served as senior vice
president logistics and from october2004 through august2005 he served as vice president logistics. from june2002 through
october2004, he served as vice president loss prevention. from 1987 until june2002, mr.ellison
held
various management and executive level positions with target corporation, a general merchandise retailer. his final position with target was director, assets protection.
craig
a. menear, age 49, has been senior vice president merchandising since october2006. from august2003 through october2006, he has served as senior vice
president merchandising, hardlines. from 1997 through august2003, mr.menear served in various management and vice president level positions in the company's
merchandising department, including merchandising vice president of hardware, merchandising vice president of the southwest division, and divisional merchandise manager of the southwest division.
bruce
a. merino, age 53, has been president western division since may2000 and president, expo design center since october2005. from october1996 through
may2000, he served as merchandising vice president.
paul
raines, age 42, has been president southern division since february2005. prior thereto he served as regional vice president florida from
april2003 through january2005. from january2002 through april2003, mr.raines served as vice president store operations, and from
january2000 through january2002, mr.raines served as director of labor management.
ricardo
salvidar, age 54, has been president mexico since 2001. from 1980 to 2001, mr.salvidar held various management and executive level positions with grupo alfa, a
mexican
conglomerate. his final position with grupo alfa was president and chief executive officer of total home.
james
c. snyder, jr., age 43, has been vice president secretary and acting general counsel since february2007. from march2006 to february2007,
mr.snyder served as vice president legal, risk management. from march2004 to march2006 mr.snyder served as vice president
legal. prior thereto mr.snyder served as director, legal from november2002 to march2004. mr.snyder joined the company in march2001 as corporate counsel.
carol
b. tom, age 50, has been chief financial officer since may2001 and executive vice president corporate services since january2007. prior
thereto ms.tom served as senior vice president finance and accounting/treasurer from february2000 through may2001 and as vice president and
treasurer from 1995 through february2000. from 1992 until 1995, when she joined the company, ms.tom was vice president and treasurer of riverwood international
corporation, a provider of paperboard packaging. ms.tom serves as a director of united parcel service,inc.
annette
m. verschuren, age 50, has been president, the home depot canada since march1996 and president, the home depot asia since september2006. from february2003 through
october2005, she also served as president, expo design center.
part ii
item 5.market for registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities.
since april19, 1984, our common stock has been listed on the new york stock exchange, trading under the symbol "hd." the company paid its first cash dividend on
june22, 1987, and has paid cash dividends during each subsequent quarter. future dividend payments will depend on the company's earnings, capital requirements, financial condition and other
factors considered relevant by the board of directors.
the
table below sets forth the high and low sales prices of our common stock on the new york stock exchange and the quarterly cash dividends declared per share of common stock during the periods
indicated.
price range
cash dividends
declared
high
low
fiscal year 2006
first quarter ended april30, 2006
$
43.95
$
38.50
$
0.150
second quarter ended july30, 2006
$
41.61
$
32.85
$
0.150
third quarter ended october29, 2006
$
38.24
$
33.07
$
0.225
fourth quarter ended january28, 2007
$
41.84
$
35.77
$
0.225
fiscal year 2005
first quarter ended may1, 2005
$
42.99
$
34.56
$
0.100
second quarter ended july31, 2005
$
43.98
$
35.54
$
0.100
third quarter ended october30, 2005
$
43.39
$
37.14
$
0.100
fourth quarter ended january29, 2006
$
43.27
$
39.65
$
0.150
as
of march26, 2007, there were approximately 180,000 shareholders of record and approximately 1,700,000 additional shareholders holding stock under nominee security position listings.
stock performance graph
this graph depicts the company's cumulative total shareholder returns relative to the performance of the standard& poor's 500 composite stock index and the
standard& poor's retail composite index for the five-year period commencing february4, 2002, the first trading day of fiscal 2002, and ending on january26, 2007,
the last trading day of fiscal 2006. the graph assumes $100
invested at the closing price of the company's common stock on the new york stock exchange and each index on february1, 2002 and assumes that all dividends were reinvested on the date paid.
the points on the graph represent fiscal year-end amounts based on the last trading day in each fiscal year.
fiscal 2001
fiscal 2002
fiscal 2003
fiscal 2004
fiscal 2005
fiscal 2006
the home depot
$
100.00
$
42.57
$
72.88
$
83.75
$
83.72
$
85.12
s&p 500 index
$
100.00
$
77.53
$
104.34
$
109.90
$
122.67
$
138.49
s&p retail composite index
$
100.00
$
71.95
$
107.54
$
123.56
$
134.39
$
150.06
issuer purchases of equity securities
since fiscal 2002, the company has repurchased shares of its common stock having a value of approximately $16.4billion. the number and average price of shares purchased
in each fiscal month of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006 are set forth in the table below:
period
total number of
shares purchased(1)
average
price paid
per share
total number of
shares purchased as
part of publicly
announced program(2)
approximate dollar
value of shares
that mayyet be
purchased under
the program
oct. 30, 2006 nov. 26, 2006
3,331,219
$
36.93
3,294,598
$
4,116,600,751
nov. 27, 2006 dec. 24, 2006
75,065,717
$
39.97
75,056,293
$
1,116,575,324
dec. 25, 2006 jan. 28, 2007
295,277
$
40.39
$
1,116,575,324
(1) these amounts include repurchases pursuant to the company's 1997 and 2005 omnibus stock incentive plans (the "plans"). under the plans, participants may exercise stock options by
surrendering shares of common stock that the participants already own as payment of the exercise price. participants in the plans may also surrender shares as payment of applicable tax withholding on
the vesting of restricted stock and deferred share awards. shares so surrendered by participants in the plans are repurchased pursuant to the terms of the plans and applicable award agreement and not
pursuant to publicly announced share repurchase programs. for the quarter ended january28, 2007, the following shares of the home depot common stock were surrendered by participants in the
plans and included in the total number of shares purchased: oct.30, 2006 nov.26, 200636,621 shares at an average price per share of
$37.82; nov.27, 2006 dec.24, 20069,424 shares at an average price per share of $39.35; dec.25, 2006
jan.28, 2007295,277 shares at an average price per share of $40.39.
(2) the company's common stock repurchase program was initially announced on july15, 2002. as of the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006, the board had
approved purchases up
to $17.5billion. the program does not have a prescribed expiration date.
sales of unregistered securities
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006, the company issued 5,805 deferred stock units under the home depot,inc. nonemployee directors' deferred stock compensation
plan pursuant to the exemption from registration provided by section4(2)of the securities act of 1933, as amended. the deferred stock units were credited to the accounts of such
nonemployee directors who elected to receive board and committee fees in the form of deferred stock units instead of receiving such fees in cash as payment for board and committee meetings held during
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006. the deferred stock units convert to shares of common stock on a one-for-one basis following a termination of service as described in this
plan.
during
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006, the company credited 884 deferred stock units to participant accounts under the home depot futurebuilder restoration plan pursuant to an exemption from the
registration requirements of the securities act of 1933, as amended, for involuntary, non-contributory plans. the deferred stock units convert to shares of common stock on a
one-for-one basis following the termination of services as described in this plan.
item 6. selected financial data.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to pagesf-1 and f-2 of this report.
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.
executive summary and selected consolidated statements of earnings data
for fiscal year ended january28, 2007 ("fiscal 2006"), we reported net earnings of $5.8billion and diluted earnings per share of $2.79 compared to net earnings
of $5.8billion and diluted earnings per share of $2.72 for fiscal year ended january29, 2006 ("fiscal 2005"). net sales increased 11.4% to $90.8billion for fiscal 2006 from
$81.5billion for fiscal 2005. our gross profit margin was 32.8% and our operating margin was 10.7% for fiscal 2006.
in
the face of a slowdown in the housing market, our retail comparable store sales declined 2.8% in fiscal 2006 driven by a decline in comparable store customer transactions. this was partially offset
by an increase in our average ticket of 1.6% in fiscal 2006 to $58.90, including increases in 8 of 10 selling departments.
we
grew our numerous installation and home maintenance programs serving our do-it-for-me customers through our stores. our retail services revenue increased 8.3% to
$3.8billion for fiscal 2006. we experienced sustained growth in categories such as countertops, exterior patios, solar, windows and hvac.
we
continued to introduce innovative and distinctive merchandise that reflects emerging consumer trends, supported by continued investments in store modernization and technology. we invested
$3.5billion in capital expenditures during fiscal 2006 primarily for new store construction, store modernization and technology. we began an accelerated store reinvestment program whereby we
increased our investment in existing stores by $350million more than our plan in the second half of fiscal 2006 to enhance the customer experience. this investment included capital and expense
dollars to reset 100 merchandise bays in 540 stores, incorporate a richer staffing model and support our "orange juiced" program, a customer service incentive program for our store associates.
we
added 125 new stores in fiscal 2006, including 12 stores through our acquisition of the home way, a chinese home improvement retailer, and 10 relocations, bringing our total store count at the end
of fiscal 2006 to 2,147. as of the end of fiscal 2006, 228, or approximately 11%, of our stores were located in canada, mexico or china compared to 191, or approximately 9%, at the end of fiscal 2005.
we
have expanded our business by capturing a growing share of the professional residential, commercial and heavy construction markets through the growth of hd supply. hd supply experienced 162% net
sales growth in fiscal 2006 and accounted for approximately 13% of our total net sales in fiscal 2006. we completed 12 acquisitions in fiscal 2006 that were integrated into hd supply, including hughes
supply,inc., a leading distributor of construction and repair products. organic net sales growth for the hd supply segment was 5.6% in fiscal 2006.
in
february2007, we announced our decision to evaluate strategic alternatives for hd supply. in order to maximize the value of hd supply, we would need to further integrate it with our retail
business. we are currently evaluating whether this integration or other strategic alternatives, such as a sale or initial public offering of the business, would create the most shareholder value.
we
generated $7.7billion of cash flow from operations in fiscal 2006. we used this cash flow, along with the net proceeds of additional borrowings of $7.6billion, to fund
$8.1billion of share repurchases and dividends, $4.3billion in acquisitions and $3.5billion in capital expenditures. at the end of fiscal 2006, our long-term
debt-to-equity ratio was 47%. our return on invested capital (computed on beginning long-term debt and equity for the trailing four quarters) was 20.5% at the end
of fiscal 2006 compared to 22.4% for fiscal 2005.
we
believe the selected sales data, the percentage relationship between net sales and major categories in the consolidated statements of earnings and the percentage change in the dollar amounts of
each of the items presented as follows is important in evaluating the performance of our business operations.
% of net sales
% increase
(decrease)
in dollar amounts
fiscal year(1)
vs. 2005
vs. 2004
net sales
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
11.4
%
11.5
%
gross profit
32.8
33.5
33.4
9.0
11.8
operating expenses:
selling, general and administrative
20.2
20.2
20.9
11.3
8.1
depreciation and amortization
1.9
1.8
1.7
19.7
17.9
total operating expenses
22.1
22.0
22.6
12.0
8.8
operating income
10.7
11.5
10.8
3.3
18.1
interest income (expense):
interest and investment income
0.1
0.1
(56.5
)
10.7
interest expense
(0.4
)
(0.2
)
(0.1
)
174.1
104.3
interest, net
(0.4
)
(0.1
)
350.6
478.6
earnings before provision for
income taxes
10.3
11.4
10.8
0.3
17.3
provision for income taxes
4.0
4.2
4.0
3.0
18.3
net earnings
6.3
%
7.2
%
6.8
%
(1.3
)%
16.7
%
selected sales data(2)
number of retail customer transactions (millions)
1,330
1,330
1,295
0.0
%
2.7
%
average ticket
$
58.90
$
57.98
$
54.89
1.6
5.6
weighted average weekly sales per
operating store (000s)
$
$
$
(5.2
)
(0.4
)
weighted average sales per square foot
$
357.83
$
377.01
$
375.26
(5.1
)
0.5
retail comparable store sales (decrease)
increase (%)(3)
(2.8
)%
3.1
%
5.1
%
n/a
n/a
(1) fiscalyears 2006, 2005 and 2004 refer to the fiscalyears ended january28, 2007, january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, respectively.
fiscalyears 2006, 2005 and 2004 include 52 weeks.
(2) includes retail segment only.
(3) includes net sales at locations open greater than 12months, including relocated and remodeled stores. retail stores become comparable on the monday following
their
365th day of operation. retail comparable store sales is intended only as supplemental information and is not a substitute for net sales or net earnings presented in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles.
results of operations
for an understanding of the significant factors that influenced our performance during the past three fiscalyears, the following discussion should be read in
conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to consolidated financial statements presented in this report.
we
operate in two reportable business segments: retail and hd supply. the retail segment is principally engaged in the operation of retail stores located in the united states, canada, mexico and our
recently acquired stores in china. the hd supply segment distributes products and sells installation services to business-to-business customers, including home builders,
professional contractors, municipalities and maintenance professionals. we identify segments based on how management makes operating decisions, assesses performance and allocates resources. the first
quarter of fiscal 2006 was the first period in which we began to report our results of operations in two segments. this change was a result of the purchase of hughes supply, which significantly
increased the size of hd supply and resulted in changes in our internal reporting and management structure.
the
retail segment includes the home depot stores, expo design center stores ("expo") and other retail formats. the retail segment also includes our retail services business and our catalog and
on-line sales businesses.
the
hd supply segment consists of four major platforms: 1)infrastructure, including waterworks and utilities; 2)construction, including construction supply, lumber and building
materials, electrical, plumbing/hvac and interiors; 3)maintenance, including facilities maintenance and industrial pvf; and 4)repair and remodel.
fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005
net sales
total net sales for fiscal 2006 increased 11.4%, or $9.3billion, to $90.8billion from $81.5billion for fiscal 2005. of the $9.3billion increase,
$7.3billion, net of intercompany sales, came from our hd supply segment and $2.0billion came from our retail segment.
net
sales for our retail segment were $79.0billion for fiscal 2006, a 2.6% increase over fiscal 2005. fiscal 2006 retail segment net sales growth was primarily driven by sales from new stores.
retail comparable store sales decreased 2.8% for fiscal 2006 compared to an increase of 3.1% for fiscal 2005. the decline in retail comparable store sales was driven by a 4.6% decline in comparable
store customer transactions offset in part by a 1.6% increase in average ticket. our average ticket increased to $58.90 for fiscal 2006 and increased in 8 of 10 selling departments. the decrease in
retail comparable store sales for fiscal 2006 was due to the significant slowdown in the u.s. retail home improvement market as well as difficult year-over-year comparisons due
to sales arising from hurricane activity in fiscal 2005. both canada and mexico, however, experienced positive retail comparable store sales for fiscal 2006. additionally, our retail comparable store
sales results reflect in part the impact of cannibalization. in order to meet our customer service objectives, we strategically open stores near market areas served by existing stores ("cannibalize")
to enhance service levels, gain incremental sales and increase market penetration. our new stores cannibalized approximately 13.5% of our existing stores during fiscal 2006, which had a negative
impact to retail comparable store sales of approximately 1.9%.
despite
the difficult u.s. retail home improvement market, we continued to expand our retail services revenue, which increased 8.3% to $3.8billion for fiscal 2006 from $3.5billion for
fiscal 2005. the growth in retail services revenue was driven by strength in a number of areas including countertops, exterior patios, solar, windows and hvac. our retail services programs focus
primarily on providing products and services to our do-it-for-me customers. our services revenue is expected to benefit from the growing percentage of aging
"baby-boomers" as they rely more heavily on installation services.
net
sales for our hd supply segment for fiscal 2006 were $12.1billion, an increase of 162% over fiscal 2005. the increase was primarily a result of recent acquisitions. organic net sales
growth for the hd supply segment was 5.6% in fiscal 2006, which includes the impact of commodity price inflation and market share gains.
we
believe that our sales performance has been, and could continue to be, negatively impacted by the level of competition that we encounter in various markets. due to the highly-fragmented u.s. home
improvement and professional supply industry, in which we estimate our market share is approximately 10%, measuring the impact on our sales by our competitors is difficult.
gross profit
total gross profit increased 9.0% to $29.8billion for fiscal 2006 from $27.3billion for fiscal 2005. gross profit as a percent of net sales decreased 73 basis
points to 32.8% for fiscal 2006 compared to 33.5% for fiscal 2005. the decline in total gross profit as a percent of net sales was primarily due to a higher penetration of the lower margin hd supply
segment. in fiscal 2006, 65 basis points of the total gross profit decline was a result of a higher penetration of hd supply businesses as well as a drop in hd supply's gross profit rate due to a
change in the mix of businesses owned.
operating expenses
operating expenses increased 12.0% to $20.1billion for fiscal 2006 from $18.0billion for fiscal 2005. operating expenses as a percent of net sales were 22.1%
for fiscal 2006 compared to 22.0% for fiscal 2005.
selling,
general and administrative expenses ("sg&a") increased 11.3% to $18.3billion for fiscal 2006 from $16.5billion for fiscal 2005. as a percent of net sales, sg&a was 20.2% for
fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005. the increase in sg&a during fiscal 2006 was due to added associate laborhours on the floor of our stores, increased spending on store maintenance programs and the
expansion of merchandise display resets. this increase was partially offset by reduced self-insurance costs as we continue to realize benefits from safety programs and other initiatives.
fiscal 2006 sg&a also reflects benefits from our private label credit card, which carries a lower discount rate than other forms of credit, like bank cards. through our private label credit card we
offer no interest/no payment programs. the cost of deferred interest associated with these programs is included in cost of sales. we believe these programs deliver long-term benefits,
including higher average ticket and customer loyalty. for fiscal 2006, the penetration of our private label credit sales was 28.0% compared to 25.6% for fiscal 2005.
also
impacting our sg&a in fiscal 2006 is expense associated with executive severance of $129million and the adoption of statement of financial accounting standards ("sfas") no.123(r),
"share-based payment" ("sfas123(r)"), whereby we recorded approximately $40million of stock compensation expense related to the continued vesting of options granted prior to fiscal
2003. partially offsetting the increase in sg&a was $91million of impairment charges and expense related to lease obligations associated with the closing of 20 expo stores in fiscal 2005.
depreciation
and amortization increased 19.7% to $1.8billion for fiscal 2006 from $1.5billion for fiscal 2005. depreciation and amortization as a percent of net sales was 1.9% for
fiscal 2006 and 1.8% for fiscal 2005. the increase as a percent of net sales was primarily due to the amortization of intangible assets acquired as part of our recent acquisitions and the depreciation
of our investments in store modernization and technology.
interest, net
in fiscal 2006, we recognized $365million of net interest expense compared to $81million in fiscal 2005. net interest expense as a percent of net sales was 0.4%
for fiscal 2006 compared to 0.1% for fiscal 2005. the increase was primarily due to additional interest incurred related to the march2006 issuance of $1.0billion of 5.20% senior notes
and $3.0billion of 5.40% senior notes and the december2006 issuance of $750million of floating rate senior notes, $1.25billion of 5.25% senior notes and
$3.0billion of 5.875% senior notes.
provision for income taxes
our combined federal, state and foreign effective income tax rate increased to 38.1% for fiscal 2006 from 37.1% for fiscal 2005. the increase in our effective income tax rate
for fiscal 2006 was primarily due to the impact of a retroactive tax assessment from the canadian province of quebec. during the second quarter of fiscal 2006, the quebec national assembly passed
legislation that retroactively changed certain tax laws that subjected us to additional tax and interest. as a result, we received an assessment from quebec for $57million in retroactive tax
and $12million in related interest for the 2002 through 2005 taxableyears.
diluted earnings per share
diluted earnings per share were $2.79 for fiscal 2006 and $2.72 for fiscal 2005. diluted earnings per share were favorably impacted in both fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005 by the
repurchase of shares of our common stock under our $17.5billion repurchase authorization. since the inception of the program in 2002, we have repurchased 451million shares of our
common stock for a total of $16.4billion, including $5billion through accelerated share repurchases in fiscal 2006. as of january28, 2007, we had $1.1billion remaining
under our authorized share repurchase program.
fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal year ended january30, 2005 ("fiscal 2004")
net sales
net sales for fiscal 2005 increased 11.5% to $81.5billion from $73.1billion for fiscal 2004. fiscal 2005 net sales growth was driven by an increase in retail
comparable store sales of 3.1%, sales from new stores opened during fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004 and sales from our newly acquired businesses within hd supply.
the
increase in retail comparable store sales in fiscal 2005 reflects a number of factors. our average ticket, which increased 5.6% to $57.98, increased in all selling departments and our retail
comparable store sales growth in fiscal 2005 was positive in 9 of 10 selling departments. building materials had the strongest retail comparable store sales increase through sales growth of gypsum,
roofing, concrete and insulation, due in part to the impact of one of the most destructive hurricane seasons in modern u.s. history. we experienced strong retail comparable store sales growth in
kitchen and bath driven by continued growth in appliances and kitchen installations. we also experienced strong retail comparable store sales in our pro categories, including plumbing, electrical and
hardware in fiscal 2005. the impact of cannibalization partially offset our fiscal 2005 retail comparable store sales growth. as of the end of fiscal 2005, certain new stores cannibalized
approximately 20% of our existing stores and we estimate that store cannibalization reduced fiscal 2005 retail comparable store sales by approximately 1.8%.
the
growth in net sales for fiscal 2005 also reflects growth in services revenue, which increased 16.6% to $3.5billion for fiscal 2005 from $3.0billion for fiscal 2004. the growth in
services revenue was driven by strength in a number of areas including countertops, roofing, kitchens, windows and hvac.
gross profit
gross profit increased 11.8% to $27.3billion for fiscal 2005 from $24.4billion for fiscal 2004. gross profit as a percent of net sales increased 10 basis points
to 33.5% for fiscal 2005, the highest annual rate in our company's history. our gross profit margin was impacted by a number of factors during the
year including a change in the mix of merchandise sold, markdowns taken in connection with our decision to close 20 expo stores, the increasing penetration of our hd supply business and the cost of
our deferred interest programs. for fiscal 2005, the penetration of our private label credit sales was 25.6% compared to 24.1% for fiscal 2004.
operating expenses
operating expenses increased 8.8% to $18.0billion for fiscal 2005 from $16.5billion for fiscal 2004. operating expenses as a percent of net sales were 22.0% for
fiscal 2005 compared to 22.6% for fiscal 2004.
sg&a
increased 8.1% to $16.5billion for fiscal 2005 from $15.3billion for fiscal 2004. as a percent of net sales, sg&a was 20.2% for fiscal 2005 compared to 20.9% for fiscal 2004. the
reduction of sg&a as a percent of net sales for fiscal 2005 was primarily a result of continued focus on cost take-out initiatives and driving productivity gains throughout the company. we
also continue to see benefits from our private label credit card, which carries a lower discount rate than other forms of credit, like bank cards. in fiscal 2005, we recorded $52million of
income related to gift card breakage as a reduction of sg&a. fiscal 2005 was the first year in which we recognized gift card breakage, and therefore, the amount recognized in fiscal 2005 includes the
breakage income related to gift cards sold since the inception of our gift card program. finally, for fiscal 2005, we recorded $91million of impairment charges and expense related to lease
obligations in connection with our decision to close 20 expo stores.
depreciation
and amortization increased 17.9% to $1.5billion for fiscal 2005 from $1.2billion for fiscal 2004. depreciation and amortization as a percent of net sales was 1.8% for
fiscal 2005 and 1.7% for fiscal 2004. the increase as a percent of net sales was primarily due to our investments in store modernization and technology.
interest, net
in fiscal 2005, we recognized $81million of net interest expense compared to $14million in fiscal 2004. net interest expense as a percent of net sales was 0.1%
for fiscal 2005 and less than 0.1% for fiscal 2004. interest expense increased to $143million for fiscal 2005 from $70million for fiscal 2004 primarily due to additional interest
incurred related to the august2005 $1.0billion issuance of 4.625% senior notes and the september2004 $1.0billion issuance of 3.75% senior notes. interest and investment
income increased 10.7% to $62million for fiscal 2005 from $56million for fiscal 2004 due primarily to a higher interest rate environment.
provision for income taxes
our combined federal and state effective income tax rate increased to 37.1% for fiscal 2005 from 36.8% for fiscal 2004. the majority of the increase in our effective income tax
rate was due to an increase in the state effective tax rate in fiscal 2005.
diluted earnings per share
diluted earnings per share were $2.72 and $2.26 for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. diluted earnings per share were favorably impacted in both fiscal 2005 and fiscal
2004 as a result of the repurchase of shares of our common stock.
liquidity and capital resources
cash flow generated from operations provides a significant source of liquidity. for fiscal 2006, net cash provided by operating activities was $7.7billion as compared
to $6.6billion for fiscal 2005. the increase was primarily a result of more productive working capital in fiscal 2006.
net
cash used in investing activities increased to $7.6billion for fiscal 2006 from $4.6billion for fiscal 2005. this increase was primarily the result of an increase in payments for
businesses acquired of $1.7billion as well as a decrease in net proceeds from sales and maturities of investments of $1.7billion, partially offset by a $339million decrease in
capital expenditures. we paid $4.3billion to complete 15 acquisitions in fiscal 2006, including hughes supply. our fiscal 2006 acquisitions resulted in increases in receivables, merchandise
inventories, goodwill, other assets and accounts payable in the consolidated balance sheet as of january28, 2007. see note11 to our "notes to consolidated financial statements"
included in item 8 of this report for further discussion.
additionally
in fiscal 2006, we spent $3.5billion on capital expenditures, allocated as follows: 64% for new stores, 11% for store modernization, 6% for technology and 19% for other
initiatives. in fiscal 2006, we added 125 new stores, including 12 stores in china through our acquisition of the home way, and 10 relocations.
net
cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2006 was $203million compared with $1.7billion for fiscal 2005. the decrease in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due
to net proceeds of $7.6billion from the issuance of additional long-term debt, partially offset by a net increase of $4.2billion in repurchases of common stock and cash
dividends paid to stockholders.
in
february2006, may2006 and august2006, our board of directors authorized an additional $1.0billion, $2.0billion and $3.5billion, respectively, in our
share repurchase program, bringing the total authorization by our board of directors since inception of the program in 2002 to $17.5billion as of january28, 2007. pursuant to this
authorization, we have repurchased approximately 451million shares of our common stock for a total of $16.4billion as of january28, 2007. during fiscal 2006, we repurchased
approximately 174million shares of our common stock for $6.7billion and during fiscal 2005 we repurchased approximately 76million shares of our common stock for
$3.0billion. as of january28, 2007, approximately $1.1billion remained under our share repurchase program. during fiscal 2006, we also increased dividends paid by 62.8% to
$1.4billion from $857million in fiscal 2005.
we
have a commercial paper program that allows for borrowings up to $2.5billion. in connection with the program, we have a back-up credit facility with a consortium of banks for
borrowings up to $2.0billion. as of january28, 2007, there were no borrowings outstanding under the commercial paper program or the credit facility. the credit facility, which expires
in december2010, contains various restrictions, none of which is expected to impact our liquidity or capital resources.
we
use capital and operating leases to finance a portion of our real estate, including our stores, distribution centers, hd supply locations and store support centers. the net present value of capital
lease obligations is reflected in our consolidated balance sheets in long-term debt. in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the operating leases are not reflected in
our consolidated balance sheets. as of the end of fiscal 2006, our long-term debt-to-equity ratio was 46.5% compared to 9.9% at the end of fiscal 2005. this
increase reflects the net increase in long-term debt as a result of the issuance of senior notes in marchand decemberof fiscal 2006.
as
of january28, 2007, we had $614million in cash and short-term investments. we believe that our current cash position and cash flow generated from operations should be
sufficient to enable us to complete our capital expenditure programs and any required long-term debt payments through the next several fiscalyears. in addition, we have funds
available from the $2.5billion commercial paper program and the ability to obtain alternative sources of financing for other requirements.
in
march2006, we entered into a forward starting interest rate swap agreement with a notional amount of $2.0billion, accounted for as a cash flow hedge, to hedge interest rate
fluctuations in anticipation of the issuance of the 5.40% senior notes due march1, 2016. upon issuance of the hedged debt, we settled our forward starting interest rate swap agreement and
recorded a $12million decrease, net of income taxes, to accumulated other comprehensive income, which will be amortized to interest expense over the life of the related debt.
in
may2006, we entered into a $2billion accelerated share repurchase agreement with a financial institution pursuant to which we repurchased approximately 53million shares of
our common stock. under the agreement, the financial institution purchased an equivalent number of shares of our common stock in the open market. the shares repurchased by us were subject to a future
purchase price adjustment based upon the weighted average price of our common stock over an agreed period, subject to a specified collar. in august2006, we settled the accelerated share
repurchase. we elected settlement in cash and received $61million from the financial institution, which was recorded as an offset to our cost of treasury stock.
in
october2006, we entered into a forward starting interest rate swap agreement with a notional amount of $1.0billion, accounted for as a cash flow hedge, to hedge interest rate
fluctuations in anticipation of the issuance of the 5.875% senior notes due december16, 2036. upon issuance of the hedged debt in december2006, we settled our forward starting interest
rate swap agreement and recorded an $11million decrease, net of income taxes, to accumulated other comprehensive income, which will be amortized to interest expense over the life of the
related debt.
in
december2006, we entered into a $3billion accelerated share repurchase agreement with a financial institution pursuant to which we repurchased approximately 75million shares
of our common stock. under the agreement, the financial institution purchased an equivalent number of shares of our common stock in the open market. the shares repurchased by us were subject to a
future purchase price adjustment based upon the weighted average price of our common stock over an agreed period. in march2007, we settled the accelerated share repurchase. we elected
settlement in cash and received $36million from the financial institution, which was recorded as an offset to our cost of treasury stock in fiscal 2007.
the following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of january28, 2007 (amounts inmillions):
payments due by fiscal year
contractual obligations(1)
total
2008-2009
2010-2011
thereafter
total debt(2)
$
19,358
$
$
3,224
$
2,946
$
12,581
capital lease obligations(3)
1,323
operating leases
9,131
1,580
1,213
5,421
subtotal
$
29,812
$
1,602
$
4,961
$
4,319
$
18,930
amount of commitment expiration per fiscal year
commercial commitments(4)
total
2008-2009
2010-2011
thereafter
letters of credit
$
1,238
$
1,230
$
$
$
purchase obligations(5)
2,741
1,379
1,336
guarantees
subtotal
4,051
2,681
1,344
total
$
33,863
$
4,283
$
6,305
$
4,341
$
18,934
(1) contractual obligations include long-term debt comprised primarily of $11billion of senior notes further discussed in "quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk" and future minimum lease payments under capital and operating leases used in the normal course of business.
(2) excludes present value of capital lease obligations of $419million. includes $8.0billion of interest payments and $69million of unamortized
discount.
(3) includes $904million of imputed interest.
(4) commercial commitments include letters of credit from certain business transactions, purchase obligations and commitments to purchase store assets. we issue letters
of credit for
insurance programs, purchases of import merchandise inventories and construction contracts. our purchase obligations consist of commitments for both merchandise and services.
(5) purchase obligations include all legally binding contracts such as firm commitments for inventory purchases, utility purchases, capital expenditures, software
acquisition and license
commitments and legally binding service contracts. purchase orders that are not binding agreements are excluded from the table above. additionally, we have included a commitment to purchase the
underlying asset under an off-balance sheet lease related to certain stores for $282million during 2008.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
our exposure to market risk results primarily from fluctuations in interest rates. although we have international operating entities, our exposure to foreign currency rate
fluctuations is not significant to our financial condition and results of operations. our primary objective for entering into derivative instruments is to manage our exposure to interest rates, as
well as to maintain an appropriate mix of fixed and variable rate debt.
as
of january28, 2007 we had, net of discounts, $10.9billion of senior notes outstanding. the market values of the publicly traded senior notes as of january28, 2007, were
approximately $10.9billion.
impact of inflation, deflation and changing prices
we have experienced inflation and deflation related to our purchase of certain commodity products. during fiscal 2006, lumber prices decreased our comparable store sales by
approximately 43 basis
points.
we do not believe that changing prices for commodities have had a material effect on our net sales or results of operations. although we cannot precisely determine the overall effect of
inflation and deflation on operations, we do not believe inflation and deflation have had a material effect on our results of operations.
critical accounting policies
our significant accounting policies are disclosed in note1 of our consolidated financial statements. the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting
policies, which are those that are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require significant judgment or use of complex estimates.
revenue recognition
we recognize revenue, net of estimated returns, at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise or receives services. we estimate the liability for sales returns
based on our historical return levels. we believe that our estimate for sales returns is an accurate reflection of future returns. we have never recorded a significant adjustment to our estimated
liability for sales returns. however, if these estimates are significantly below the actual amounts, our sales could be adversely impacted. when we receive payment from customers before the customer
has taken possession of the merchandise or the service has been performed, the amount received is recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets until the sale or service
is complete.
merchandise inventories
our merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market, with approximately 80% valued under the retail inventory
method and the remainder under the cost method. retailers like the home depot, with many different types of merchandise at low unit cost and a large number of transactions, frequently use the retail
inventory method. under the retail inventory method, merchandise inventories are stated at cost, which is determined by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the ending retail
value of inventories. as our inventory retail value is adjusted regularly to reflect market conditions, our inventory valued under the retail method approximates the lower of cost or market. we
evaluate our inventory valued under the cost method at the end of each quarter to ensure that it is carried at the lower of cost or market. the valuation allowance for merchandise inventories valued
under the cost method was not material to the consolidated financial statements of the company as of the end of fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005.
independent
physical inventory counts or cycle counts are taken on a regular basis in each store, distribution center and hd supply location to ensure that amounts reflected in the accompanying
consolidated financial statements for merchandise inventories are properly stated. during the period between physical inventory counts in our stores, we accrue for estimated losses related to shrink
on a store-by-store basis. shrink (or in the case of excess inventory, "swell") is the difference between the recorded amount of inventory and the physical inventory. shrink
may occur due to theft, loss, inaccurate records for the receipt of inventory or deterioration of goods, among other things. we estimate shrink as a percent of net sales using the average shrink
results from the previous two physical inventories. the estimates are evaluated quarterly and adjusted based on recent shrink results and current trends in the business.
self-insurance
we are self-insured for certain losses related to general liability, product liability, automobile, workers' compensation and medical claims. our liability
represents an estimate of the ultimate cost of claims incurred as of the balance sheet date. the estimated liability is not discounted and is established based
upon
analysis of historical data and actuarial estimates, and is reviewed by management and third-party actuaries on a quarterly basis to ensure that the liability is appropriate. while we believe
these estimates are reasonable based on the information currently available, if actual trends, including the severity or frequency of claims, medical cost inflation, or fluctuations in premiums,
differ from our estimates, our results of operations could be impacted.
vendor allowances
vendor allowances primarily consist of volume rebates that are earned as a result of attaining certain purchase levels and advertising co-op allowances for the
promotion of vendors' products that are typically based on guaranteed minimum amounts with additional amounts being earned for attaining certain purchase levels. these vendor allowances are accrued as
earned, with those allowances received as a result of attaining certain purchase levels accrued over the incentive period based on estimates of purchases. we believe that our estimate of vendor
allowances earned based on expected volume of purchases over the incentive period is an accurate reflection of the ultimate allowance to be received from our vendors.
volume
rebates and advertising co-op allowances earned are initially recorded as a reduction in merchandise inventories and a subsequent reduction in cost of sales when the related product
is sold. certain advertising co-op allowances that are reimbursements of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred to promote vendors' products are recorded as an offset
against advertising expense.
recent accounting pronouncements
in september2006, the securities and exchange commission ("sec") issued staff accounting bulletin no.108, "considering the effects of prior year misstatements
when quantifying misstatements in current year financial statements" ("sab 108"). sab 108 addresses the process of quantifying prior year financial statement misstatements and their impact on current
year financial statements. the provisions of sab 108 allow companies to report the cumulative effect of correcting immaterial prior year misstatements, based on the company's historical method for
evaluating misstatements, by adjusting the opening balance of retained earnings in the current year financial statements rather than amending previously filed reports. sab 108 also requires disclosure
of the nature and amount of each individual error being corrected, how the event arose and the fact that the errors are considered immaterial to the prior year financial statements. sab 108 is
effective for fiscalyears ending after november15, 2006, and therefore was effective for the home depot in fiscal 2006. see note2 to our "notes to consolidated financial
statements" included in item 8 of this report for further discussion.
in
july2006, the financial accounting standards board ("fasb") issued fasb interpretation no.48, "accounting for uncertainty in income taxes an interpretation of
fasb statement no.109" ("fin 48"). fin 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income tax reporting by prescribing a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial
statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. fin 48 requires that companies recognize tax benefits in their financial statements for a tax
position only if that position is more likely than not of being sustained on audit, based on the technical merits of the position. additionally, fin 48 provides guidance on de-recognition,
classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. fin 48 becomes effective for
fiscalyears beginning after december15, 2006, and will therefore be effective for the home depot in fiscal 2007. the cumulative impact of adopting fin 48 in fiscal 2007 is not expected
to have a material impact on the financial condition of the company.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to item 7. "management's discussion and analysis of financial conditions and results of operations" of this
report.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data.
management's responsibility for financial statements
the financial statements presented in this annual report have been prepared with integrity and objectivity and are the responsibility of the management of the home
depot,inc. these financial statements have been prepared in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles and properly reflect certain estimates and judgments based upon the
best available information.
the
financial statements of the company have been audited by kpmg llp, an independent registered public accounting firm. their accompanying report is based upon an audit conducted in accordance with
the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).
the
audit committee of the board of directors, consisting solely of outside directors, meets five times a year with the independent registered public accounting firm, the internal auditors and
representatives of management to discuss auditing and financial reporting matters. in addition, a telephonic meeting is held prior to each quarterly earnings release. the audit committee retains the
independent registered public accounting firm and regularly reviews the internal accounting controls, the activities of the independent registered public accounting firm and internal auditors and the
financial condition of the
company. both the company's independent registered pubic accounting firm and the internal auditors have free access to the audit committee.
management's report on internal control over financial reporting
our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in
rule13a-15(f)promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended. under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our principal
executive officer and principal financial officer, we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in  internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based
on our evaluation, our management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of january28, 2007 in providing reasonable assurance regarding reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. our management's assessment of the effectiveness of
our internal control over financial reporting as of january28, 2007 has been audited by kpmg llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in its report which is included
herein.
/s/ francis s. blake
/s/ carol b. tom
francis s. blake
chairman&
chief executive officer
carol b. tom
chief financial officer&
executive vice president corporate services
report of independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and stockholders
the home depot,inc.:
we
have audited management's assessment, included in the accompanying management's report on internal control over financial reporting, that the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries maintained
effective internal control over financial reporting as of january28, 2007, based on criteria established in internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the company's management is responsible for maintaining effective internal
control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on management's assessment and an
opinion on the effectiveness of the company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
we
conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over
financial reporting, evaluating management's assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
a
company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a company's internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)pertain
to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company's assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
in
our opinion, management's assessment that the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of january28, 2007, is fairly
stated, in all material respects, based on criteria established in internal control integrated framework issued by the committee of
sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). also, in our opinion, the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over
financial reporting as of january28, 2007, based on criteria established in internal control integrated framework issued by
the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso).
we
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated balance sheets of the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries
as of january28, 2007 and january29, 2006, and the related consolidated statements of earnings, stockholders' equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the
fiscalyears in the three-year period ended january28, 2007, and our report dated march21, 2007 expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated financial
statements. our report refers to the company's adoption of securities and exchange commission staff accounting bulletin no.108, considering the effects of prior year
misstatements when quantifying misstatements in the current year financial statements, effective january30, 2006, the beginning of the fiscal year ended
january28, 2007.
/s/
kpmg llp
atlanta,
georgia
march21, 2007
report of independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and stockholders
the home depot,inc.:
we
have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries as of january28, 2007 and january29, 2006, and the related consolidated
statements of earnings, stockholders' equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the fiscalyears in the three-year period ended january28, 2007. these
consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the company's management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
we
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
in
our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries as of
january28, 2007 and january29, 2006, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the fiscalyears in the three-year period ended
january28, 2007, in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles.
as
discussed in note2 to the consolidated financial statements, effective january30, 2006, the beginning of the fiscal year ended january28, 2007, the company adopted
securities and exchange commission staff accounting bulletin no.108, considering the effects of prior year misstatements when quantifying misstatements in the current
year financial statements.
we
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the effectiveness of the home depot,inc.'s internal control over
financial reporting as of january28, 2007, based on criteria established in internal control integrated framework issued by
the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso), and our report dated march21, 2007 expressed an unqualified opinion on management's assessment of, and the
effective operation of, internal control over financial reporting.
/s/
kpmg llp
atlanta,
georgia
march21, 2007
the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated statements of earnings
fiscal year ended(1)
amounts inmillions, except per share data
january28,
january29,
january30,
net sales
$
90,837
$
81,511
$
73,094
cost of sales
61,054
54,191
48,664
gross profit
29,783
27,320
24,430
operating expenses:
selling, general and administrative
18,348
16,485
15,256
depreciation and amortization
1,762
1,472
1,248
total operating expenses
20,110
17,957
16,504
operating income
9,673
9,363
7,926
interest income (expense):
interest and investment income
interest expense
(392
)
(143
)
(70
)
interest, net
(365
)
(81
)
(14
)
earnings before provision for income
taxes
9,308
9,282
7,912
provision for income taxes
3,547
3,444
2,911
net earnings
$
5,761
$
5,838
$
5,001
weighted average common shares
2,054
2,138
2,207
basic earnings per share
$
2.80
$
2.73
$
2.27
diluted weighted average common shares
2,062
2,147
2,216
diluted earnings per share
$
2.79
$
2.72
$
2.26
(1) fiscalyears ended january28, 2007, january29, 2006 and january30, 2005 include 52 weeks.  see accompanying notes to consolidated
financial statements.
the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated balance sheets
amounts inmillions, except per share data
january28,
january29,
assets
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
short-term investments
receivables, net
3,223
2,396
merchandise inventories
12,822
11,401
other current assets
1,341
total current assets
18,000
15,269
property and equipment, at cost:
land
8,355
7,924
buildings
15,215
14,056
furniture, fixtures and equipment
7,799
7,073
leasehold improvements
1,391
1,207
construction in progress
1,123
capital leases
34,358
31,530
less accumulated depreciation and amortization
7,753
6,629
net property and equipment
26,605
24,901
notes receivable
goodwill
6,314
3,286
other assets
1,001
total assets
$
52,263
$
44,405
liabilities and stockholders' equity
current liabilities:
short-term debt
$
$
accounts payable
7,356
6,032
accrued salaries and related expenses
1,295
1,068
sales taxes payable
deferred revenue
1,634
1,757
income taxes payable
current installments of long-term debt
other accrued expenses
1,936
1,560
total current liabilities
12,931
12,706
long-term debt, excluding current installments
11,643
2,672
other long-term liabilities
1,243
1,172
deferred income taxes
1,416
stockholders' equity
common stock, par value $0.05; authorized: 10,000 shares; issued
2,421 shares at january28, 2007 and 2,401 shares at january29, 2006;
outstanding 1,970 shares at january28, 2007 and 2,124 shares at
january29, 2006
paid-in capital
7,930
7,149
retained earnings
33,052
28,943
accumulated other comprehensive income
treasury stock, at cost, 451 shares at january28, 2007 and 277 shares
at january29, 2006
(16,383
)
(9,712
)
total stockholders' equity
25,030
26,909
total liabilities and stockholders' equity
$
52,263
$
44,405
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated statements of stockholders'  equity and comprehensive income
common stock
treasury stock
accumulated
other
comprehensive
income (loss)
paid-in
capital
retained
earnings
stockholders'
equity
total
comprehensive
income
amounts inmillions, except per share data
shares
amount
shares
amount
balance,
february1, 2004
2,373
$
$
6,108
$
19,680
$
(116
)
$
(3,590
)
$
22,407
net earnings
5,001
5,001
$
5,001
shares issued under
employee stock
plans
tax effect of sale of
option shares by
employees
translation adjustments
stock options, awards
and amortization
of restricted stock
repurchase of common
stock
(84
)
(3,102
)
(3,102
)
cash dividends ($0.325
per share)
(719
)
(719
)
comprehensive income
$
5,138
balance,
january30, 2005
2,385
$
$
6,542
$
23,962
$
(200
)
$
(6,692
)
$
24,158
net earnings
5,838
5,838
$
5,838
shares issued under
employee stock
plans
tax effect of sale of
option shares
by employees
translation adjustments
stock options, awards
and amortization
of restricted stock
repurchase of common
stock
(77
)
(3,020
)
(3,020
)
cash dividends ($0.40
per share)
(857
)
(857
)
comprehensive income
$
6,020
balance,
january29, 2006
2,401
$
$
7,149
$
28,943
$
(277
)
$
(9,712
)
$
26,909
cumulative effect of
adjustments resulting
from the adoption of
sab 108, net of tax
(257
)
(56
)
adjusted balance,
january29, 2006
2,401
$
$
7,350
$
28,686
$
(277
)
$
(9,712
)
$
26,853
net earnings
5,761
5,761
$
5,761
shares issued under
employee stock
plans
tax effect of sale of
option shares
by employees
translation adjustments
(77
)
(77
)
(77
)
interest rate hedges
(22
)
(22
)
(22
)
stock options, awards
and amortization
of restricted stock
repurchase of common
stock
(174
)
(6,671
)
(6,671
)
cash dividends ($0.675
per share)
(1,395
)
(1,395
)
other
(85
)
(85
)
comprehensive income
$
5,662
balance,
january28, 2007
2,421
$
$
7,930
$
33,052
$
(451
)
$
(16,383
)
$
25,030
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries         consolidated statements of cash flows
fiscal year ended(1)
amounts inmillions
january28,
january29,
january30,
cash flows from operating activities:
net earnings
$
5,761
$
5,838
$
5,001
reconciliation of net earnings to net cash provided
by operating activities:
depreciation and amortization
1,886
1,579
1,319
impairment related to disposition of expo real estate
stock-based compensation expense
changes in assets and liabilities, net of the effects of
acquisitions:
decrease (increase) in receivables, net
(358
)
(266
)
increase in merchandise inventories
(563
)
(971
)
(849
)
(increase) decrease in other current assets
(225
)
increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities
(decrease) increase in deferred revenue
(123
)
(decrease) increase in income taxes payable
(172
)
increase (decrease) in deferred income taxes
(609
)
(decrease) increase in other long-term liabilities
(51
)
other
(75
)
net cash provided by operating activities
7,661
6,620
6,632
cash flows from investing activities:
capital expenditures, net of $49, $51 and $38 of non-cash
capital expenditures in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively
(3,542
)
(3,881
)
(3,948
)
payments for businesses acquired, net
(4,268
)
(2,546
)
(727
)
proceeds from sales of property and equipment
purchases of investments
(5,409
)
(18,230
)
(25,890
)
proceeds from sales and maturities of investments
5,434
19,907
25,990
net cash used in investing activities
(7,647
)
(4,586
)
(4,479
)
cash flows from financing activities:
(repayments of) proceeds from short-term borrowings, net
(900
)
proceeds from long-term borrowings, net of discount
8,935
repayments of long-term debt
(509
)
(24
)
(510
)
repurchases of common stock
(6,684
)
(3,040
)
(3,106
)
proceeds from sale of common stock
cash dividends paid to stockholders
(1,395
)
(857
)
(719
)
other financing activities
(31
)
(136
)
net cash used in financing activities
(203
)
(1,748
)
(2,783
)
(decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
(189
)
(630
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash
equivalents
(4
)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
1,103
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash
payments made for:
interest, net of interest capitalized
$
$
$
income taxes
$
3,963
$
3,860
$
2,793
(1) fiscalyears ended january28, 2007, january29, 2006 and january30, 2005 include 52 weeks.
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
notes to consolidated financial statements
1.summary of significant accounting policies
business, consolidation and presentation
the home depot,inc. and its subsidiaries (the "company") operate the home depot stores, which are full-service, warehouse-style stores averaging
approximately 105,000 square feet in size. the stores stock approximately 35,000 to 45,000 different kinds of building materials, home improvement supplies and lawn and garden products that are sold
to do-it-yourself customers, do-it-for-me customers, home improvement contractors, tradespeople and building maintenance professionals. in
addition, the company operates expo design center stores ("expo"), which offer products and services primarily related to design and renovation projects, and the home depot landscape supply stores,
which service landscape professionals and garden enthusiasts with lawn, landscape and garden products. at the end of fiscal 2006, the company was operating 2,147 stores in total, which included 1,872
the home depot stores, 34 expo design center stores, 11 the home depot landscape supply stores and two the home depot floor stores in the united states, including the territories of puerto rico and
the virgin islands ("u.s."), 155 the home depot stores in canada, 61 the home depot stores in mexico and 12 the home depot stores in china.
additionally,
hd supply, through the company's wholly-owned subsidiaries, distributes products and sells installation services primarily to business-to-business customers,
including home builders, professional contractors, municipalities and maintenance professionals. hd supply consists of four major platforms: 1)infrastructure, including waterworks and
utilities; 2)construction, including construction supply, lumber and building materials, electrical, plumbing/hvac
and interiors; 3)maintenance, including facilities maintenance and industrial pvf; and 4)repair and remodel.
the
company operates its business in two reportable segments, retail and hd supply. see note12 for further information on the company's segments. the consolidated financial statements include
the accounts of the company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. all significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
fiscal year
the company's fiscal year is a 52- or 53-week period ending on the sunday nearest to january31. fiscalyears ended january28,
2007 ("fiscal 2006"), january29, 2006 ("fiscal 2005") and january30, 2005 ("fiscal 2004") include 52 weeks.
use of estimates
management of the company has made a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities, and reported amounts of revenues and expenses in preparing these financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles. actual results could differ from these
estimates.
fair value of financial instruments
the carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, receivables, short-term debt and accounts payable approximate fair value due to the short-term
maturities of these financial instruments. the fair value of the company's investments is discussed under the caption "short-term investments" in this note1. the fair value of the
company's long-term debt is discussed in note4.
cash equivalents
the company considers all highly liquid investments purchased with maturities of threemonths or less to be cash equivalents. the company's cash equivalents are carried
at fair market value and consist primarily of high-grade commercial paper, money market funds, u.s. government agency securities and tax-exempt notes and bonds.
short-term investments
short-term investments are recorded at fair value based on current market rates and are classified as available-for-sale. changes in the
fair value are included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of applicable taxes, in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. the company periodically invests in auction
rate securities, which are debt instruments with long-term scheduled maturities and periodic interest rate reset dates. the interest rates on these securities are typically reset to market
prevailing rates every 35days or less, and in all cases every 90days or less. due to the liquidity provided by the interest rate reset mechanism and the short-term nature
of the company's investment in these securities, they have been classified as current assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
accounts receivable
the company has an agreement with a third-party service provider who directly extends credit to customers and manages the company's private label credit card program. in
addition, certain subsidiaries of the company extend credit directly to customers in the ordinary course of business. the receivables due from customers were $1.8billion and
$865million as of january28, 2007 and january29, 2006, respectively. the company's valuation reserve related to accounts receivable was not material to the consolidated
financial statements of the company as of the end of fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005.
merchandise inventories
the majority of the company's merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market, as determined by the retail
inventory method. as the inventory retail value is adjusted regularly to reflect market conditions, the inventory valued using the retail method approximates the lower of cost or market. certain
subsidiaries, including retail operations in mexico and china, and distribution centers record merchandise inventories at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market, as
determined by the cost
method. these merchandise inventories represent approximately 20% of the total merchandise inventories balance. the company evaluates the inventory valued using the cost method at the end of each
quarter to ensure that it is carried at the lower of cost or market. the valuation allowance for merchandise inventories valued under the cost method was not material to the consolidated financial
statements of the company as of the end of fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005.
independent
physical inventory counts or cycle counts are taken on a regular basis in each store, distribution center and hd supply location to ensure that amounts reflected in the accompanying
consolidated financial statements for merchandise inventories are properly stated. during the period between physical inventory counts in stores, the company accrues for estimated losses related to
shrink on a store-by-store basis based on historical shrink results and current trends in the business. shrink (or in the case of excess inventory, "swell") is the difference
between the recorded amount of inventory and the physical inventory. shrink may occur due to theft, loss, inaccurate records for the receipt of inventory or deterioration of goods, among other things.
income taxes
the company provides for federal, state and foreign income taxes currently payable, as well as for those deferred due to timing differences between reporting income and
expenses for financial statement purposes versus tax purposes. federal, state and foreign tax benefits are recorded as a reduction of income taxes. deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized
for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. deferred tax
assets and liabilities are measured using enacted income tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in theyears in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
the effect of a change in income tax rates is recognized as income or expense in the period that includes the enactment date.
the
company and its eligible subsidiaries filea consolidated u.s. federal income tax return. non-u.s. subsidiaries and certain u.s. subsidiaries, which are consolidated for
financial reporting purposes, are not eligible to be included in the company's consolidated u.s. federal income tax return. separate provisions for income taxes have been determined for these
entities. the company intends to reinvest the unremitted earnings of its non-u.s. subsidiaries and postpone their remittance indefinitely. accordingly, no provision for u.s. income taxes
for non-u.s. subsidiaries was recorded in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings.
depreciation and amortization
the company's buildings, furniture, fixtures and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. leasehold
improvements are amortized using the straight-line method over the original term of the lease or the useful life of the improvement, whichever is shorter. the company's property and
equipment is depreciated using the following estimated useful lives:
life
buildings
10-45years
furniture, fixtures and equipment
3-20years
leasehold improvements
5-45years
capitalized software costs
the company capitalizes certain costs related to the acquisition and development of software and amortizes these costs using the straight-line method over the
estimated useful life of the software, which is three to sixyears. these costs are included in furniture, fixtures and equipment in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. certain
development costs not meeting the criteria for capitalization are expensed as incurred.
revenues
the company recognizes revenue, net of estimated returns, at the time the customer takes possession of merchandise or receives services. the liability for sales returns is
estimated based on historical return levels. when the company receives payment from customers before the customer has taken possession of the merchandise or the service has been performed, the amount
received is recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets until the sale or service is complete. the company also records deferred revenue for the sale of gift cards and
recognizes this revenue upon the redemption of gift cards in net sales. gift card breakage income is recognized based upon historical redemption patterns and represents the balance of gift cards for
which the company believes the likelihood of redemption by the customer is remote. during fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, the company recognized $33million and $52million, respectively,
of gift card breakage income. fiscal
was the first year in which the company recognized gift card breakage income, and therefore, the amount recognized includes the gift card breakage income related to gift cards sold since the
inception of the gift card program. this income is recorded as other income and is included in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings as a reduction in selling, general and
administrative expenses ("sg&a").
services revenue
net sales include services revenue generated through a variety of installation, home maintenance and professional service programs. in these programs, the customer selects and
purchases material for a project and the company provides or arranges professional installation. these programs are offered through the company's stores and certain hd supply locations. under certain
programs, when the company provides or arranges the installation of a project and the subcontractor provides material as part of the installation, both the material and labor are included in services
revenue. the company recognizes this revenue when the service for the customer is complete.
all
payments received prior to the completion of services are recorded in deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. retail services revenue was $3.8billion,
$3.5billion and $3.0billion for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
self-insurance
the company is self-insured for certain losses related to general liability, product liability, automobile, workers' compensation and medical claims. the expected
ultimate cost for claims incurred as of the balance sheet date is not discounted and is recognized as a liability. the expected ultimate cost of claims is estimated based upon analysis of historical
data and actuarial estimates.
prepaid advertising
television and radio advertising production costs along with media placement costs are expensed when the advertisement first appears. included in other current assets in the
accompanying consolidated balance sheets are $44million and $42million, respectively, at the end of fiscal 2006 and 2005 relating to prepayments of production costs for print and
broadcast advertising.
vendor allowances
vendor allowances primarily consist of volume rebates that are earned as a result of attaining certain purchase levels and advertising co-op allowances for the
promotion of vendors' products that are typically based on guaranteed minimum amounts with additional amounts being earned for attaining certain purchase levels. these vendor allowances are accrued as
earned, with those allowances received as a result of attaining certain purchase levels accrued over the incentive period based on estimates of purchases.
volume
rebates and advertising co-op allowances earned are initially recorded as a reduction in merchandise inventories and a subsequent reduction in cost of sales when the related product
is sold. certain advertising co-op allowances that are reimbursements of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred to promote vendors' products are recorded as an offset
against advertising expense. in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, net advertising expense was $1.1billion, $1.1billion and $1.0billion, respectively, which was recorded in sg&a.
cost of sales
cost of sales includes the actual cost of merchandise sold and services performed, the cost of transportation of merchandise from vendors to the company's stores, locations or
customers, the
operating
cost of the company's distribution centers and the cost of deferred interest programs offered through the company's private label credit card program.
the
cost of handling and shipping merchandise from the company's stores, locations or distribution centers to the customer is classified as sg&a. the cost of shipping and handling, including internal
costs and payments to third parties, classified as sg&a was $741million, $563million and $499million in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
goodwill and other intangible assets
goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired. the company does not amortize goodwill, but does assess the recoverability of
goodwill in the third quarter of each fiscal year by determining whether the fair value of each reporting unit supports its carrying value. the fair values of the company's identified reporting units
were estimated using the expected present value of discounted cash flows.
the
company amortizes the cost of other intangible assets over their estimated useful lives, which range from 1 to 14years, unless such lives are deemed indefinite. intangible assets with
indefinite lives are tested in the third quarter of each fiscal year for impairment. the company recorded no impairment charges for fiscal 2006, 2005 or 2004.
impairment of long-lived assets
the company evaluates the carrying value of long-lived assets when management makes the decision to relocate or close a store or other location, or when
circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. losses related to the impairment of long-lived assets are recognized to the extent the sum of undiscounted
estimated future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset are less than the asset's carrying value. if the
carrying value is greater than the future cash flows, a provision is made to write down the related assets to the estimated net recoverable value. impairment losses were recorded as a component of
sg&a in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings. when a location closes, the company also recognizes in sg&a the net present value of future lease obligations, less estimated sublease
income.
in
fiscal 2005, the company recorded $91million in sg&a related to asset impairment charges and on-going lease obligations associated with the closing of 20 of its expo stores.
additionally, the company recorded $29million of expense in cost of sales in fiscal 2005 related to inventory markdowns in these stores. the company also recorded impairments on other closings
and relocations in the ordinary course of business, which were not material to the consolidated financial statements of the company in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004.
stock-based compensation
effective february3, 2003, the company adopted the fair value method of recording stock-based compensation expense in accordance with statement of financial accounting
standards ("sfas") no.123, "accounting for stock-based compensation" ("sfas123"). the company selected the prospective method of adoption as described in sfas no.148,
"accounting for stock-based compensation transition and disclosure," and accordingly, stock-based compensation expense was recognized for stock options granted, modified or
settled and expense related to the employee stock purchase plan ("espp") after the beginning of fiscal 2003. effective january30, 2006, the company adopted the fair value recognition
provisions of sfas no.123(r), "share-based payment" ("sfas123(r)"), using the modified prospective transition method. under the modified prospective transition method, the company
began expensing unvested options granted prior to fiscal 2003 in addition to continuing to recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payments awarded since the adoption of
sfas123 in fiscal 2003. during fiscal 2006, the company recognized
additional
stock compensation expense of approximately $40million as a result of the adoption of sfas123(r). as the majority of stock options granted prior to 2003 are now fully
vested, the company does not expect sfas123(r) to have a material impact on its consolidated financial condition or results of operations subsequent to fiscal 2006. results of prior periods
have not been restated.
the
per share weighted average fair value of stock options granted during fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004 was $11.88, $12.83 and $13.57, respectively. the fair value of these options was determined at the
date of grant using the black-scholes option-pricing model with the following assumptions:
fiscal year ended
january28,
january29,
january30,
risk-free interest rate
4.7
%
4.3
%
2.6
%
assumed volatility
28.5
%
33.7
%
41.3
%
assumed dividend yield
1.5
%
1.1
%
0.8
%
assumed lives of option
5years
5years
5years
the
following table illustrates the effect on net earnings and earnings per share as if the company had applied the fair value recognition provisions of sfas123(r) to all stock-based
compensation in each period (amounts inmillions, except per share data):
fiscal year ended
january28,
january29,
january30,
net earnings, as reported
$
5,761
$
5,838
$
5,001
add: stock-based compensation expense
included in reported net earnings, net of
related tax effects
deduct: total stock-based compensation
expense determined under fair value based
method for all awards, net of related
tax effects
(186
)
(197
)
(237
)
pro forma net earnings
$
5,761
$
5,751
$
4,843
earnings per share:
basic as reported
$
2.80
$
2.73
$
2.27
basic pro forma
$
2.80
$
2.69
$
2.19
diluted as reported
$
2.79
$
2.72
$
2.26
diluted pro forma
$
2.79
$
2.68
$
2.19
derivatives
the company uses derivative financial instruments from time to time in the management of its interest rate exposure on long-term debt. the company accounts for its
derivative financial instruments in accordance with sfas no.133, "accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities." there were no derivative instruments outstanding as of
january28, 2007.
comprehensive income
comprehensive income includes net earnings adjusted for certain revenues, expenses, gains and losses that are excluded from net earnings under generally accepted accounting
principles. adjustments to net earnings are primarily for foreign currency translation adjustments and interest rate hedges.
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in a foreign currency are translated into u.s. dollars at the current rate of exchange on the last day of the reporting period. revenues and
expenses are generally translated at a daily exchange rate and equity transactions are translated using the actual rate on the day of the transaction.
reclassifications
certain amounts in prior fiscalyears have been reclassified to conform with the presentation adopted in the current fiscal year.
2.staff accounting bulletin no. 108
in
september2006, the securities and exchange commission ("sec") issued staff accounting bulletin no.108, "considering the effects of prior year misstatements when quantifying
misstatements in current year financial statements" ("sab 108"). sab 108 addresses the process of quantifying prior year financial statement misstatements and their impact on current year financial
statements. the provisions of sab 108 allow companies to report the cumulative effect of correcting immaterial prior year misstatements, based on the company's historical method for evaluating
misstatements, by adjusting the opening balance of retained earnings in the current year financial statements rather than
amending previously filed reports. sab 108 is effective for fiscalyears ending after november15, 2006, and therefore was effective for the home depot in fiscal 2006. in accordance with
sab 108, the company has adjusted beginning retained earnings for fiscal 2006 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the items described below. the company does not consider these
adjustments to have a material impact on the company's consolidated financial statements in any of the prioryears affected.
historical stock option practices
during fiscal 2006, the company requested that its board of directors review its historical stock option granting practices. a subcommittee of the audit committee undertook the
review with the assistance of independent outside counsel, and it has completed its review. the principal findings of the review are as follows:
all
options granted in the period from 2002 through the present had an exercise price based on the market price of the company's stock on the date the grant was approved by
the board of directors or an officer acting pursuant to delegated authority. during this period, the stock administration department corrected administrative errors retroactively and without separate
approvals. the administrative errors included inadvertent omissions of grantees from lists that were approved previously and miscalculations of the number of options granted to particular employees on
approved lists.
all
options granted from december1, 2000 through the end of 2001 had an exercise price based on the market price of the company's stock on the date of a meeting of
the board of directors or some other date selected without the benefit of hindsight. the february2001 annual grant was not finally allocated to recipients until several weeks after the grant
was approved. during this period, the stock administration department also corrected administrative errors retroactively and without separate approvals as in the period 2002 to the present.
for
annual option grants and certain quarterly option grants from 1981 through november2000, the stated grant date was routinely earlier than the actual date on
which the grants were approved by a committee of the board of directors. in almost every instance, the stock price on the apparent approval date was higher than the price on the stated grant date. the
backdating
occurred
for grants at all levels of the company. management personnel, who have since left the company, generally followed a practice of reviewing closing prices for a prior period and selecting a
date with a low stock price to increase the value of the options to employees on lists of grantees subsequently approved by a committee of the board of directors.
the
annual option grants in 1994 through 2000, as well as many quarterly grants during this period, were not finally allocated among the recipients until several weeks after
the stated grant date. because of the absence of records prior to 1994, it is unclear whether allocations also postdated the selected grant dates from 1981 through 1993. moreover, for many of these
annual and quarterly grants from 1981 through december2000, there is insufficient documentation to determine with certainty when the grants were actually authorized by a committee of the board
of directors. finally, the company's stock administration department also retroactively added employees to lists of approved grantees, or changed the number of options granted to specific employees,
without authorization of the board of directors or a board committee, to correct administrative errors.
numerous
option grants to rank-and-file employees were made pursuant to delegations of authority that may not have been effective under delaware law.
in
numerous instances, and primarily prior to 2003, beneficiaries of grants who were required to report them to the sec failed to do so in a timely manner or at all.
the
subcommittee concluded that there was no intentional wrongdoing by any current member of the company's management team or its board of directors.
the
company believes that because of these errors, it had unrecorded expense over the affected period (1981 through 2005) of $227million in the aggregate, including related tax items. in
accordance with the provisions of sab 108, the company decreased beginning retained earnings for fiscal 2006 by $227million within the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
as
previously disclosed, the staff of the sec has begun an informal inquiry into the company's stock option practices, and the u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york has also requested
information on the subject. the company is continuing to cooperate with these agencies. while the company cannot predict the outcome of these matters, it does not believe that they will have a
material adverse impact on its consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
the
company does not believe that the effect of the stock option adjustment was material, either quantitatively or qualitatively, in any of theyears covered by the review of these items. in
reaching that determination, the following quantitative measures were considered (dollars inmillions):
fiscal year
net after-tax
effect of
adjustment
reported net
earnings
percent of
reported net
earnings
$
$
5,838
0.19
%
5,001
0.36
4,304
0.42
3,664
0.57
1981-2001
14,531
1.09
total
$
$
33,338
0.68
%
vendor credits
the company records credits against vendor invoices for various issues related to the receipt of goods. the company previously identified that it was not recording an allowance
for subsequent reversals of these credits based on historical experience. beginning retained earnings for fiscal 2006 has been
decreased
by $30million in the accompanying consolidated financial statements to reflect the appropriate adjustments to merchandise inventories and accounts payable, net of tax.
impact of adjustments
the impact of each of the items noted above, net of tax, on fiscal 2006 beginning balances are presented below (amounts in millions):
cumulative effect as of january30,2006
stock option
practices
vendor
credits
total
merchandise inventories
$
$
$
accounts payable
(59
)
(59
)
deferred income taxes
other accrued expenses
(37
)
(37
)
paid-in capital
(201
)
(201
)
retained earnings
total
$
$
$
3.intangible assets
the
company's intangible assets at the end of fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, which are included in other assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, consisted of the following (amounts in
millions):
january28,
january29,
customer relationships
$
$
trademarks and franchises
other
less accumulated amortization
(151
)
(35
)
total
$
$
amortization
expense related to intangible assets was $117million, $29million and $4million for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. estimated future amortization expense
for intangible assets recorded as of january28, 2007 is $107million, $105million, $99million, $94million and $82million for fiscal 2007 through fiscal
2011, respectively.
4.debt
the
company has a commercial paper program that allows for borrowings up to $2.5billion. all of the company's short-term borrowings in fiscal 2006 and 2005 were made under this
commercial paper program. in connection with the commercial paper program, the company has a back-up credit facility with a consortium of banks for borrowings up to $2.0billion.
the credit facility, which expires in december2010, contains various restrictions, none of which is expected to materially impact the company's liquidity or capital resources.
short-term
debt under the commercial paper program was as follows (dollars inmillions):
january28,
january29,
balance outstanding at fiscal year-end
$
$
maximum amount outstanding at any month-end
$
1,470
$
average daily short-term borrowings
$
$
weighted average interest rate
5.1
%
4.3
%
the
company's long-term debt at the end of fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005 consisted of the following (amounts inmillions):
january28,
january29,
5.375% senior notes; due april1, 2006; interest
payable semi-annually on april1 and october1
$
$
3.75% senior notes; due september15, 2009; interest
payable semi-annually on march15 and september15
floating rate senior notes; due december16, 2009;
interest payable on march16, june16, september16
and december16
4.625% senior notes; due august15, 2010; interest
payable semi-annually on february15 and august15
5.20% senior notes; due march1, 2011; interest
payable semi-annually on march1 and september1
1,000
5.25% senior notes; due december16, 2013; interest
payable semi-annually on june16 and december16
1,243
5.40% senior notes; due march1, 2016; interest
payable semi-annually on march1 and september1
2,986
5.875% senior notes; due december16, 2036; interest
payable semi-annually on june16 and december16
2,958
capital lease obligations; payable in varying
installments through january31, 2055
other
total long-term debt
11,661
3,185
less current installments
long-term debt, excluding current installments
$
11,643
$
2,672
in
december2006, the company issued $750million of floating rate senior notes due december16, 2009 at par value, $1.25billion of 5.25% senior notes due
december16, 2013 at a discount of $7million and $3.0billion of 5.875% senior notes due december16, 2036 at a discount of $42million, together the
"december2006 issuance." the net proceeds of the december2006 issuance were used to fund, in part, the company's common stock repurchases, to repay outstanding commercial paper and for
general corporate purposes. the $49million discount and $37million of issuance costs associated with the december2006 issuance are being amortized to interest expense over the
term of the related senior notes.
additionally
in october2006, the company entered into a forward starting interest rate swap agreement with a notional amount of $1.0billion, accounted for as a cash flow hedge, to
hedge interest rate fluctuations in anticipation of the issuance of the 5.875% senior notes due december16, 2036. upon issuance of the hedged debt in december2006, the company settled
its forward starting interest rate swap agreements and recorded an $11million decrease, net of income taxes, to accumulated
other
comprehensive income, which will be amortized to interest expense over the life of the related debt.
in
march2006, the company issued $1.0billion of 5.20% senior notes due march1, 2011 at a discount of $1million and $3.0billion of 5.40% senior notes due
march1, 2016 at a discount of $15million, together the "march2006 issuance." the net proceeds of the march2006 issuance were used to pay for the acquisition price of
hughes supply,inc. and for the repayment of the company's 5.375% senior notes due april2006 in the aggregate principal amount of $500million. the $16million discount
and $19million of issuance costs associated with the march2006 issuance are being amortized to interest expense over the term of the related senior notes.
additionally
in march2006, the company entered into a forward starting interest rate swap agreement with a notional amount of $2.0billion, accounted for as a cash flow hedge, to hedge
interest rate fluctuations in anticipation of the issuance of the 5.40% senior notes due march1, 2016. upon issuance of the hedged debt, the company settled its forward starting interest rate
swap agreements and recorded a $12million decrease, net of income taxes, to accumulated other comprehensive income, which will be amortized to interest expense over the life of the related
debt.
in
august2005, the company issued $1.0billion of 4.625% notes due august15, 2010 ("august2005 issuance") at a discount of $5million. the net proceeds of
$995million were used to pay for a portion of the acquisition price of national waterworks,inc. the $5million discount and $7million of issuance costs associated with
the august2005 issuance are being amortized to interest expense over the term of the related senior notes.
the
company also had $1.0billion of 3.75% senior notes due september15, 2009 outstanding as of january28, 2007, collectively referred to with the december2006 issuance,
march2006 issuance and august2005 issuance as "senior notes." the senior notes may be redeemed by the company at any time, in whole or in part, at a redemption price plus accrued
interest up to the redemption date. the redemption price is equal to the greater of (1)100% of the principal amount of the senior notes to be redeemed, or (2)the sum of the present
values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest to maturity. additionally, if a change in control triggering event occurs, as defined by the terms of the december2006
issuance, holders of the december2006 issuance have the right to require the company to redeem those notes at 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes plus accrued interest up to
the redemption date.
the
company is generally not limited under the indenture governing the senior notes in its ability to incur additional indebtedness or required to maintain financial ratios or specified levels of net
worth or liquidity. however, the indenture governing the senior notes contains various restrictive covenants, none of which is expected to impact the company's liquidity or capital resources.
interest
expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings is net of interest capitalized of $47million, $51million and $40million in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. maturities of long-term debt are $18million for fiscal 2007, $301million for fiscal 2008, $1.8billion for fiscal 2009, $1.0billion for fiscal
2010, $1.0billion for fiscal 2011 and $7.5billion thereafter.
as
of january28, 2007, the market value of the senior notes was approximately $10.9billion. the estimated fair value of all other long-term borrowings, excluding capital
lease obligations, was approximately $316million compared to the carrying value of $311million. these fair values were estimated using a discounted cash flow analysis based on the
company's incremental borrowing rate for similar liabilities.
5.income taxes
the
components of earnings before provision for income taxes for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004 were as follows (amounts inmillions):
fiscal year ended
january28,
january29,
january30,
united states
$
8,709
$
8,736
$
7,508
foreign
total
$
9,308
$
9,282
$
7,912
the
provision for income taxes consisted of the following (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january28,
january29,
january30,
current:
federal
$
2,831
$
3,394
$
2,153
state
foreign
3,569
4,057
2,571
deferred:
federal
(9
)
(527
)
state
(9
)
(111
)
foreign
(4
)
(16
)
(22
)
(613
)
total
$
3,547
$
3,444
$
2,911
the
company's combined federal, state and foreign effective tax rates for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, net of offsets generated by federal, state and foreign tax benefits, were approximately 38.1%,
37.1% and 36.8%, respectively.
the
reconciliation of the provision for income taxes at the federal statutory rate of 35% to the actual tax expense for the applicable fiscalyears was as follows (amounts inmillions):
fiscal year ended
january28,
january29,
january30,
income taxes at federal statutory rate
$
3,258
$
3,249
$
2,769
state income taxes, net of federal
income tax benefit
foreign rate differences
(10
)
(17
)
change in valuation allowance
(23
)
(31
)
other, net
(51
)
(25
)
total
$
3,547
$
3,444
$
2,911
the
tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to significant portions of the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities as of january28, 2007 and january29, 2006, were
as follows (amounts inmillions):
january28,
january29,
current:
deferred tax assets:
accrued self-insurance liabilities
$
$
other accrued liabilities
other
current deferred tax assets
deferred tax liabilities:
accelerated inventory deduction
(137
)
(271
)
other
(29
)
(17
)
current deferred tax liabilities
(166
)
(288
)
current deferred tax assets, net
noncurrent:
deferred tax assets:
accrued self-insurance liabilities
other accrued liabilities
net operating losses
noncurrent deferred tax assets
deferred tax liabilities:
property and equipment
(1,365
)
(1,160
)
goodwill and other intangibles
(361
)
(209
)
other
(74
)
noncurrent deferred tax liabilities
(1,800
)
(1,369
)
noncurrent deferred tax liabilities, net
(1,409
)
(917
)
net deferred tax liabilities
$
(878
)
$
(756
)
current
deferred tax assets and current deferred tax liabilities are netted by tax jurisdiction and noncurrent deferred tax assets and noncurrent deferred tax liabilities are netted by tax
jurisdiction, and are included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets as follows (amounts inmillions):
january28,
january29,
other current assets
$
$
other assets
other accrued expenses
(30
)
(60
)
deferred income taxes
(1,416
)
(946
)
net deferred tax liabilities
$
(878
)
$
(756
)
the
company believes that the realization of the deferred tax assets is more likely than not, based upon the expectation that it will generate the necessary taxable income in future periods and,
accordingly, no valuation reserves have been provided. as a result of acquisitions that were accounted for under the purchase method of accounting, deferred tax liabilities of $118million were
recorded in fiscal 2006 representing the difference between the book value and the tax basis of acquired assets.
at
january28, 2007, the company had state and foreign net operating loss carry-forwards to reduce future taxable income, which will expire at various dates from 2010 to 2026. management has
concluded that it is more likely than not that these tax benefits related to the net operating losses will be realized and hence no valuation allowance has been provided. the company has not provided
for u.s. deferred income taxes on $1.2billion of undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries because of its intention to indefinitely reinvest these earnings outside the u.s. the
determination of the amount of the unrecognized deferred u.s. income tax liability related to the undistributed earnings is not practicable; however, unrecognized foreign income tax credits would be
available to reduce a portion of this liability.
the
company's income tax returns are routinely under audit by domestic and foreign tax authorities. these audits include questions regarding its tax filing positions, including the timing and amount
of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. in 2005, the irs completed its examination of the company's u.s. federal income tax returns through fiscal 2002. certain
issues relating to the examinations of fiscal 2001 and 2002 are under appeal, the outcome of which is not expected to have a material impact on the company's financial statements. during 2006, the irs
initiated an audit of the company's fiscal 2003 and 2004 income tax returns. this audit will likely not be completely settled until after fiscal 2007. at this time, the company does not expect the
results of the audit to have a material impact on the company's financial statements.
during
the second quarter of fiscal 2006, the quebec national assembly passed legislation that retroactively changed certain tax laws that subjected the company to additional tax and interest. as a
result, the company received an assessment from quebec for $57million in retroactive tax and $12million in related interest for the 2002 through 2005 taxableyears. this
retroactive tax is included in the company's current year foreign tax expense.
in
july2006, the financial accounting standards board ("fasb") issued fasb interpretation no.48, "accounting for uncertainty in income taxes an interpretation of
fasb statement no.109" ("fin 48"). fin 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income tax reporting by prescribing a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial
statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. fin 48 requires that companies recognize tax benefits in their financial statements for a tax
position only if that position is more likely than not of being sustained on audit, based on the technical merits of the position. additionally, fin 48 provides guidance on de-recognition,
classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. fin 48 becomes effective for fiscalyears beginning after december15, 2006, and will
therefore be effective for the home depot in fiscal 2007. the cumulative impact of adopting fin 48 in fiscal 2007 is not expected to have a material impact on the financial condition of the company.
6.employee stock plans
the
home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan ("2005 plan") and the home depot,inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan ("1997 plan") (collectively the "plans") provide that
incentive, non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted shares, performance shares, performance units and deferred shares may be issued to selected associates,
officers and directors of the company. under the 2005 plan, the maximum number of shares of the company's common stock authorized for issuance is 255million shares, with any award other than a
stock option reducing the number of shares available for issuance by 2.11 shares. as of january28, 2007, there were 236million shares available for future grant under the 2005 plan. no
additional equity awards may be issued from the 1997 plan after the adoption of the 2005 plan on may26, 2005.
under
the plans, as of january28, 2007, the company had granted incentive and non-qualified stock options for 184million shares, net of cancellations (of which
120million have been exercised). under
the
terms of the plans, incentive stock options and non-qualified stock options are to be priced at or above the fair market value of the company's stock on the date of the grant.
typically, incentive stock options and non-qualified stock options vest at the rate of 25% per year commencing on the first anniversary date of the grant and expire on the tenth
anniversary date of the grant. the company recognized $148million, $117million and $71million of stock-based compensation expense in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively,
related to stock options.
under
the plans, as of january28, 2007, the company had issued 12million shares of restricted stock, net of cancellations (the restrictions on 2million shares have lapsed).
generally, the restrictions on the restricted stock lapse according to one of the following schedules: (1)the restrictions on 100% of the restricted stock lapse at 3, 4 or 5years,
(2)the restrictions on 25% of the restricted stock lapse upon the third and sixth year anniversaries of the date of issuance with the remaining 50% of the restricted stock lapsing upon the
associate's attainment of age 62, or (3)the restrictions on 25% of the restricted stock lapse upon the third and sixth year anniversaries of the date of issuance with the remaining 50% of the
restricted stock lapsing upon the earlier of the associate's attainment of age 60 or the tenth anniversary date. additionally, certain awards may become non-forfeitable upon the attainment
of age 60, provided the associate has had fiveyears of continuous service. the fair value of the restricted stock is expensed over the period during which the restrictions lapse. the company
recorded stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock of $95million, $32million and $22million in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
in
fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, there were 417,000, 461,000 and 461,000 deferred shares, respectively, granted under the plans. each deferred share entitles the associate to one share of common stock
to be received up to fiveyears after the vesting date of the deferred share, subject to certain deferral rights of the associate. the company recorded stock-based compensation expense related
to deferred shares of $37million, $10million and $14million in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
as
of january28, 2007, there were 2.5million non-qualified stock options outstanding under non-qualified stock option plans that are not part of the plans.
the
company maintains two espps (u.s. and non-u.s. plans). the plan for u.s. associates is a tax-qualified plan under section423 of the internal revenue code. the
non-u.s. plan is not a section423 plan. the espps allow associates to purchase up to 152million shares of common stock, of which 120million shares have been
purchased from inception of the plans. the purchase price of shares under the espps is equal to 85% of the stock's fair market value on the last day of the purchase period. during fiscal 2006, there
were 3million shares purchased under the espps at an average price of $32.06. under the outstanding espps as of january28, 2007,
employees have contributed $10million to purchase shares at 85% of the stock's fair market value on the last day (june30, 2007) of the purchase period. the company had
32million shares available for issuance under the espps at january28, 2007. the company recognized $17million, $16million and $15million of stock-based
compensation in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively, related to the espps.
in
total, the company recorded stock-based compensation expense, including the expense of stock options, espps, restricted stock and deferred stock units, of $297million, $175million
and $125million, in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
the
following table summarizes stock options outstanding at january28, 2007, january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, and changes during the fiscalyears ended on these
dates (shares in thousands):
number of
shares
weighted
average option
price
outstanding at february1, 2004
87,779
$
35.40
granted
16,713
36.46
exercised
(7,825
)
25.94
canceled
(10,273
)
38.27
outstanding at january30, 2005
86,394
$
36.12
granted
17,721
37.96
exercised
(11,457
)
28.83
canceled
(8,626
)
38.65
outstanding at january29, 2006
84,032
$
37.24
granted
39.53
exercised
(10,045
)
28.69
canceled
(8,103
)
40.12
outstanding at january28, 2007
66,141
$
38.20
the
total intrinsic value of stock options exercised during fiscal 2006 was $120million.
as
of january28, 2007, there were approximately 66million stock options outstanding with a weighted average remaining life of 5.6years and an intrinsic value of
$248million. as of january28, 2007, there were approximately 47million options exercisable with a weighted average option price of $39.20 and an intrinsic value of
$162million. as of january28, 2007, there were approximately 63million shares vested or expected to ultimately vest.
the
following table summarizes restricted stock outstanding at january28, 2007 (shares in thousands):
number of
shares
weighted
average grant
date fair value
outstanding at january29, 2006
5,308
$
35.76
granted
7,575
41.37
restrictions lapsed
(1,202
)
38.03
canceled
(1,551
)
39.00
outstanding at january28, 2007
10,130
$
39.20
7.leases
the
company leases certain retail locations, office space, warehouse and distribution space, equipment and vehicles. while most of the leases are operating leases, certain locations and equipment are
leased under capital leases. as leases expire, it can be expected that, in the normal course of business, certain leases will be renewed or replaced.
certain
lease agreements include escalating rents over the lease terms. the company expenses rent on a straight-line basis over the life of the lease which commences on the date the
company has the right to control the property. the cumulative expense recognized on a straight-line basis in excess of the
cumulative
payments is included in other accrued expenses and other long-term liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
the
company has a lease agreement under which the company leases certain assets totaling $282million. this lease was originally created under a structured financing arrangement and involves
two special purpose entities. the company financed a portion of its new stores opened in fiscalyears 1997 through 2003 under this lease agreement. under this agreement, the lessor purchased
the
properties, paid for the construction costs and subsequently leased the facilities to the company. the company records the rental payments under the terms of the operating lease agreements as sg&a in
the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings.
the
$282million lease agreement expires in fiscal 2008 with no renewal option. the lease provides for a substantial residual value guarantee limited to 79% of the initial book value of the
assets and includes a purchase option at the original cost of each property. during fiscal 2005, the company committed to exercise its option to purchase the assets under this lease for
$282million at the end of the lease term in fiscal 2008.
in
the first quarter of fiscal 2004, the company adopted the revised version of fasb interpretation no.46, "consolidation of variable interest entities" ("fin 46"). fin 46 requires
consolidation of a variable interest entity if a company's variable interest absorbs a majority of the entity's expected losses or receives a majority of the entity's expected residual returns, or
both.
in
accordance with fin 46, the company was required to consolidate one of the two aforementioned special purpose entities that, before the effective date of fin 46, met the requirements for
non-consolidation. the second special purpose entity that owns the assets leased by the company totaling $282million is not owned by or affiliated with the company, its management
or its officers. pursuant to fin 46, the company was not deemed to have a variable interest, and therefore was not required to consolidate this entity.
fin
46 requires the company to measure the assets and liabilities at their carrying amounts, which amounts would have been recorded if fin 46 had been effective at the inception of the transaction.
accordingly, during the first quarter of fiscal 2004, the company recorded long-term debt of $282million and long-term notes receivable of $282million on the
consolidated balance sheets. the company continues to record the rental payments under the operating lease agreements as sg&a in the consolidated statements of earnings. the adoption of fin 46 had no
economic impact on the company.
total
rent expense, net of minor sublease income for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004 was $958million, $782million and $684million, respectively. certain store leases also provide
for contingent rent payments based on percentages of sales in excess of specified minimums. contingent rent expense for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004 was approximately $9million,
$9million and $11million, respectively. real estate taxes, insurance, maintenance and operating expenses applicable to the leased property are obligations of the company under the
lease agreements.
the
approximate future minimum lease payments under capital and all other leases at january28, 2007 were as follows (in millions):
fiscal year
capital
leases
operating
leases
$
$
thereafter through 2097
5,421
1,323
$
9,131
less imputed interest
net present value of capital lease obligations
less current installments
long-term capital lease obligations, excluding current
installments
$
short-term
and long-term obligations for capital leases are included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets in current installments of long-term debt and
long-term debt, respectively. the assets under capital leases recorded in property and equipment, net of amortization, totaled $340million and $304million at
january28, 2007 and january29, 2006, respectively.
8.employee benefit plans
the
company maintains active defined contribution retirement plans for its employees ("the benefit plans"). all associates satisfying certain service requirements are eligible to participate in the
benefit plans. the company makes cash contributions each payroll period up to specified percentages of associates' contributions as approved by the board of directors.
the
company also maintains a restoration plan to provide certain associates deferred compensation that they would have received under the benefit plans as a matching contribution if not for the
maximum compensation limits under the internal revenue code. the company funds the restoration plan through contributions made to a grantor trust, which are then used to purchase shares of the
company's common stock in the open market.
the
company's contributions to the benefit plans and the restoration plan were $159million, $132million and $114million for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. at
january28, 2007, the benefit plans and the restoration plan held a total of 26million shares of the company's common stock in trust for plan participants.
9.basic and diluted weighted average common shares
the
reconciliation of basic to diluted weighted average common shares for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004 was as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january28,
january29,
january30,
weighted average common shares
2,054
2,138
2,207
effect of potentially dilutive securities:
stock plans
diluted weighted average common shares
2,062
2,147
2,216
stock
plans include shares granted under the company's employee stock plans as described in note6 to the consolidated financial statements. options to purchase 45.4million,
55.1million and 49.1million shares of common stock at january28, 2007, january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, respectively, were excluded from the computation of
diluted earnings per share because their effect would have been anti-dilutive.
10.commitments and contingencies
at
january28, 2007, the company was contingently liable for approximately $1.2billion under outstanding letters of credit issued for certain business transactions, including insurance
programs, trade and construction contracts. the company's letters of credit are primarily performance-based and are not based on changes in variable components, a liability or an equity security of
the other party.
the
company is involved in litigation arising from the normal course of business and in certain securities and derivative litigation matters. in management's opinion, this litigation is not expected
to have a material adverse effect on the company's consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
11.acquisitions
the
following acquisitions completed by the company were all accounted for under the purchase method of accounting and, accordingly, their results of operations have been consolidated in the company's
financial statements since the date of acquisition. pro forma results of operations for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004 would not be materially different as a result of these acquisitions and therefore are
not presented.
during
fiscal 2006, the company made the following acquisitions under its hd supply segment:
burrus contractors supply
heartland waterworks supply
cox lumber company
hughes supply
ctf supply
rice planter carpets
edson electric supply
sioux pipe
forest products supply
texas contractors supply
grafton utility supply
western fasteners
additionally,
during fiscal 2006, the company acquired home decorators collection, the home way and jubilee home solutions under its retail segment.
the
aggregate purchase price for acquisitions in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004 was $4.5billion, $2.6billion and $729million, respectively, including $3.5billion for hughes
supply in fiscal 2006. the company recorded goodwill related to the hd supply segment of $2.8billion, $1.8billion and $391million for
fiscal
2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively, and goodwill related to the retail segment of $229million, $111million and $163million for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively,
in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. of the goodwill recorded in fiscal 2006, approximately $500million will be deductible for income taxes.
the
following table summarizes the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the dates of acquisition for all acquisitions made during fiscal 2006, and is subject to the
final fair value determination of certain assets and liabilities (amounts inmillions):
cash
$
receivables
inventories
property and equipment
intangible assets(1)
goodwill
3,007
other assets
total assets acquired
6,018
current liabilities
1,321
other liabilities
total liabilities assumed
1,514
net assets acquired
$
4,504
(1)primarily customer relationships and tradenames which are included in other assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and are being amortized over
a weighted average useful life of 10years.
12.segment information
the
company operates in two reportable business segments: retail and hd supply. the retail segment is principally engaged in the operation of retail stores located in the united states, canada, mexico
and the company's recently acquired stores in china. the hd supply segment distributes products and sells installation services to business-to-business customers, including
home builders, professional contractors, municipalities and maintenance professionals. the company identifies segments based on how management makes operating decisions, assesses performance and
allocates resources. the first quarter of fiscal 2006 was the first period in which the company began to report its results of operations in two segments. this change was a result of the purchase of
hughes supply, which significantly increased the size of hd supply and resulted in changes in the company's internal reporting and management structure.
the
retail segment includes the home depot stores, expo design center stores and other retail formats. the retail segment also includes our retail services business and our catalog and
on-line sales businesses.
the
hd supply segment consists of four major platforms: 1)infrastructure, including waterworks and utilities; 2)construction, including construction supply, lumber and building
materials, electrical, plumbing/hvac and interiors; 3)maintenance, including facilities maintenance and industrial pvf; and 4)repair and remodel.
the
company measures the profit of its segments as operating income, which is defined as earnings before net interest expense and provision for income taxes. the amounts under the caption
eliminations/other in the following tables are unallocated corporate overhead, invested cash and
short-term
investments and intersegment eliminations. additionally, operating income under eliminations/other for the fiscal year ended january28, 2007 includes $129million
of cost associated with executive severance and separation agreements. the following tables present financial information by segment for the fiscalyears ended january28, 2007,
january29, 2006 and january30, 2005, respectively (amounts inmillions):
fiscal year ended january28, 2007
retail
hd supply
eliminations/
other
consolidated
net sales
$
79,027
$
12,070
$
(260
)
$
90,837
operating income
$
9,024
$
$
(151
)
$
9,673
interest, net
(365
)
earnings before provision for income taxes
$
9,308
depreciation and amortization
$
1,682
$
$
$
1,886
total assets
$
42,094
$
10,021
$
$
52,263
capital expenditures
$
3,321
$
$
$
3,542
payments for businesses acquired, net
$
$
3,963
$
$
4,268
fiscal year ended january29, 2006
retail
hd supply
eliminations/
other
consolidated
net sales
$
77,022
$
4,614
$
(125
)
$
81,511
operating income
$
9,058
$
$
(14
)
$
9,363
interest, net
(81
)
earnings before provision for income taxes
$
9,282
depreciation and amortization
$
1,510
$
$
$
1,579
total assets
$
39,827
$
4,517
$
$
44,405
capital expenditures
$
3,777
$
$
$
3,881
payments for businesses acquired, net
$
$
2,356
$
$
2,546
fiscal year ended january30, 2005
retail
hd supply
eliminations/
other
consolidated
net sales
$
71,101
$
2,040
$
(47
)
$
73,094
operating income
$
7,812
$
$
(8
)
$
7,926
interest, net
(14
)
earnings before provision for income taxes
$
7,912
depreciation and amortization
$
1,296
$
$
$
1,319
total assets
$
36,902
$
1,406
$
$
39,020
capital expenditures
$
3,905
$
$
$
3,948
payments for businesses acquired, net
$
$
$
$
net
sales for the company outside of the united states were $6.4billion, $5.3billion and $4.2billion during fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. long-lived
assets outside of the united states totaled $2.5billion and $2.2billion as of january28, 2007 and january29, 2006, respectively.
13.quarterly financial data (unaudited)
the
following is a summary of the quarterly consolidated results of operations for the fiscalyears ended january28, 2007 and january29, 2006 (dollars inmillions, except
per share data):
net sales
gross profit
net earnings
basic
earnings per
share
diluted
earnings per
share
fiscal year ended january28, 2007:
first quarter
$
21,461
$
7,228
$
1,484
$
0.70
$
0.70
second quarter
26,026
8,380
1,862
0.90
0.90
third quarter
23,085
7,537
1,490
0.73
0.73
fourth quarter
20,265
6,638
0.46
0.46
fiscal year
$
90,837
$
29,783
$
5,761
$
2.80
$
2.79
fiscal year ended january29, 2006:
first quarter
$
18,973
$
6,355
$
1,247
$
0.58
$
0.57
second quarter
22,305
7,409
1,768
0.83
0.82
third quarter
20,744
6,963
1,538
0.72
0.72
fourth quarter
19,489
6,593
1,285
0.61
0.60
fiscal year
$
81,511
$
27,320
$
5,838
$
2.73
$
2.72
note: the quarterly data may not sum to fiscal year totals due to rounding.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure.
none.
item 9a. controls and procedures.
disclosure controls and procedures
the company maintains disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the company's securities exchange act reports
is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the securities and exchange commission's rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated
to the company's management, including the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
the
company's chief executive officer and chief financial officer have evaluated the effectiveness of the design and operation of the company's disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)under the securities exchange act) as of the end of the period covered by this report. based on such evaluation, such officers have
concluded that, as of the end of the period covered by this report, the company's disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
internal control over financial reporting
there have not been any changes in the company's internal control over financial reporting (as such term is defined in rules13a-15(e)and
15d-15(e)under the securities exchange act) during the fiscal quarter ended january28, 2007 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect,
the company's internal control over financial reporting.
management's report on internal control over financial reporting
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to item 8. "financial statements and supplementary data" of this report.
item 9b. other information.
none.
part iii
item 10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance.
information required by this section, other than information regarding the executive officers of the company which is set forth in item 4a. "executive officers of the company"
of this report, is incorporated by reference to the sectionsentitled "election of directors and director biographies," "board of directors information," "general
section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance" and "audit committee report and fees paid to accounting firm" in the company's proxy statement for the 2007 annual meeting of
shareholders (the "proxy statement").
item 11. executive compensation.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled "executive compensation," "compensation discussion & analysis," "leadership
development and compensation committee" and "director compensation" in the company's proxy statement.
item 12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled "beneficial ownership of common stock" and "executive compensation" in the company's
proxy statement.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled "board of directors information" and "general insider
transactions" in the company's proxy statement.
item 14. principal accounting fees and services.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled "audit committee report and fees paid to accounting firm" in the company's proxy
statement.
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules.
(a)(1)financial statements
the
following financial statements are set forth in item 8 hereof:
consolidated
statements of earnings for the fiscalyears ended january28, 2007, january29, 2006, and january30, 2005;
consolidated
balance sheets as of january28, 2007 and january29, 2006;
consolidated
statements of stockholders' equity and comprehensive income for the fiscalyears ended january28, 2007, january29, 2006 and
january30, 2005;
consolidated
statements of cash flows for the fiscalyears ended january28, 2007, january29, 2006 and january30, 2005;
notes
to consolidated financial statements;
management's
responsibility for financial statements and management's report on internal control over financial reporting; and
reports
of independent registered public accounting firm.
(2)financial
statement schedules
all
schedules are omitted as the required information is inapplicable or the information is presented in the consolidated financial statements or related notes.
(3)exhibits
exhibits
marked with an asterisk (*) are incorporated by reference to exhibits or appendices previously filed with the securities and exchange commission, as indicated by the references in brackets.
all other exhibits are filed herewith.
*3.1
amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the home depot,inc. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august4, 2002, exhibit3.1]
*3.2
by-laws, as amended and restated. [form8-k filed on january8, 2007, exhibit3.1]
*4.1
indenture dated as of september16, 2004 between the home depot,inc. and the bank of new york. [form8-k filed september17, 2004, exhibit4.1]
*4.2
indenture, dated as of may4, 2005, between the home depot,inc. and the bank of new york trust company, n.a., as trustee. [forms-3 (file no.333-124699) filed may6, 2005, exhibit4.1]
*4.3
formof 3.75% senior notedue september15, 2009. [form8-k filed on september17, 2004, exhibit4.2]
*4.4
formof 45/8% senior notedue august15, 2010. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january29, 2006, exhibit4.6]
*4.5
formof 5.20% senior notedue march1, 2011. [form8-k filed march23, 2006, exhibit4.1]
*4.6
formof 5.40% senior notedue march1, 2016. [form8-k filed march23, 2006, exhibit4.2]
*4.7
formof floating rate senior notedue december16, 2009. [form8-k filed december19, 2006, exhibit4.1]
*4.8
formof 5.250% senior notedue december16, 2013. [form8-k filed december19, 2006, exhibit4.2]
*4.9
formof 5.875% senior notedue december16, 2036. [form8-k filed december19, 2006, exhibit4.3]
*10.1
the home depot,inc. amended and restated employee stock purchase plan, as amended and restated effective july1, 2003. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended november2, 2003, exhibit10.1]
*10.2
amendment no.1 to the home depot,inc. amended and restated employee stock purchase plan, effective july1, 2004. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august1, 2004, exhibit10.2]
*10.3
the home depot,inc. non-u.s. employee stock purchase plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit10.36]
*10.4
the home depot,inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august4, 2002, exhibit10.1]
*10.5
form of executive officer restricted stock award pursuant to the home depot,inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004, exhibit10.1]
*10.6
form of executive officer nonqualified stock option award pursuant to the home depot,inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004, exhibit10.2]
*10.7
form of outside director nonqualified stock option award pursuant to the home depot,inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004, exhibit10.3]
*10.8
form of executive officer long-term incentive program performance unit award pursuant to the home depot,inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004,
exhibit10.4]
*10.9
the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on may27, 2005, exhibit10.8]
*10.10
formof restricted stock award pursuant to the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.1]
*10.11
formof deferred share award (non-employee director) pursuant to the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.2]
*10.12
formof deferred share award (u.s. officers) pursuant to the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on may27, 2005, exhibit10.3]
*10.13
formof deferred share award (mexico) pursuant to the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.3]
*10.14
form of deferred share award (canada) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.4]
*10.15
formof nonqualified stock option (non-employee directors) pursuant to the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.5]
*10.16
formof nonqualified stock option pursuant to the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.6]
*10.17
formof performance share award pursuant to the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.7]
*10.18
form of performance share award (mexico) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.8]
*10.19
formof performance vested option award pursuant to the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.9]
*10.20
formof ltip performance unit award pursuant to the home depot,inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.10]
*10.21
the home depot futurebuilder restoration plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january28, 2001, exhibit 10.10]
*10.22
third amendment to the home depot futurebuilder restoration plan, effective march1, 2004. [form10- q for the fiscal quarter ended august1, 2004, exhibit10.1]
*10.23
non-qualified stock option and deferred stock unit plan and agreement dated as of december4, 2000. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january28, 2001, exhibit10.20]
*10.24
the home depot futurebuilder for puerto rico. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.35]
*10.25
first amendment to the home depot futurebuilder for puerto rico, effective july5, 2004. [forms-8 (file no.333-125332) filed may27, 2005, exhibit10.3]
*10.26
the home depot futurebuilder, a 401(k)and stock ownership plan, as amended and restated effective july1, 2004. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october31, 2004, exhibit10.5]
*10.27
the home depot long-term incentive plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.42]
*10.28
senior officers' bonus pool plan, as amended. [appendix a to proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders held may26, 1999]
*10.29
executive officers' bonus plan. [appendix b to proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders held may27, 1998]
*10.30
supplemental executive choice program, effective january1, 1999. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february3, 2002, exhibit10.15]
*10.31
home depot u.s.a.,inc. deferred compensation plan for officers. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit10.38]
*10.32
the home depot executive life insurance, death benefit only plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit10.39]
*10.33
the home depot executive physical program. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit 10.40]
*10.34
the home depot management incentive plan. [appendix a to proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders held on may30, 2003]
*10.35
the home depot,inc. management incentive plan fiscal year 2007 performance measures. [form8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit10.11]
*10.36
the home depot,inc. non-employee directors' deferred stock compensation plan. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february2, 2003, exhibit10.37]
10.37
separation agreement between the company and robert nardelli effective as of january2, 2007.
10.38
deferred payment trust dated as of january12, 2007.
*10.39
employment arrangement between frank blake and the home depot,inc., dated january23, 2007. [form8-k/a filed on january24, 2007, exhibit10.1]
*10.40
employment arrangement between carol b. tom and the home depot,inc., dated january22, 2007. [form8-k/a filed on january24, 2007, exhibit10.2]
*10.41
employment arrangement between joe deangelo and the home depot,inc., dated january23, 2007. [form8-k/a filed on january24, 2007, exhibit10.3]
*10.42
employment agreement between dennis m. donovan and the home depot,inc. dated march16, 2001. [forms-4 (file no.333-61548) filed may24, 2001, exhibit10.1]
*10.43
deferred stock units plan and agreement between dennis m. donovan and the home depot,inc. dated as of may31, 2001. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february3, 2002, exhibit10.25]
*10.44
promissory notebetween dennis m. donovan and the home depot,inc. dated june7, 2001. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february3, 2002, exhibit10.26]
*10.45
employment agreement between frank l. fernandez and the home depot,inc. dated april2, 2001. [forms-4 (file no.333-61548) filed may24, 2001, exhibit10.2]
*10.46
deferred stock units plan and agreement between frank l. fernandez and the home depot,inc. dated april2, 2001. [form s-4 (file no.333-61548) filed may24, 2001, exhibit10.3]
*10.47
promissory notebetween frank l. fernandez and the home depot,inc. dated june18, 2001. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended february3, 2002, exhibit10.27]
*10.48
employment agreement between robert derodes and the home depot,inc., effective as of february7, 2002. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended november3, 2002, exhibit10.2]
*10.49
separation agreement& release by and between the home depot,inc. and john h. costello, dated september8, 2005. [form10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october30, 2005, exhibit10.1]
*10.50
participation agreement dated as of october22, 1998 among the home depot,inc. as guarantor; home depot u.s.a.,inc. as lessee; hd real estate funding corp. ii as facility lender; credit suisse leasing 92a l.p. as lessor; the bank of
new york as indenture trustee; and credit suisse first boston corporation and invemed associates,inc. as initial purchasers. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january31, 1999, exhibit10.10.]
*10.51
master modification agreement dated as of april20, 1998 among the home depot,inc. as guarantor; home depot u.s.a.,inc., as lessee and construction agent; hd real estate funding corp., as facility lender; credit suisse leasing 92a
l.p. as lessor; the lenders named on the schedule thereto as lenders; and credit suisse first boston corporation as agent bank. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january31, 1999, exhibit10.13]
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
list of subsidiaries of the company.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to rule13a-14(a)promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
31.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to rule13a-14(a)promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
32.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
management
contract or compensatory plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to this form pursuant to item 15(a)of this report.
(this page has been left blank intentionally.)
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf
by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the home depot, inc.
(registrant)
by:
/s/francis s. blake (francis s. blake, chairman& ceo)
date:
march23, 2007
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates
indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/francis s. blake (francis s. blake)
chairman& ceo (principal executive officer)
march23, 2007
/s/carol b. tom (carol b. tom)
chief financial officer and executive vice president corporate services (principal financial officer and principal accounting officer)
march23, 2007
/s/david h. batchelder (david h. batchelder)
director
march23, 2007
/s/gregory d. brenneman (gregory d. brenneman)
director
march23, 2007
/s/john l. clendenin (john l. clendenin)
director
march23, 2007
/s/claudio x. gonzlez (claudio x. gonzlez)
director
march23, 2007
/s/milledge a. hart, iii (milledge a. hart, iii)
director
march23, 2007
/s/bonnie g. hill (bonnie g. hill)
director
march23, 2007
/s/laban p. jackson, jr. (laban p. jackson, jr.)
director
march23, 2007
/s/helen johnson-leipold (helen johnson-leipold)
director
march23, 2007
/s/lawrence r. johnston (lawrence r. johnston)
director
march23, 2007
/s/kenneth g. langone (kenneth g. langone)
director
march23, 2007
/s/angelo r. mozilo (angelo r. mozilo)
director
march23, 2007
index of attached exhibits
10.37
separation agreement between the company and robert nardelli effective as of january2, 2007.
10.38
deferred payment trust dated as of january12, 2007.
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
list of subsidiaries of the company.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to rule13a-14(a)promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
31.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to rule13a-14(a)promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
32.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
10-year summary of financial and operating results
the home depot,inc. and subsidiaries
amounts inmillions, except where noted
10-year
compound annual
growth rate
statement of earnings data
net sales
16.6
%
$
90,837
$
81,511
net sales increase (%)
11.4
11.5
earnings before provision for income taxes
19.7
9,308
9,282
net earnings
19.9
5,761
5,838
net earnings increase (%)
(1.3
)
16.7
diluted earnings per share ($)(2)
20.5
2.79
2.72
diluted earnings per share increase (%)
2.6
20.4
diluted weighted average number of common shares
2,062
2,147
gross margin % of sales
32.8
33.5
total operating expenses % of sales
22.1
22.0
net interest income (expense) % of sales
(0.4
)
(0.1
)
earnings before provision for income taxes % of sales
10.3
11.4
net earnings % of sales
6.3
7.2
balance sheet data and financial ratios
total assets
18.8
%
$
52,263
$
44,405
working capital
10.5
5,069
2,563
merchandise inventories
16.8
12,822
11,401
net property and equipment
17.2
26,605
24,901
long-term debt
25.0
11,643
2,672
stockholders' equity
15.4
25,030
26,909
book value per share ($)
16.5
12.71
12.67
long-term debt-to-equity (%)
46.5
9.9
total debt-to-equity (%)
46.6
15.2
current ratio
1.39:1
1.20:1
inventory turnover
4.7x
4.8x
return on invested capital (%)
20.5
22.4
statement of cash flows data
depreciation and amortization
23.3
%
$
1,886
$
1,579
capital expenditures
11.0
3,542
3,881
payments for businesses acquired, net
4,268
2,546
cash dividends per share ($)
29.5
0.675
0.400
store data(3)
number of stores
15.4
%
2,147
2,042
square footage at fiscal year-end
15.3
increase in square footage (%)
4.2
7.0
average square footage per store (in thousands)
store sales and other data
comparable store sales increase (decrease) (%)(3)(4)(5)(6)
(2.8
)
3.1
weighted average weekly sales per operating store (in thousands)(3)
(1.0
)%
$
$
weighted average sales per square foot ($)(3)(4)
(1.1
)
number of customer transactions(3)
11.1
1,330
1,330
average ticket ($)(3)
3.4
58.90
57.98
number of associates at fiscal year-end
14.0
364,400
344,800
(1)fiscalyear 2001 includes 53 weeks; all other fiscal years reported include 52 weeks.  (2) diluted earnings per
share for fiscal 1997, excluding a $104million non-recurring charge, were $0.55.  (3) includes retail segment only.  (4)
adjusted to reflect the first 52 weeks of the 53-week fiscal year in 2001.
f-1
2001(1)
statement of earnings data
net sales
$
73,094
$
64,816
$
58,247
$
53,553
$
45,738
$
38,434
$
30,219
$
24,156
net sales increase (%)
12.8
11.3
8.8
17.1
19.0
27.2
25.1
23.7
earnings before provision for income taxes
7,912
6,843
5,872
4,957
4,217
3,804
2,654
1,898
net earnings
5,001
4,304
3,664
3,044
2,581
2,320
1,614
1,160
net earnings increase (%)
16.2
17.5
20.4
17.9
11.3
43.7
31.9
23.7
diluted earnings per share ($)(2)
2.26
1.88
1.56
1.29
1.10
1.00
0.71
0.52
diluted earnings per share increase (%)
20.2
20.5
20.9
17.3
10.0
40.8
29.1
20.9
diluted weighted average number of common
shares
2,216
2,289
2,344
2,353
2,352
2,342
2,320
2,287
gross margin % of sales
33.4
31.8
31.1
30.2
29.9
29.7
28.5
28.1
total operating expenses % of sales
22.6
21.2
21.1
20.9
20.7
19.8
19.7
19.8
net interest income (expense) % of sales
0.1
earnings before provision for income taxes % of
sales
10.8
10.6
10.1
9.3
9.2
9.9
8.8
7.9
net earnings % of sales
6.8
6.6
6.3
5.7
5.6
6.0
5.3
4.8
balance sheet data and financial ratios
total assets
$
39,020
$
34,437
$
30,011
$
26,394
$
21,385
$
17,081
$
13,465
$
11,229
working capital
3,818
3,774
3,882
3,860
3,392
2,734
2,076
2,004
merchandise inventories
10,076
9,076
8,338
6,725
6,556
5,489
4,293
3,602
net property and equipment
22,726
20,063
17,168
15,375
13,068
10,227
8,160
6,509
long-term debt
2,148
1,321
1,250
1,545
1,566
1,303
stockholders' equity
24,158
22,407
19,802
18,082
15,004
12,341
8,740
7,098
book value per share ($)
11.06
9.93
8.38
7.71
6.46
5.36
3.95
3.23
long-term debt-to-equity (%)
8.9
3.8
6.7
6.9
10.3
6.1
17.9
18.4
total debt-to-equity (%)
8.9
6.1
6.7
6.9
10.3
6.1
17.9
18.4
current ratio
1.37:1
1.40:1
1.48:1
1.59:1
1.77:1
1.75:1
1.73:1
1.82:1
inventory turnover
4.9x
5.0x
5.3x
5.4x
5.1x
5.4x
5.4x
5.4x
return on invested capital (%)
21.5
20.4
18.8
18.3
19.6
22.5
19.3
16.1
statement of cash flows data
depreciation and amortization
$
1,319
$
1,076
$
$
$
$
$
$
capital expenditures
3,948
3,508
2,749
3,393
3,574
2,618
2,094
1,464
payments for businesses acquired, net
cash dividends per share ($)
0.325
0.26
0.21
0.17
0.16
0.11
0.08
0.06
store data(3)
number of stores
1,890
1,707
1,532
1,333
1,134
square footage at fiscal year-end
increase in square footage (%)
9.8
10.2
14.1
18.5
22.6
23.5
22.8
23.1
average square footage per store (in thousands)
store sales and other data
comparable store sales increase (decrease)
(%)(3)(4)(5)(6)
5.1
3.7
(0.5
)
weighted average weekly sales per operating store
(in thousands)(3)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
weighted average sales per square foot ($)(3)(4)
number of customer transactions(3)
1,295
1,246
1,161
1,091
average ticket ($)(3)
54.89
51.15
49.43
48.64
48.65
47.87
45.05
43.63
number of associates at fiscal year-end
323,100
298,800
280,900
256,300
227,300
201,400
156,700
124,400
(5)includes net sales at locations open greater than 12months, including relocated and remodeled stores. retail stores become comparable on the monday
following their 365th day of operation. comparable store sales is intended only as supplemental information and is not a substitute for net sales or net earnings presented in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles.  (6) comparable store sales in fiscalyears prior to 2002 were reported to the nearest percent.
f-2
quicklinks
table of contents
cautionary statement pursuant to the private securities litigation reform act of 1995
part i
part ii
report of independent registered public accounting firm
report of independent registered public accounting firm
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries consolidated statements of earnings
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries consolidated balance sheets
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries consolidated statements of stockholders' equity and comprehensive income
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries consolidated statements of cash flows
part iii
part iv
signatures
