10-k
x17422e10vk.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington,d.c.
form10-k
x
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
february1, 2009
or
o
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities  exchange act of 1934
commission file number 1-8207
the home depot, inc.
(exact name of registrant as
specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
95-3261426
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
2455 paces ferry road,
n.w., atlanta, georgia 30339
(address of principal executive
offices) (zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code:
(770)433-8211
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
name of each
exchange
title of each
class
on which
registered
common stock, $0.05par value per share
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:
none
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known
seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities
act.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the
act.yesonox
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed
all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding
12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to file such reports), and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item405 of
regulations-k
is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in
partiii of this
form10-k
or any amendment to this
form10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated
filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of
large accelerated filer, accelerated
filer and smaller reporting company in rule
12b-2 of the
exchange act. (check one):
large accelerated
filerx
accelerated
filero
non-accelerated
filero
(do
not check if a smaller reporting company)
smaller reporting
companyo
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company
(as defined in
rule12b-2
of the exchange
act).yesonox
the aggregate market value of the common stock of the registrant
held by non-affiliates of the registrant on august3, 2008
was $39.7billion.
the number of shares outstanding of the registrants common
stock as of march23, 2009 was 1,696,279,008shares.
documents
incorporated by reference
portions of the registrants proxy statement for the 2009
annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference in
partiii of this
form10-k
to the extent described herein.
the home
depot, inc.
fiscal year 2008
form10-k
table of contents
part i
item 1.
business
item 1a.
risk factors
item 1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
partii
item 5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
item 9b.
other information
partiii
item 10.
directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions,
and director independence
item 14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
table of contents
cautionary
statement pursuant to the
private securities litigation reform act of 1995
certain statements regarding our future performance constitute
forward-looking statements as defined in the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking
statements may relate to, among other things, the demand for our
products and services, net sales growth, comparable store sales,
impact of cannibalization, store openings and closures, state of
the economy, state of the residential construction, housing and
home improvement markets, commodity price inflation and
deflation, implementation of store initiatives, continuation of
reinvestment plans, net earnings performance, earnings per
share, stock-based compensation expense, capital allocation and
expenditures, liquidity, the effect of adopting certain
accounting standards, return on invested capital, management of
our purchasing or customer credit policies, the effect of
charges, the planned recapitalization of the company, timing of
the completion of such recapitalization and the ability to issue
debt securities on terms and at rates acceptable to us.
forward-looking statements are based on currently available
information and our current assumptions, expectations and
projections about future events. you are cautioned not to place
undue reliance on our forward-looking statements. such
statements are not guarantees of future performance and are
subject to future events, risks and uncertainties
many of which are beyond our control or are currently unknown to
us as well as potentially inaccurate assumptions
that could cause actual results to differ materially from our
expectations and projections. such risks and uncertainties
include, but are not limited to, those described in
item1a, risk factors.
forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are
made, and we do not undertake to update such statements other
than as required by law. you are advised, however, to review any
further disclosures we make on related subjects in our periodic
filings with the securities and exchange commission
(sec).
parti
item1.
business.
introduction
the home depot, inc. is the worlds largest home
improvement retailer based on net sales for the fiscal year
ended february1, 2009 (fiscal 2008). the home
depot stores sell a wide assortment of building materials, home
improvement and lawn and garden products and provide a number of
services. the home depot stores average approximately
105,000square feet of enclosed space, with approximately
24,000 additional square feet of outside garden area. as of the
end of fiscal 2008, we had 2,233 the home depot stores located
throughout the united states including the commonwealth of
puerto rico and the territories of the u.s.virgin islands
and guam (u.s.), canada, china and mexico. in
addition, at the end of fiscal 2008, the company operated 34
expo design center stores, two thd design center stores and five
yardbirds stores. on january26, 2009, we announced the
planned closing of our expo, thd design center and yardbirds
stores as part of our focus on our core business.
the home depot, inc. is a delaware corporation that was
incorporated in 1978. our store support center (corporate
office) is located at 2455 paces ferry road, n.w., atlanta,
georgia 30339. our telephone number is
(770)433-8211.
we maintain an internet website at www.homedepot.com. we make
available on our website, free of charge, our annual reports to
shareholders, annual reports on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
current reports on
form8-k,
proxy statements and forms3, 4 and 5 as soon as reasonably
practicable after filing such documents with, or furnishing such
documents to, the sec.
we include our website addresses throughout this filing only as
textual references. the information contained on our websites is
not incorporated by reference into this report.
table of contents
our
business
operating strategy.in fiscal 2008,
despite the continuing difficult economic environment, we
continued to focus on our core retail business, investing in our
associates and stores and improving our customer service. we
shifted our focus from new square footage growth to maximizing
the productivity of our existing store base. during the year, we
implemented significant changes in our store operations to make
them simpler, more consistent and more customer-focused. we
shifted associate hours to be more customer facing and refocused
our efforts on offering every day values in the stores.
additionally, we made several strategic decisions which are
intended to optimize our capital allocation, concentrate our
efforts on our core business and create long-term value for our
shareholders, including our decision to close 15 stores, remove
approximately 50 stores from our new store pipeline and exit our
expo, thd design center, yardbirds and hd bath businesses.
customers.the home depot stores serve
three primary customer groups:
do-it-yourself (d-i-y)
customers:these customers are typically home
owners who purchase products and complete their own projects and
installations.
do-it-for-me (d-i-f-m)
customers:these customers are typically home
owners who purchase materials themselves and hire third parties
to complete the project or installation, or both. we arrange for
the installation of a variety of the home depot products through
qualified independent contractors.
professional customers:these customers are
professional remodelers, general contractors, repairmen, small
business owners and tradesmen. in many stores, we offer a
variety of programs to these customers, including delivery and
will-call services, dedicated staff, extensive merchandise
selections and expanded credit programs, all of which we believe
increase sales to these customers.
products.a typical home depot store
stocks approximately 30,000 to 40,000 products during the year,
including both national brand name and proprietary items. the
following table shows the percentage of net sales of each major
product group (and related services) for each of the last three
fiscal years:
percentage of net sales for fiscal year ended
february1,
february3,
january28,
product group
plumbing, electrical and kitchen
30.6
%
31.0
%
30.8
%
hardware and seasonal
28.7
28.0
27.0
building materials, lumber and millwork
22.1
22.3
23.6
paint and flooring
18.6
18.7
18.6
total
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
in fiscal 2008, we reduced our inventory while maintaining a
favorable in-stock rate. we also reduced a number of one-time
discount promotions and refocused our efforts on offering every
day values. we continued to introduce innovative and distinctive
products to our customers, including
thomasville
deep seating patio furniture,
charbroil
infrared grills,
ridgid
pressure washers and
homelite
trimmers.
to complement and enhance our product selection, we have formed
strategic alliances and exclusive relationships with selected
suppliers to market products under a variety of well-recognized
brand names. during fiscal 2008, we offered a number of
proprietary and exclusive brands across a wide range of
departments including, but not limited to, behr premium
plus
paint, hampton
bay
lighting,
vigoro
lawn care products,
husky
hand tools,
ridgid
and
ryobi
power tools,
pegasus
faucets, and glacier
bay
bath fixtures. we may consider additional strategic alliances
and relationships with other suppliers and will continue to
assess opportunities to expand the range of products available
under brand names that are exclusive to the home depot.
from our store support center we maintain a global sourcing
merchandise program to source high-quality products directly
from manufacturers around the world. our product development
merchants identify and purchase market leading innovative
products directly for our stores. additionally, we have three
sourcing offices located in the chinese cities of shanghai,
shenzhen and dalian, and offices in gurgaon, india; milan,
italy; monterrey, mexico and toronto, canada.
table of contents
services.our stores offer a variety of
installation services. these services target d-i-f-m customers
who select and purchase products and installation of those
products from us. these installation programs include products
such as carpeting, flooring, cabinets, countertops and water
heaters. in addition, we provide professional installation of a
number of products sold through our in-home sales programs, such
as generators and furnace and central air systems.
store
growth
united states.at the end of fiscal 2008, we
were operating 1,971 the home depot stores in the u.s.,
including the commonwealth of puerto rico and the territories of
the u.s.virgin islands and guam. during fiscal 2008, we
opened 41 new the home depot stores, including five relocations,
in the u.s.
canada.at the end of fiscal 2008, we were
operating 176 the home depot stores in ten canadian provinces.
of these stores, 12 were opened during fiscal 2008, including
one relocation.
mexico.at the end of fiscal 2008, we were
operating 74 the home depot stores in mexico. of these stores,
nine were opened during fiscal 2008.
china.at the end of fiscal 2008, we were
operating 12 the home depot stores in six chinese cities.
certain financial information about our operations outside of
the u.s.is reported in note1 to the consolidated
financial statements.
store
support services
information technologies.during fiscal
2008, we continued to make information technology investments to
better support our customers and provide an improved overall
shopping environment and experience. we invested in our supply
chain and merchandising tools to improve inventory management
capabilities and streamline our operations.
we completed the deployment of a new enterprise resource
planning (erp) system to our canadian division,
which includes all stores and distribution centers. we will
assess the return on investment and performance of the system in
the fiscal year ended january31, 2010 (fiscal
2009) as we evaluate alternatives for our
u.s.application footprint.
with regard to our supply chain, we implemented a new warehouse
management system to support the u.s.and canadian stores,
continued implementation of a new transportation management
system, completed a technology refresh at our distribution
centers, and implemented improvements to our central automated
replenishment system.
we made improvements to the tools utilized in merchandising
systems in the areas of assortment management, forecasting, and
replenishment.
with our continued focus on the stores, we provided technology
improvements designed to help store associates perform their
tasks and improve customer service. we equipped 1,100 stores
with new computers, registers and printers, and 920 stores
received new paint dispensers.
credit services.we offer six credit
programs through third-party credit providers to professional,
d-i-y and d-i-f-m customers. in fiscal 2008, approximately
3.2million new the home depot credit accounts were opened,
and the total number of the home depot active account holders
was approximately 12.5million. proprietary credit card
sales accounted for approximately 28% of store sales in fiscal
2008. in fiscal 2008, home depot re-negotiated and extended the
term of the primary contracts governing the programs. the new
contract with citibank established a ceiling for the cost of
credit for the program while retaining the ability for portfolio
performance improvements to lower the cost of credit.
logistics.our logistics programs are
designed to ensure product availability for customers, effective
use of our investment in inventory and low total supply chain
costs. at the end of fiscal 2008, we operated 30lumber
distribution centers, 45 conventional distribution centers and
five transit facilities, all located in the u.s., canada and
mexico. additionally in 2008, we opened four new rapid
deployment centers (rdc) in the u.s., bringing our
total number of rdcs to five. we now serve approximately 25% of
our u.s.stores from rdcs. rdcs allow for aggregation of
store product needs to a single purchase order, and then rapid
allocation and deployment of inventory to individual stores upon
table of contents
arrival at the center. this process allows improved
transportation, simplified order processing at suppliers and
reduced lead time from the time that product needs at stores are
determined to actual replenishment. we plan to open additional
rdcs during fiscal 2009 and 2010 and ultimately serve all of our
u.s.stores from rdcs.
in fiscal 2008, approximately 35% of the merchandise shipped to
our u.s.stores flowed through our distribution facilities.
the remaining merchandise was shipped directly from suppliers to
our stores. the expansion of the rdc network is expected to
increase our distribution utilization. in addition to
replenishing merchandise at our stores, we also provide delivery
of in-stock and special order product directly to our customers.
associates.at the end of fiscal 2008,
we employed approximately 322,000 associates, of whom
approximately 22,500 were salaried, with the remainder
compensated on an hourly or temporary basis. approximately 65%
of our associates are employed on a full-time basis. we believe
that our employee relations are very good. to attract and retain
qualified personnel, we seek to maintain competitive salary and
wage levels in each market we serve.
intellectual property.through our
wholly-owned subsidiary, homer tlc, inc., we have registered or
applied for registration, in a number of countries, for a
variety of internet domain names, service marks and trademarks
for use in our businesses, including the home
depot;
hampton
bay
fans, lighting and accessories; glacier
bay
toilets, sinks and faucets;
pegasus
faucets and bath accessories; and
workforce
tools, tool boxes and shelving. we have also obtained and now
maintain patent portfolios relating to certain products and
services provided by the home depot, and continually seek to
patent or otherwise protect selected innovations we incorporate
into our products and business operations. we regard our
intellectual property as having significant value to our
business and as being an important factor in the marketing of
our brand,
e-commerce,
stores and new areas of our business.
quality assurance program.we have both
quality assurance and engineering resources who oversee the
quality of our directly imported, globally-sourced and
proprietary products. through these programs, we have
established criteria for supplier and product performance that
are designed to ensure our products comply with federal, state
and local quality and performance standards. these programs also
allow us to measure and track timeliness of shipments. these
performance records are made available to the factories to allow
them to strive for improvement. the program addresses quality
assurance at the factory, product and packaging levels.
environmental, health& safety
(eh&s).we are committed to
maintaining a safe environment for our customers and associates
and protecting the environment of the communities in which we do
business. our eh&s function in the field is directed by
trained associates focused primarily on the execution of the
eh&s programs. additionally, we have a store support
center-based team of dedicated eh&s professionals who
evaluate, develop, implement and enforce policies, processes and
programs on a company-wide basis.
environmental.the home depot is
committed to conducting business in an environmentally
responsible manner and this commitment impacts all areas of our
business, including store construction and maintenance, energy
usage, product selection and customer education.
in fiscal 2008, we spent approximately $27.5million for
energy efficiency related projects. by replacing hvac units in
approximately 200 existing stores and switching to the use of
t-5 lighting in approximately 700 existing stores, we estimate
cumulative savings to be approximately $28million since
fiscal 2006. in addition, we have implemented strict operational
standards that establish energy efficient practices in all of
our facilities. these include hvac unit temperature regulation
and adherence to strict lighting schedules, which are the
largest sources of energy consumption in our stores, as well as
utilizing the novar energy management and alarm system in each
store to monitor energy efficiency. we estimate that by
implementing and utilizing these energy saving programs we have
avoided 1.6billion pounds of greenhouse gas emissions
since fiscal 2006. we believe this is equivalent to removing
approximately 132,000 cars from the highway. in june 2008, we
launched a nation-wide in-store compact fluorescent light bulb
recycling program. this service is offered to all customers
free-of-charge
and is available in all u.s.stores, including alaska and
hawaii.
we have also taken additional measures to further our
sustainability efforts. we partnered with the u.s.green
building council and have built seven leadership in energy and
environmental design (leed) green certified and
equivalent stores. we offset the carbon emissions created by our
facilities and a portion of those emissions created by
business-related travel through an agreement with the
conservation fund that resulted in the planting of thousands of
trees that will help reduce the heat-island effect in urban
areas, reduce erosion and help clean the air. through our eco
optionssm
table of contents
program, we have created product categories that allow consumers
to easily identify environmentally preferred product selections
in our stores. we implemented a supplier social and
environmental responsibility program to ensure that our
suppliers adhere to the highest standards of social and
environmental responsibility.
seasonality.our business is seasonal
to a certain extent. generally, our highest volume of sales
occurs in our second fiscal quarter, and the lowest volume
occurs during our fourth fiscal quarter.
competition.our business is highly
competitive, based in part on price, store location, customer
service and assortment of merchandise. in each of the markets we
serve, there are a number of other home improvement stores,
electrical, plumbing and building materials supply houses and
lumber yards. with respect to some products, we also compete
with discount stores, local, regional and national hardware
stores, mail order firms, warehouse clubs, independent building
supply stores and, to a lesser extent, other retailers. due to
the variety of competition we face, we are unable to precisely
measure the impact on our sales by our competitors.
item1a.
risk
factors.
the risks and uncertainties described below could materially and
adversely affect our business, financial condition and results
of operations and could cause actual results to differ
materially from our expectations and projections. the risk
factors described below include the considerable risks
associated with the current economic environment and the
possible adverse effects on our financial condition and results
of operations. you should read these risk factors in conjunction
with managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations in
item7 and our consolidated financial statements and
related notes in item8. there also may be other factors
that we cannot anticipate or that are not described in this
report, generally because we do not perceive them to be
material. such factors could cause results to differ materially
from our expectations.
the
state of the housing, construction and home improvement markets,
rising costs, a reduction in the availability of financing,
weather and other conditions in north america could further
adversely affect our costs of doing business, demand for our
products and services and our financial
performance.
in 2008, the housing, residential construction and home
improvement markets have deteriorated dramatically and more
severely than was previously anticipated. we expect the
deterioration to continue through 2009 and our fiscal 2009 net
sales and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
to decline from fiscal 2008. other factors including
increasing unemployment and foreclosures, interest rate
fluctuations, fuel and other energy costs, labor and healthcare
costs, the availability of financing, the state of the credit
markets, including mortgages, home equity loans and consumer
credit, consumer confidence, weather, natural disasters and
other factors beyond our control could further
adversely affect demand for our products and services and our
financial performance. these and other similar factors could
increase our costs and cause our customers to delay purchasing
or determine not to purchase home improvement products and
services.
we
rely on third party suppliers. if we fail to identify and
develop relationships with a sufficient number of qualified
suppliers, or if our current suppliers experience financial
difficulties, our ability to timely and efficiently access
products that meet our high standards for quality could be
adversely affected.
we buy our products from suppliers located throughout the world.
our ability to continue to identify and develop relationships
with qualified suppliers who can satisfy our high standards for
quality and our need to access products in a timely and
efficient manner is a significant challenge. our ability to
access products also can be adversely affected by political
instability, the financial instability of suppliers,
suppliers noncompliance with applicable laws, trade
restrictions, tariffs, currency exchange rates, transport
capacity and cost and other factors beyond our control.
if we
are unable to effectively manage and expand our alliances and
relationships with selected suppliers of brand name products, we
may be unable to effectively execute our strategy to
differentiate ourselves from our competitors.
as part of our focus on product differentiation, we have formed
strategic alliances and exclusive relationships with selected
suppliers to market products under a variety of well-recognized
brand names. if we are unable to manage and expand these
alliances and relationships or identify alternative sources for
comparable products, we may not be able to effectively execute
product differentiation.
table of contents
our
ability to obtain additional financing on favorable terms, if
needed, could be adversely affected by the volatility in the
capital markets.
we obtain and manage liquidity from the positive cash flow we
generate from our operating activities and our access to capital
markets, including our commercial paper programs supported by a
long-term bank
line-of-credit
commitment. although we currently maintain a strong investment
grade rating and had no outstanding commercial paper obligations
as of the end of fiscal 2008, there is no assurance that our
ability to obtain additional financing through the capital
markets, if needed, will not be adversely impacted if the
current recessionary trends persist or worsen. continued
volatility in the capital markets could result in diminished
availability of credit, higher cost of borrowing and lack of
confidence in the equity market, making it more difficult to
obtain additional financing on terms that are favorable to us.
the
implementation of our supply chain and technology initiatives
could disrupt our operations in the near term, and these
initiatives might not provide the anticipated benefits or might
fail.
we have made, and we plan to continue to make, significant
investments in our supply chain and technology. these
initiatives are designed to streamline our operations to allow
our associates to continue to provide high quality service to
our customers and to provide our customers with a better
experience. the cost and potential problems and interruptions
associated with the implementation of these initiatives could
disrupt or reduce the efficiency of our operations in the near
term. in addition, our improved supply chain and new or upgraded
technology might not provide the anticipated benefits, it might
take longer than expected to realize the anticipated benefits,
or the initiatives might fail altogether.
we may
not timely identify or effectively respond to consumer trends,
which could adversely affect our relationship with customers,
the demand for our products and services and our market
share.
it is difficult to successfully predict the products and
services our customers will demand. the success of our business
depends in part on our ability to identify and respond to
evolving trends in demographics and consumer preferences.
failure to design attractive stores and to timely identify or
effectively respond to changing consumer tastes, preferences,
spending patterns and home improvement needs could adversely
affect our relationship with customers, the demand for our
products and services and our market share.
the
inflation or deflation of commodity prices could affect our
prices, demand for our products, sales and profit
margins.
prices of certain commodity products, including lumber and other
raw materials, are historically volatile and are subject to
fluctuations arising from changes in domestic and international
supply and demand, labor costs, competition, market speculation,
government regulations and periodic delays in delivery. rapid
and significant changes in commodity prices may affect our sales
and profit margins.
our
costs of doing business could increase as a result of changes in
federal, state or local regulations.
changes in the federal, state or local minimum wage or living
wage requirements or changes in other wage or workplace
regulations could increase our costs of doing business. in
addition, changes in federal, state or local regulations
governing the sale of some of our products or tax regulations
could increase our costs of doing business. also, passage of the
employee free choice act or other similar laws in congress could
lead to higher labor costs by encouraging unionization efforts
among our associates and disruption of store operations.
our
success depends upon our ability to attract, train and retain
highly qualified associates.
to be successful, we must attract, train and retain a large
number of highly qualified associates while controlling labor
costs. our ability to control labor costs is subject to numerous
external factors, including prevailing wage rates and health and
other insurance costs. in addition, many of our associates are
in hourly positions with historically high turnover rates. we
compete with other retail businesses for these associates and
invest significant resources in training and motivating them. we
also depend on our executives and other key associates for our
success. there is no assurance that we will be able to attract
or retain highly qualified associates in the future.
table of contents
changes
in accounting standards and subjective assumptions, estimates
and judgments by management related to complex accounting
matters could significantly affect our financial results or
financial condition.
generally accepted accounting principles and related accounting
pronouncements, implementation guidelines and interpretations
with regard to a wide range of matters that are relevant to our
business, such as revenue recognition, asset impairment,
inventories, lease obligations, self-insurance, tax matters and
litigation, are highly complex and involve many subjective
assumptions, estimates and judgments. changes in these rules or
their interpretation or changes in underlying assumptions,
estimates or judgments could significantly change our reported
or expected financial performance or financial condition.
increased
competition could adversely affect prices and demand for our
products and services and could decrease our market
share.
we operate in markets that are highly competitive. we compete
principally based on price, store location, customer service and
assortment of merchandise. in each market we serve, there are a
number of other home improvement stores, electrical, plumbing
and building materials supply houses and lumber yards. with
respect to some products, we also compete with discount stores,
local, regional and national hardware stores, mail order firms,
warehouse clubs, independent building supply stores and other
retailers. in addition, we compete with specialty design stores
or showrooms, some of which are only open to interior design
professionals, local and regional distributors, and wholesalers
and manufacturers that sell products directly to their customer
bases. intense competitive pressures from one or more of our
competitors could affect prices or demand for our products and
services. if we are unable to timely and appropriately respond
to these competitive pressures, our financial performance and
our market share could be adversely affected.
we are
involved in a number of legal proceedings, and while we cannot
predict the outcomes of such proceedings and other contingencies
with certainty, some of these outcomes may adversely affect our
operations or increase our costs.
we are involved in a number of legal proceedings, including
government inquiries and investigations, and consumer,
employment, tort and other litigation that arise from time to
time in the ordinary course of business. litigation is
inherently unpredictable, and the outcome of some of these
proceedings and other contingencies could require us to take or
refrain from taking actions which could adversely affect our
operations or could result in excessive verdicts. additionally,
defending against these lawsuits and proceedings may involve
significant expense and diversion of managements attention
and resources from other matters.
the
regulatory environment related to information security and
privacy is increasingly rigorous, and a significant privacy
breach could adversely affect our business.
the protection of our customer, employee and company data is
important to us. the regulatory environment related to
information security and privacy is increasingly rigorous, with
new and constantly changing requirements applicable to our
business. in addition, our customers have a high expectation
that we will adequately protect their personal information. a
significant breach of customer, employee or company data could
damage our reputation and result in lost sales, fines and
lawsuits.
any
inability to open new stores on schedule will delay the
contribution of these new stores to our financial
performance.
we expect to increase our presence in certain existing markets
and enter new markets. our ability to open new stores will
depend primarily on our ability to identify attractive
locations, negotiate leases or real estate purchase agreements
on acceptable terms, attract and train qualified
employees,and manage pre-opening expenses, including
construction costs.
environmental regulations, local zoning issues and other laws
related to land use affect our ability to open new stores.
failure to effectively manage these and other similar factors
will affect our ability to open stores on schedule, which will
delay the impact of these new stores on our financial
performance.
table of contents
if we
cannot successfully manage the unique challenges presented by
international markets, we may not be successful in expanding our
international operations.
our strategy includes expansion of our operations in
international markets by selective acquisitions, strategic
alliances and the opening of new stores. our ability to
successfully execute our strategy in international markets is
affected by many of the same operational risks we face in
expanding our u.s.operations. in addition, international
expansion may be adversely affected by our inability to identify
and gain access to local suppliers as well as by local laws and
customs, u.s. laws applicable to foreign operations, such as the
foreign corrupt practices act (fcpa), legal and
regulatory constraints, political and economic conditions and
currency regulations of the countries or regions in which we
currently operate or intend to operate in the future. risks
inherent in international operations also include, among others,
the costs and difficulties of managing international operations,
adverse tax consequences, greater difficulty in enforcing
intellectual property rights and risks associated with fcpa and
local anti-bribery law compliance. additionally, foreign
currency exchange rates and fluctuations may have an impact on
our future costs or on future cash flows from our international
operations.
item1b.
unresolved
staff comments.
not applicable.
item2.
properties.
the following tables show locations of the 1,971 the home depot
stores located in the u.s.and its territories and the 262
the home depot stores outside of the u.s.at the end of
fiscal 2008:
u.s. locations
number of stores
alabama
alaska
arizona
arkansas
california
colorado
connecticut
delaware
district of columbia
florida
georgia
guam
hawaii
idaho
illinois
indiana
iowa
kansas
kentucky
louisiana
maine
maryland
massachusetts
michigan
minnesota
mississippi
missouri
montana
nebraska
nevada
new hampshire
new jersey
new mexico
new york
north carolina
north dakota
ohio
oklahoma
oregon
pennsylvania
puerto rico
rhode island
south carolina
south dakota
tennessee
texas
utah
vermont
virgin islands
virginia
washington
west virginia
wisconsin
wyoming
total u.s.
1,971
table of contents
international locations
number of stores
canada:
alberta
british columbia
manitoba
new brunswick
newfoundland
nova scotia
ontario
prince edward island
quebec
saskatchewan
total canada
china:
beijing
henan
liaoning
shaanxi
shandong
tianjin
total china
mexico:
aguascalientes
baja california norte
baja california sur
chiapas
chihuahua
coahuila
distrito federal
durango
guanajuato
guerrero
hidalgo
jalisco
michoacn
morelos
nuevo len
puebla
queretaro
quintana roo
sanluis potosi
sinaloa
sonora
state of mexico
tabasco
tamaulipas
veracruz
yucatan
total mexico
additionally, at the end of fiscal 2008, we had 41 other retail
store locations, which included 34 expo design center stores
located in arizona, california, florida, georgia, illinois,
maryland, massachusetts, missouri, new jersey, new york,
tennessee, texas and virginia, five yardbirds stores located in
california and two thd design center stores located in
california and north carolina. we also operated nine home
decorators collection locations in california, illinois, kansas,
missouri, north carolina and oklahoma.
of our 2,274 stores at the end of fiscal 2008, approximately 89%
were owned (including those owned subject to a ground lease)
consisting of approximately 211.9million square feet, and
approximately 11% of such stores were leased consisting of
approximately 26.2million square feet.
at the end of fiscal 2008, we utilized 204 warehouses and
distribution centers located in 46states, consisting of
approximately 30.2million square feet, of which
approximately 0.2million is owned and approximately
30.0million is leased.
our executive, corporate staff, divisional staff and financial
offices occupy approximately 2.0million square feet of
leased and owned space in atlanta, georgia. at the end of fiscal
2008, we occupied an aggregate of approximately 4.0million
square feet, of which approximately 2.2million square feet
is owned and approximately 1.8million square feet is
leased, for store support centers and customer support centers.
table of contents
item3.
legal
proceedings.
in august 2005, the company received an informal request from
the staff of the sec for information related to the
companys
return-to-vendor
policies and procedures. subsequent to august 2005, the sec
staff requested additional information related to such policies
and procedures. the sec staff last contacted the company
regarding this matter in january 2007. the company responded to
the requests and will continue to fully cooperate with the sec
staff. the sec has informed the company that the informal
inquiry is not an indication that any violations of law have
occurred. although the company cannot predict the outcome of
this matter, it does not expect that this informal inquiry will
have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial
condition or results of operations.
the sec informed the company on december10, 2008 that it
does not intend to take any action on its informal inquiry into
the companys stock option granting practices, which
inquiry commenced in june 2006. the office of the
u.s.attorney for the southern district of new york also
requested information on this subject in 2006. the company
responded to each request and otherwise cooperated with the sec
and the office of the u.s.attorney, including producing
documents to the office of the u.s.attorney in late 2006.
the sec matter is therefore now closed, and we have not received
any communication from the office of the u.s.attorney
since that time.
on october8, 2008, the u.s.court of appeals for the
eleventh circuit affirmed the dismissal of class actions filed
against the company and certain of its current and former
officers and directors in the u.s.district court for the
northern district of georgia in atlanta, alleging certain
misrepresentations in violation of sections10(b) and 20(a)
of the securities exchange act of 1934 and
rule10b-5
thereunder in connection with the companys
return-to-vendor
practices. these actions were filed by certain current and
former shareholders of the company in the second quarter of
2006. relief sought in the amended complaint included
unspecified damages and costs and attorneys fees. the
disposition of these matters is now complete.
the company has agreed to settle derivative and securities
exchange act of 1934 section14(a) claims filed against it
and certain of its current and former officers and directors
relating to the companys
return-to-vendor,
stock option granting and compensation practices. the claims
were filed by certain shareholders of the company from the
second quarter of fiscal 2006 through the fourth quarter of
fiscal 2007. relief sought included, among others, unspecified
damages, injunctive relief, disgorgement of profits, benefits
and compensation obtained by the defendants, cancellation of a
new stock incentive plan and awards granted under such plan,
punitive damages, costs and attorneys fees. under the
terms of the settlement, the company agreed to maintain or adopt
certain corporate governance practices and to pay
plaintiffs counsel attorneys fees and reimbursement
of expenses in the aggregate amount of $14.5million. the
settlement was approved by the superior court of fulton county,
georgia, on june10, 2008. the derivative and
section14(a) actions were dismissed in accordance with the
settlement, and the disposition of these matters is now complete.
the following actions have been filed against the company and,
in some cases, against certain of its current and former
officers and directors as described below. although the company
cannot predict their outcome, it does not expect these actions,
individually or together, will have a material adverse effect on
its consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
in the second and third quarters of fiscal 2006, three
purported, but uncertified, class actions were filed against the
company, the home depot futurebuilder administrative committee
and certain of the companys current and former directors
and employees alleging breach of fiduciary duty in violation of
the employee retirement income security act of 1974
(erisa) in connection with the companys
return-to-vendor
and stock option practices. these actions are before the
u.s.district court for the northern district of georgia in
atlanta. in the first quarter of fiscal 2007, the plaintiffs
joined together in one case and voluntarily dismissed the other
two cases. in march 2007, the three original plaintiffs and two
additional former employees filed a joint amended complaint
seeking certification as a class action, unspecified damages,
costs, attorneys fees and equitable and injunctive relief.
on september10, 2007, the court granted the
defendants motion to dismiss and entered judgment for the
defendants. the plaintiffs appealed the dismissal and, on
july31, 2008, the u.s.court of appeals for the
eleventh circuit reversed the district courts decision on
standing, affirmed its finding that the plaintiffs failed to
exhaust the administrative remedies provided under erisa, and
remanded the matter to the district court for further
adjudication. the district court has stayed the matter pending
plaintiffs pursuit of their administrative remedies under
erisa.
table of contents
the company has reached a tentative settlement, subject to court
approval, with the plaintiffs in five current lawsuits in the
superior court of the county of los angeles in california,
containing multiple
class-action
allegations that the company failed to provide meal breaks. the
complaints were filed by current and former hourly associates
from the first quarter of 2004 through the fourth quarter of
2008. relief sought included unspecified monetary damages,
injunctive relief or both. class or collective-action
certification was not addressed in any of these cases. in the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, the company established a reserve
for this settlement, which is recorded in our consolidated
balance sheets in other accrued expenses.
from the third quarter of 2004 through the fourth quarter of
2008, current and former associates have filed three pending
lawsuits in the district court of new jersey and the superior
court of the county of los angeles, containing multiple
class-action
allegations that the company misclassified their positions under
the fair labor standards act and that they are entitled to
overtime, or otherwise that they were not paid for work
performed. the complaints generally seek unspecified monetary
damages, injunctive relief or both. final class or
collective-action certification has yet to be addressed in most
of these cases. the company cannot reasonably estimate the
possible loss which may arise from these lawsuits. these
matters, if decided adversely to or settled by the company,
individually or in the aggregate, may have a material adverse
effect on its consolidated financial condition or results of
operations. the company is vigorously defending itself against
these actions.
in july 2005, the company received a grand jury subpoena from
the united states attorneys office in los angeles,
california, seeking documents and information relating to the
companys handling, storage and disposal of hazardous
waste. the company is cooperating fully with the united states
attorneys office. although the company cannot predict the
outcome of this proceeding, it does not expect any such outcome
to have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial
condition or results of operations.
on september26, 2008, the company received an
administrative order and notice of civil administrative penalty
assessment from the state of new jersey department of
environmental protection (dep). the order and notice
seeks a civil penalty for alleged violations of recordkeeping
requirements pertaining to the use of generators as determined
by the dep. the company is currently in settlement discussions
with the dep regarding this matter. although the company cannot
predict the outcome of this proceeding, it does not expect any
such outcome to have a material adverse effect on its
consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
item4.
submission
of matters to a vote of security holders.
not applicable.
table of contents
partii
item5.market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities.
since april19, 1984, our common stock has been listed on
the new york stock exchange, trading under the symbol
hd. the company paid its first cash dividend on
june22, 1987, and has paid cash dividends during each
subsequent quarter. future dividend payments will depend on the
companys earnings, capital requirements, financial
condition and other factors considered relevant by the board of
directors.
the table below sets forth the high and low sales prices of our
common stock on the new york stock exchange and the quarterly
cash dividends declared per share of common stock during the
periods indicated.
price range
cash dividends
high
low
declared
fiscal year 2008
first quarter ended may4, 2008
$
30.12
$
25.00
$
0.225
second quarter ended august3, 2008
$
29.53
$
21.46
$
0.225
third quarter ended november2, 2008
$
30.16
$
18.51
$
0.225
fourth quarter ended february1, 2009
$
25.26
$
18.52
$
0.225
fiscal year 2007
first quarter ended april29, 2007
$
41.76
$
36.74
$
0.225
second quarter ended july29, 2007
$
40.94
$
36.75
$
0.225
third quarter ended october28, 2007
$
38.31
$
30.70
$
0.225
fourth quarter ended february3, 2008
$
31.51
$
24.71
$
0.225
as of march17, 2009, there were approximately
156,000shareholders of record and approximately 1,200,000
additional shareholders holding stock under nominee security
position listings.
table of contents
stock
performance graph
this graph depicts the companys cumulative total
shareholder returns relative to the performance of the
standard& poors 500 composite stock index and
the standard& poors retail composite index for
the five-year period commencing february2, 2004, the first
trading day of fiscal 2004, and ending january30, 2009,
the last trading day of fiscal 2008. the graph assumes $100
invested at the closing price of the companys common stock
on the new york stock exchange and each index on
january30, 2004 and assumes that all dividends were
reinvested on the date paid. the points on the graph represent
fiscal year-end amounts based on the last trading day in each
fiscal year.
fiscal 2003
fiscal 2004
fiscal 2005
fiscal 2006
fiscal 2007
fiscal 2008
the home depot
$
100.00
$
114.91
$
114.88
$
116.79
$
91.40
$
66.93
s&p 500 index
$
100.00
$
105.33
$
117.57
$
132.72
$
132.76
$
80.49
s&pretailcompositeindex
$
100.00
$
114.90
$
124.97
$
139.54
$
117.39
$
73.11
table of contents
issuer
purchases of equity securities
since fiscal 2002, the company has repurchased shares of its
common stock having a value of approximately $27.3billion
pursuant to its share repurchase program. the number and average
price of shares purchased in each fiscal month of the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2008 are set forth in the table below:
approximate dollar
total number of
value of shares
average
shares purchased as
that may yet be
total number of
price paid
part of publicly
purchased under
period
shares
purchased(1)
per share
announced
program(2)
the program
nov. 3, 2008 nov. 30, 2008
10,405
$
25.28
$
12,731,893,819
dec. 1, 2008 dec. 28, 2008
10,237
$
23.14
$
12,731,893,819
dec. 29, 2008 feb. 1, 2009
43,381
$
23.72
$
12,731,893,819
(1)
these amounts are repurchases pursuant to the companys
1997 and 2005 omnibus stock incentive plans (the
plans). under the plans, participants may exercise
stock options by surrendering shares of common stock that the
participants already own as payment of the exercise price.
participants in the plans may also surrender shares as payment
of applicable tax withholding on the vesting of restricted stock
and deferred share awards. shares so surrendered by participants
in the plans are repurchased pursuant to the terms of the plans
and applicable award agreements and not pursuant to publicly
announced share repurchase programs.
(2)
the companys common stock repurchase program was
initially announced on july15, 2002. as of the end of
fiscal 2008, the board approved purchases up to
$40.0billion. the program does not have a prescribed
expiration date.
sales of
unregistered securities
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, the company issued 513
deferred stock units under the home depot, inc. nonemployee
directors deferred stock compensation plan pursuant to the
exemption from registration provided by section4(2) of the
securities act of 1933, as amended. the deferred stock units
were credited to the accounts of such nonemployee directors who
elected to receive board retainers in the form of deferred stock
units instead of cash during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008.
the deferred stock units convert to shares of common stock on a
one-for-one
basis following a termination of service as described in this
plan.
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, the company credited
53,608 deferred stock units to participant accounts under the
home depot futurebuilder restoration plan pursuant to an
exemption from the registration requirements of the securities
act of 1933, as amended, for involuntary, non-contributory
plans. the deferred stock units convert to shares of common
stock on a
one-for-one
basis following the termination of services as described in this
plan.
item6.
selected
financial data.
the information required by this item is incorporated by
reference to pages f-1 and f-2 of this report.
table of contents
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations.
executive
summary and selected consolidated statements of earnings
data
for fiscal year ended february1, 2009 (fiscal
2008), we reported net earnings of $2.3billion and
diluted earnings per share of $1.34 compared to net earnings of
$4.4billion and diluted earnings per share of $2.37 for
fiscal year ended february3, 2008 (fiscal
2007).
we took action on several strategic items in fiscal 2008
resulting in total pretax charges of $951million
(rationalization charges). these rationalization
charges included the closing of 15 underperforming stores and
the removal of approximately 50 stores from our new store
opening pipeline, the planned exit of our expo, thd design
center, yardbirds and hd bath businesses and strategic support
staff reductions. additionally, fiscal 2008 included a
$163million pretax write-down of our investment in hd
supply and a $52million loss from discontinued operations,
net of tax, for the settlement of working capital from the sale
of hd supply.
fiscal 2008 consisted of 52weeks compared with
53weeks for fiscal 2007. the
53rdweek
added approximately $1.1billion in net sales and increased
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations by
approximately $0.04 for fiscal 2007.
we reported earnings from continuing operations of
$2.3billion and diluted earnings per share from continuing
operations of $1.37 for fiscal 2008 compared to earnings from
continuing operations of $4.2billion and diluted earnings
per share from continuing operations of $2.27 for fiscal 2007.
excluding the rationalization charges and the write-down of our
investment in hd supply, earnings from continuing operations
were $3.0billion and diluted earnings per share from
continuing operations were $1.78 for fiscal 2008.
net sales decreased 7.8% to $71.3billion for fiscal 2008
from $77.3billion for fiscal 2007. excluding the
53rdweek
of fiscal 2007, net sales decreased 6.5% for fiscal 2008. the
slowdown in the global economy and weakness in the
u.s.residential construction and home improvement markets
negatively impacted our net sales for fiscal 2008. our
comparable store sales declined 8.7% in fiscal 2008 driven by a
5.5% decline in comparable store customer transactions, as well
as a 3.3% decline in our average ticket.
in fiscal 2008, despite the continuing difficult economic
environment, we continued to focus on our core retail business,
investing in our associates and stores and improving our
customer service. we have exited non-core businesses,
restructured support staff and have stopped applying significant
capital to building new square footage. we remain committed to
the long-term health of our business through our strategy of
investing in our retail business through the following five
priorities:
associate engagement we have taken a number of
actions to improve associate engagement by changing the way our
associates are compensated, recognized and rewarded, including
enhancing our success sharing program, an incentive program for
our hourly associates driven by individual store performance.
success sharing payouts will be received by 83% of our stores
for the second half of fiscal 2008 compared to 44% of stores for
the same period last year.
product excitement we continue to work on our
merchandising transformation by redefining how we run our
business, implementing a focused bay portfolio approach to
product assortment and creating new tools to support better
merchandising decision making. as a result, we saw consumer unit
share gains against the market in several key merchandising
classes. for example, carpet, hand tools, power tools, blinds,
bath fixtures, windows and doors all gained share in fiscal
2008. our new lower price campaign is a major component of our
portfolio strategy. an example is interior paint, where we have
lowered prices on items such as behr flat premium plus. unit
sales are increasing, and at the same time, our attachment sales
of related items are going up.
shopping environment we continued our store
reinvestment by completing an aggressive list of maintenance
projects, including the completion of our lighting upgrade, as
well as more complex repair and maintenance activities for
hundreds of other stores. in addition to programmatic
maintenance, our integrated field and support center teams have
rolled out store standards to all stores. we developed and
piloted common guidelines on store appearance and shopability,
including standards for front apron merchandising, wingstack
usage, signage presentation, fixturing and off-shelf product.
this
table of contents
initiative helps reduce the amount of time our store managers
spend on these issues, removes unnecessary clutter from the
aisles and implements a basic and consistent approach to store
appearance.
product availability we continued our supply chain
transformation to improve product availability. we have five
rdcs operating that now serve approximately 500 of our stores.
we plan to open additional rdcs in fiscal 2009 and expect that
they will serve approximately 1,000 of our stores by the end of
fiscal 2009. we remain committed to our overall roll-out
strategy for rdcs, supporting our goal of increasing our central
distribution penetration.
own the pro we have made significant improvements in
the services we provide our pro customers, particularly through
our pro bid room. the pro bid room, which is available in all of
our stores, allows us to leverage the buying power of the home
depot for the benefit of our pro customers. our direct ship
program allows us to have large orders delivered from our
vendors to the customers job site directly, reducing
handling, lead-time and cost while building loyalty with the pro
customer.
we opened 62 new stores in fiscal 2008, including 6 relocations,
closed 15 stores as part of our store rationalization actions
and closed one store in mexico due to a fire, bringing our total
store count at the end of fiscal 2008 to 2,274. as of the end of
fiscal 2008, 262, or approximately 12%, of our stores were
located in canada, mexico and china compared to 243 as of fiscal
2007.
we generated $5.5billion of cash flow from operations in
fiscal 2008. we used this cash flow to repay $2.0billion
of short-term debt and other debt obligations, fund
$1.8billion in capital expenditures and pay
$1.5billion of dividends.
at the end of fiscal 2008, our long-term debt-to-equity ratio
was 54.4% compared to 64.3% at the end of fiscal 2007. our
return on invested capital for continuing operations (computed
on the average of beginning and ending long-term debt and equity
for the trailing twelve months) was 9.5% at the end of fiscal
2008 compared to 13.9% for fiscal 2007. this decrease reflects
the decline in our operating profit, which includes the impact
of the rationalization charges. excluding rationalization
charges, our return on invested capital for continuing
operations was 11.4%.
table of contents
we believe the selected sales data, the percentage relationship
between net sales and major categories in the consolidated
statements of earnings and the percentage change in the dollar
amounts of each of the items presented below are important in
evaluating the performance of our business operations. we
believe the information presented in our managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations provides an understanding of our business, our
operations and our financial condition.
% increase
(decrease)
% of net sales
in dollar amounts
fiscal
year(1)
vs. 2007
vs. 2006
net sales
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
(7.8
)%
(2.1
)%
gross profit
33.7
33.6
33.6
(7.7
)
(2.1
)
operating expenses:
selling, general and administrative
25.0
22.1
20.4
4.7
5.9
depreciation and amortization
2.5
2.2
2.0
4.9
8.1
total operating expenses
27.5
24.3
22.4
4.7
6.1
operating income
6.1
9.4
11.2
(39.8
)
(18.3
)
interest and other (income) expense:
interest and investment income
(0.1
)
(75.7
)
174.1
interest expense
0.9
0.9
0.5
(10.3
)
78.0
other
0.2
0.0
0.0
interest and other, net
1.1
0.8
0.5
23.6
70.9
earnings from continuing operations before provision for
income taxes
5.0
8.6
10.8
(45.8
)
(22.1
)
provision for income taxes
1.8
3.1
4.1
(47.0
)
(25.5
)
earnings from continuing operations
3.2
%
5.4
%
6.7
%
(45.1
)%
(20.1
)%
selected sales data
number of customer transactions (in
millions)(2)
1,272
1,336
1,330
(4.8
)%
0.5
%
average
ticket(2)
$
55.61
$
57.48
$
58.90
(3.3
)
(2.4
)
weighted average weekly sales per operating store (in
thousands)(2)
$
$
$
(8.7
)
(9.0
)
weighted average sales per square
foot(2)
$
298.19
$
331.86
$
357.83
(10.1
)
(7.3
)
comparable store sales decrease
(%)(3)
(8.7
)%
(6.7
)%
(2.8
)%
n/a
n/a
note: certain percentages may not sum to totals due to
rounding.
(1)
fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006 refer to the fiscal years
ended february1, 2009, february3, 2008 and
january28, 2007, respectively. fiscal years 2008 and 2006
include 52weeks; fiscal year 2007 includes
53weeks.
(2)
the
53rd week
of fiscal 2007 increased customer transactions by
20million, negatively impacted average ticket by $0.05,
negatively impacted weighted average weekly sales per operating
store by $3 thousand and increased weighted average sales per
square foot by $4.77.
(3)
includes net sales at locations open greater than
12months, including relocated and remodeled stores. retail
stores become comparable on the monday following their
365th day
of operation. comparable store sales is intended only as
supplemental information and is not a substitute for net sales
or net earnings presented in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles.
results
of operations
for an understanding of the significant factors that influenced
our performance during the past three fiscal years, the
following discussion should be read in conjunction with the
consolidated financial statements and the notes to consolidated
financial statements presented in this report.
table of contents
fiscal
2008 compared to fiscal 2007
net
sales
fiscal 2008 consisted of 52weeks compared to 53weeks
in fiscal 2007. net sales for fiscal 2008 decreased 7.8% to
$71.3billion from $77.3billion for fiscal 2007. the
decrease in net sales for fiscal 2008 reflects the impact of
negative comparable store sales and $1.1billion of net
sales attributable to the additional week in fiscal 2007,
partially offset by net sales of $1.8billion from new
stores in fiscal 2008. comparable store sales decreased 8.7% for
fiscal 2008 compared to a decrease of 6.7% for fiscal 2007.
there were a number of factors that contributed to our
comparable store sales decline. the u.s.residential
construction and home improvement markets continued to be soft
and consumers were challenged due to higher unemployment and an
across-the-board tightening of consumer credit availability. we
saw relative strength in building materials, plumbing,
garden/seasonal and hardware as comparable store sales in these
areas were above or at the company average for fiscal 2008.
comparable store sales for lumber, flooring, paint, electrical,
kitchen/bath and millwork were below the company average for
fiscal 2008. softness in our big ticket categories negatively
impacted average ticket, which decreased 3.3% to $55.61 for
fiscal 2008.
in order to meet our customer service objectives, we
strategically open stores near market areas served by existing
stores (cannibalize) to enhance service levels, gain
incremental sales and increase market penetration. our new
stores cannibalized approximately 5% of our existing stores as
of the end of fiscal 2008, which had a negative impact to
comparable store sales of approximately 1%.
we believe that our sales performance has been, and could
continue to be, negatively impacted by the level of competition
that we encounter in various markets. due to the
highly-fragmented u.s.home improvement industry, in which
we estimate our market share is approximately 20%, measuring the
impact on our sales by our competitors is difficult.
gross
profit
gross profit decreased 7.7% to $24.0billion for fiscal
2008 from $26.0billion for fiscal 2007. gross profit as a
percent of net sales was 33.7% for fiscal 2008 compared to 33.6%
for fiscal 2007, an increase of four basis points. this gross
margin expansion included $30million in markdowns taken in
connection with our rationalization charges. excluding these
markdowns, our gross profit as a percent of net sales increased
eight basis points for fiscal 2008, reflecting our focused bay
portfolio approach to product assortment.
operating
expenses
selling, general and administrative expenses
(sg&a) increased 4.7% to $17.8billion for
fiscal 2008 from $17.1billion for fiscal 2007. as a
percent of net sales, sg&a was 25.0% for fiscal 2008
compared to 22.1% for fiscal 2007. excluding the rationalization
charges, sg&a as a percent of net sales for fiscal 2008 was
23.7%, an increase of approximately 170basis points over
the prior year. the increase in sg&a as a percent of net
sales for fiscal 2008 was primarily the result of expense
deleverage in the negative comparable store sales environment,
as well as an increase of approximately 70basis points due
to a higher cost of credit associated with the private label
credit card program. for fiscal 2008, the penetration of the
private label credit card sales was 28.1% compared to 29.4% for
fiscal 2007.
depreciation and amortization increased 4.9% to
$1.8billion for fiscal 2008 from $1.7billion for
fiscal 2007. depreciation and amortization as a percent of net
sales was 2.5% for fiscal 2008 and 2.2% for fiscal 2007. the
increase as a percent of net sales was primarily due to sales
deleverage and the depreciation of our investments in shorter
lived assets such as store resets and technology.
operating
income
operating income decreased 39.8% to $4.4billion for fiscal
2008 from $7.2billion for fiscal 2007. operating income as
a percent of net sales was 6.1% for fiscal 2008 compared to 9.4%
for fiscal 2007. excluding the rationalization charges,
operating income as a percent of net sales was 7.4% for fiscal
2008.
table of contents
interest
and other, net
in fiscal 2008, we recognized $769million of interest and
other, net, compared to $622million in fiscal 2007.
interest and other, net, as a percent of net sales was 1.1% for
fiscal 2008 compared to 0.8% for fiscal 2007. interest and
other, net, reflects a $163million charge to write-down
our investment in hd supply. excluding this charge, interest and
other, net, as a percent of net sales was 0.9% for fiscal 2008.
provision
for income taxes
our combined effective income tax rate for continuing operations
decreased to 35.6% for fiscal 2008 from 36.4% for fiscal 2007.
the decrease in our effective income tax rate for fiscal 2008
reflects lower state and foreign effective tax rates.
diluted
earnings per share from continuing operations
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations were $1.37
for fiscal 2008 and $2.27 for fiscal 2007. excluding the
rationalization charges and the write-down of our investment in
hd supply, diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
for fiscal 2008 were $1.78, a decrease of 21.6% from fiscal
2007. the
53rdweek
in fiscal 2007 increased diluted earnings per share from
continuing operations by approximately $0.04 for fiscal 2007.
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations were
favorably impacted by the repurchase of shares of our common
stock. we repurchased 2.4million shares for
$70million in fiscal 2008 and 293million shares for
$10.8billion in fiscal 2007. since the inception of the
repurchase program in 2002, we have repurchased 746million
shares of our common stock for a total of $27.3billion.
discontinued
operations
on august30, 2007, the company closed the sale of hd
supply. discontinued operations for fiscal 2008 consist of a
loss of $52million, net of tax, or $0.03 per diluted
share, recorded to settle net working capital matters arising
from the sale of hd supply. discontinued operations for fiscal
2007 consist of the results of operations for hd supply through
august30, 2007 and a $4million loss on the sale of
hd supply. net sales from discontinued operations were
$7.4billion for fiscal 2007 and earnings from discontinued
operations, net of tax, were $185million for fiscal 2007.
non-gaapmeasurements
to provide clarity, internally and externally, about our
operating performance for fiscal 2008, we supplemented our
reporting with non-gaap measurements to reflect the
rationalization charges as described more fully in note2
to the consolidated financial statements and the charge to
write-down our investment in hd supply as described in
note4 to the consolidated financial statements. this
supplemental information should not be considered in isolation
or as a substitute for the related gaap measurements. we believe
these non-gaap measurements provide management and investors
with meaningful information to understand and analyze our
performance. the following reconciles the non-gaap measurements
reflecting the rationalization charges and investment write-down
to the reported gaap information for fiscal 2008:
as
non-gaap
% of
amounts in millions, except per share data
reported
charges
measurement
net sales
net sales
$
71,288
$
$
71,288
100.0
%
cost of sales
47,298
47,268
66.3
gross profit
23,990
(30
)
24,020
33.7
operating expenses
19,631
18,710
26.2
operating income
4,359
(951
)
5,310
7.4
interest and other, net
0.9
earnings from continuing operations before provision for income
taxes
3,590
(1,114
)
4,704
6.6
provision for income taxes
1,278
(430
)
1,708
2.4
earnings from continuing operations
$
2,312
$
(684
)
$
2,996
4.2
%
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$
1.37
$
(0.41
)
$
1.78
n/a
table of contents
fiscal
2007 compared to fiscal year ended january28, 2007
(fiscal 2006)
net
sales
fiscal 2007 consisted of 53weeks compared to 52weeks
in fiscal 2006. net sales for fiscal 2007 decreased 2.1%, or
$1.7billion, to $77.3billion from $79.0billion
for fiscal 2006. the decrease in net sales for fiscal 2007
reflects the impact of negative comparable store sales,
partially offset by net sales of $3.7billion for fiscal
2007 from new stores and $1.1billion of net sales
attributable to the additional week in fiscal 2007. comparable
store sales decreased 6.7% for fiscal 2007 compared to a
decrease of 2.8% for fiscal 2006.
there were a number of factors that contributed to our
comparable store sales decline. the residential construction and
home improvement markets continued to be soft, especially in
some of our traditionally strong markets such as florida,
california and the northeast. the combination of softness in our
big ticket categories and commodity price deflation negatively
impacted average ticket, which decreased 2.4% to $57.48 for
fiscal 2007. our international business performed well in fiscal
2007. our mexican stores posted a double digit comparable store
sales increase for fiscal 2007, and canadas comparable
store sales were also positive. our new stores cannibalized
approximately 10% of our existing stores as of the end of fiscal
2007, which had a negative impact to comparable store sales of
approximately 1%.
gross
profit
gross profit decreased 2.1% to $26.0billion for fiscal
2007 from $26.5billion for fiscal 2006. gross profit as a
percent of net sales was 33.6% for fiscal 2007, flat compared to
fiscal 2006. lower deferred interest costs associated with our
private label credit card financing programs provided a benefit
of 39basis points to gross profit as a percent of net
sales for fiscal 2007. the deferred interest benefit was mostly
offset by a higher penetration of lower margin products such as
appliances and markdowns taken to clear through some seasonal
items, such as outdoor power equipment and grills, and to allow
us to transition into new products, such as assembled cabinets
and kitchen accessories.
operating
expenses
sg&a increased 5.9% to $17.1billion for fiscal 2007
from $16.1billion for fiscal 2006. as a percent of net
sales, sg&a was 22.1% for fiscal 2007 compared to 20.4% for
fiscal 2006. in fiscal 2007, our profit sharing with the
third-party administrator of the private label credit card
portfolio was $275million less than what we received in
fiscal 2006. we also recognized $88million of write-offs
associated with certain future store locations that we
determined we will not open and $34million of expense
associated with closing our 11home depot landscape supply
stores and our tampa call center in fiscal 2007. sg&a also
reflects investments we are making in support of our five key
priorities. as a percentage of net sales, total payroll
increased by 76basis points for fiscal 2007 over fiscal
2006. this reflects investments in store labor and our master
trade specialists program, the impact of our success sharing
bonus plans, as well as the negative sales environment. the
increase in sg&a for fiscal 2007 over fiscal 2006 was
partially offset by $129million of executive severance
recorded in fiscal 2006.
depreciation and amortization increased 8.1% to
$1.7billion for fiscal 2007 from $1.6billion for
fiscal 2006. depreciation and amortization as a percent of net
sales was 2.2% for fiscal 2007 and 2.0% for fiscal 2006. the
increase as a percent of net sales was primarily due to the
depreciation of our investments in store modernization and
technology.
operating
income
operating income decreased 18.3% to $7.2billion for fiscal
2007 from $8.9billion for fiscal 2006. operating income as
a percent of net sales was 9.4% for fiscal 2007 compared to
11.2% for fiscal 2006.
interest
and other, net
in fiscal 2007, we recognized $622million of
netinterest expense compared to $364million in
fiscal 2006. net interest expense as a percent of net sales was
0.8% for fiscal 2007 compared to 0.5% for fiscal 2006. the
increase was primarily due to additional interest incurred
related to the december 2006 issuance of $750million of
floating rate senior notes, $1.25billion of
5.25%senior notes and $3.0billion of
5.875%senior notes.
table of contents
provision
for income taxes
our combined effective income tax rate for continuing operations
decreased to 36.4% for fiscal 2007 from 38.1% for fiscal 2006.
the decrease in our effective income tax rate for fiscal 2007
reflects the impact of a one-time retroactive tax assessment
received from the canadian province of quebec in the second
quarter of fiscal 2006 and tax benefits recognized upon
settlement of several state audits and completion of the fiscal
2003 and 2004 federal tax audits in fiscal 2007.
diluted
earnings per share from continuing operations
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations were $2.27
for fiscal 2007 and $2.55 for fiscal 2006. the
53rdweek
increased diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
by approximately $0.04 for fiscal 2007. diluted earnings per
share from continuing operations were favorably impacted in both
fiscal 2007 and 2006 by the repurchase of shares of our common
stock.
discontinued
operations
discontinued operations consist of the results of operations for
hd supply through august30, 2007 and a loss on the sale of
hd supply. net sales from discontinued operations were
$7.4billion for fiscal 2007 compared to $11.8billion
for fiscal 2006. earnings from discontinued operations, net of
tax, were $185million for fiscal 2007, compared to
$495million for fiscal 2006. earnings from discontinued
operations for fiscal 2007 include a $4million loss, net
of tax, recognized on the sale of the business.
liquidity
and capital resources
cash flow generated from operations provides a significant
source of liquidity. for fiscal 2008, net cash provided by
operating activities was $5.5billion compared to
$5.7billion for fiscal 2007. this change was primarily a
result of decreased net earnings partially offset by improved
inventory management.
net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2008 was
$1.7billion compared to $4.8billion provided by
investing activities for fiscal 2007. the change in net cash
used in/provided by investing activities was primarily the
result of $8.3billion of net proceeds from the sale of hd
supply in the third quarter of fiscal 2007 partially offset by
$1.7billion less in capital expenditures in fiscal 2008
compared to fiscal 2007.
in fiscal 2008, we spent $1.8billion on capital
expenditures, allocated as follows: 45% for new stores, 15% for
merchandising and operations, 12% for maintenance, 11% for core
technology and 17% for other initiatives. in fiscal 2008, we
added 62 new stores, including six relocations.
net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2008 was
$3.7billion compared with $10.6billion for fiscal
2007. the decrease in net cash used in financing activities was
primarily due to the repurchase of 289million shares of
our common stock for $10.7billion in connection with our
tender offer related to the sale of hd supply in the third
quarter of fiscal 2007 and by repayments in fiscal 2008 of
$1.7billion of short-term commercial paper and
$282million of structured financing debt.
we repurchased 2.4million shares of our common stock for
$70million in fiscal 2008 and a total of 293million
shares for $10.8billion in fiscal 2007, including a
$10.7billion tender offer funded primarily using proceeds
from the sale of hd supply. since the inception of our share
repurchase program in 2002, we have repurchased 746million
shares of our common stock for a total of $27.3billion. as
of february1, 2009, $12.7billion remained under our
share repurchase authorization. given current market conditions,
we have suspended the repurchase program until our business and
credit markets stabilize.
we have commercial paper programs that allow for borrowings up
to $3.25billion. in connection with the programs, we have
a back-up
credit facility with a consortium of banks for borrowings up to
$3.25billion. as of february1, 2009, there were no
borrowings outstanding under the commercial paper programs or
the related credit facility. the credit facility, which expires
in december 2010, contains various restrictive covenants, all of
which we are in compliance. none of the covenants are expected
to impact our liquidity or capital resources.
table of contents
we use capital and operating leases to finance a portion of our
real estate, including our stores, distribution centers and
store support centers. the net present value of capital lease
obligations is reflected in our consolidated balance sheets in
long-term debt and current maturities of long-term debt. in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the
operating leases are not reflected in our consolidated balance
sheets. as of the end of fiscal 2008, our long-term
debt-to-equity ratio was 54.4% compared to 64.3% at the end of
fiscal 2007.
as of february1, 2009, we had $525million in cash
and short-term investments. we believe that our current cash
position, access to the debt capital markets and cash flow
generated from operations should be sufficient to enable us to
complete our capital expenditure programs and required long-term
debt payments through the next several fiscal years. in
addition, we have funds available from our commercial paper
programs and the ability to obtain alternative sources of
financing for other requirements. we intend to use cash flow
generated by operations to repay $1.8billion in debt
coming due in fiscal 2009.
during fiscal 2008 and 2007, we entered into interest rate
swaps, accounted for as fair value hedges, with notional amounts
of $3.0billion, that swapped fixed rate interest on our
$3.0billion 5.40%senior notes for variable rate
interest equal to libor plus 60 to 149basis points. in
fiscal 2008, we received $56million to settle these swaps,
which will be amortized to reduce interest expense over the
remaining term of the debt.
at february1, 2009, we had outstanding an interest rate
swap, accounted for as a cash flow hedge, with a notional amount
of $750million that swaps variable rate interest on our
$750million floating rate senior notes for fixed rate
interest at 4.36% that expires on december16, 2009. at
february1, 2009, the approximate fair value of this
agreement was a liability of $21million, which is the
estimated amount we would have paid to settle this interest rate
swap agreement.
off-balance
sheet arrangements
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
operating leases for a portion of our real estate and other
assets are not reflected in our consolidated balance sheets.
contractual
obligations
the following table summarizes our significant contractual
obligations as of february1, 2009 (amounts in millions):
payments due by fiscal year
contractual obligations
total
2010-2011
2012-2013
thereafter
total
debt(1)
$
17,850
$
2,327
$
2,943
$
2,068
$
10,512
capital lease
obligations(2)
1,366
operating leases
8,738
1,366
1,094
5,474
purchase
obligations(3)
6,123
1,687
1,791
1,712
fin48 unrecognized tax
benefits(4)
total
$
34,095
$
4,924
$
6,278
$
5,052
$
17,841
(1)
excludes present value of capital lease obligations of
$417million. includes $6.8billion of interest
payments and $2million, net, of unamortized non-cash
items.
(2)
includes $949million of imputed interest.
(3)
purchase obligations include all legally binding contracts
such as firm commitments for inventory purchases, utility
purchases, capital expenditures, software acquisition and
license commitments and legally binding service contracts.
purchase orders that are not binding agreements are excluded
from the table above.
(4)
excludes $677million of noncurrent unrecognized tax
benefits due to uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash
payments related to the fin48 liabilities.
table of contents
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
our exposure to market risk results primarily from fluctuations
in interest rates. although we have international operating
entities, our exposure to foreign currency rate fluctuations is
not significant to our financial condition and results of
operations. our primary objective for entering into derivative
instruments is to manage our exposure to interest rates, as well
as to maintain an appropriate mix of fixed and variable rate
debt.
as of february1, 2009 we had, net of discounts,
$11.0billion of senior notes outstanding. the market
values of the publicly traded senior notes as of
february1, 2009, were approximately $10.0billion.
impact of
inflation, deflation and changing prices
we have experienced inflation and deflation related to our
purchase of certain commodity products. we do not believe that
changing prices for commodities have had a material effect on
our net sales or results of operations. although we cannot
precisely determine the overall effect of inflation and
deflation on operations, we do not believe inflation and
deflation have had a material effect on our results of
operations.
critical
accounting policies
our significant accounting policies are disclosed in note1
to the consolidated financial statements. the following
discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies,
which are those that are both important to the portrayal of our
financial condition and results of operations and that require
significant judgment or use of complex estimates.
revenue
recognition
we recognize revenue, net of estimated returns and sales tax, at
the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise or
receives services. we estimate the liability for sales returns
based on our historical return levels. we believe that our
estimate for sales returns is an accurate reflection of future
returns. we have never recorded a significant adjustment to our
estimated liability for sales returns. however, if these
estimates are significantly below the actual amounts, our sales
could be adversely impacted. when we receive payment from
customers before the customer has taken possession of the
merchandise or the service has been performed, the amount
received is recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying
consolidated balance sheets until the sale or service is
complete. we also record deferred revenue for the sale of gift
cards and recognize this revenue upon the redemption of gift
cards in net sales.
merchandise
inventories
our merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost
(first-in,
first-out) or market, with approximately 82% valued under the
retail inventory method and the remainder under a cost method.
retailers like the home depot, with many different types of
merchandise at low unit cost and a large number of transactions,
frequently use the retail inventory method. under the retail
inventory method, merchandise inventories are stated at cost,
which is determined by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the
ending retail value of inventories. as our inventory retail
value is adjusted regularly to reflect market conditions, our
inventory valued under the retail method approximates the lower
of cost or market. we evaluate our inventory valued under a cost
method at the end of each quarter to ensure that it is carried
at the lower of cost or market. the valuation allowance for
merchandise inventories valued under a cost method was not
material to our consolidated financial statements as of the end
of fiscal 2008 or 2007.
independent physical inventory counts or cycle counts are taken
on a regular basis in each store and distribution center to
ensure that amounts reflected in the accompanying consolidated
financial statements for merchandise inventories are properly
stated. during the period between physical inventory counts in
our stores, we accrue for estimated losses related to shrink on
a
store-by-store
basis. shrink (or in the case of excess inventory,
swell) is the difference between the recorded amount
of inventory and the physical inventory. shrink may occur due to
theft, loss, inaccurate records for the receipt of inventory or
deterioration of goods, among other things. we estimate shrink
as a percent of net sales using the average shrink results from
the previous two physical inventories. the estimates are
evaluated quarterly and adjusted based on recent shrink results
and current trends in the business. actual shrink results did
not vary materially from estimated amounts for fiscal 2008, 2007
or 2006.
table of contents
self-insurance
we are self-insured for certain losses related to general
liability, product liability, automobile, workers
compensation and medical claims. our liability represents an
estimate of the ultimate cost of claims incurred as of the
balance sheet date. the estimated liability is not discounted
and is established based upon analysis of historical data and
actuarial estimates, and is reviewed by management and
third-party actuaries on a quarterly basis to ensure that the
liability is appropriate. while we believe these estimates are
reasonable based on the information currently available, if
actual trends, including the severity or frequency of claims,
medical cost inflation, or fluctuations in premiums, differ from
our estimates, our results of operations could be impacted.
actual results related to these types of claims did not vary
materially from estimated amounts for fiscal 2008, 2007 or 2006.
vendor
allowances
vendor allowances primarily consist of volume rebates that are
earned as a result of attaining certain purchase levels and
advertising co-op allowances for the promotion of vendors
products that are typically based on guaranteed minimum amounts
with additional amounts being earned for attaining certain
purchase levels. these vendor allowances are accrued as earned,
with those allowances received as a result of attaining certain
purchase levels accrued over the incentive period based on
estimates of purchases. we believe that our estimate of vendor
allowances earned based on expected volume of purchases over the
incentive period is an accurate reflection of the ultimate
allowance to be received from our vendors.
volume rebates and advertising co-op allowances earned are
initially recorded as a reduction in merchandise inventories and
a subsequent reduction in cost of sales when the related product
is sold. certain advertising co-op allowances that are
reimbursements of specific, incremental and identifiable costs
incurred to promote vendors products are recorded as an
offset against advertising expense in sg&a.
impairment
of long-lived assets
we evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets when
management makes the decision to relocate or close a store or
other location, or when circumstances indicate the carrying
amount of an asset may not be recoverable. a stores assets
are evaluated for impairment by comparing its undiscounted cash
flows with its carrying value. if the carrying value is greater
than the undiscounted cash flows, a provision is made to write
down the related assets to fair value if the carrying value is
greater than the fair value. we make critical assumptions and
estimates in completing impairment assessments of long-lived
assets. while we believe these estimates are reasonable based on
the information currently available, if actual results differ
from our estimates, our results of operations could be impacted.
impairment losses are recorded as a component of sg&a in
the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings. when a
location closes, we also recognize in sg&a the net present
value of future lease obligations, less estimated sublease
income.
in fiscal 2008, we recorded $580million of asset
impairments and $252million of lease obligation costs as
part of our rationalization charges. see note2 for more
details on the rationalization charges. we also recorded
impairments on the other closings and relocations in the
ordinary course of business, which were not material to the
consolidated financial statements in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006.
recent
accounting pronouncements
in june 2008, the financial accounting standards board
(fasb) issued fasb staff position (fsp)
emerging issues task force
no.03-6-1,
determining whether instruments granted in share-based
payment transactions are participating securities
(fsp-eitf03-6-1).
fsp-eitf03-6-1
clarifies that unvested share-based payment awards that contain
nonforfeitable rights to dividends or dividend equivalents
(whether paid or unpaid) are participating securities and are to
be included in the computation of earnings per share under the
two-class method.
fsp-eitf03-6-1
is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years
beginning after december15, 2008, and interim periods
within those years.
fsp-eitf03-6-1
is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated
financial statements.
item7a.
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
the information required by this item is incorporated by
reference to item7. managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations
of this report.
table of contents
item8.
financial
statements and supplementary data.
managements
responsibility for financial statements
the financial statements presented in this annual report have
been prepared with integrity and objectivity and are the
responsibility of the management of the home depot, inc. these
financial statements have been prepared in conformity with
u.s.generally accepted accounting principles and properly
reflect certain estimates and judgments based upon the best
available information.
the financial statements of the company have been audited by
kpmg llp, an independent registered public accounting firm.
their accompanying report is based upon an audit conducted in
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting
oversight board (united states).
the audit committee of the board of directors, consisting solely
of outside directors, meets five times a year with the
independent registered public accounting firm, the internal
auditors and representatives of management to discuss auditing
and financial reporting matters. in addition, a telephonic
meeting is held prior to each quarterly earnings release. the
audit committee retains the independent registered public
accounting firm and regularly reviews the internal accounting
controls, the activities of the independent registered public
accounting firm and internal auditors and the financial
condition of the company. both the companys independent
registered public accounting firm and the internal auditors have
free access to the audit committee.
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term
is defined in
rules13a-15(f)
promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as
amended. under the supervision and with the participation of our
management, including our chief executive officer and chief
financial officer, we conducted an evaluation of the
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
as of february1, 2009 based on the framework in
internal control integrated framework issued
by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission (coso). based on our evaluation, our management
concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was
effective as of february1, 2009 in providing reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and
the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. the
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
as of february1, 2009 has been audited by kpmg llp, an
independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in
their report which is included on page26 in this
form10-k.
/s/ francis s.
blake
/s/ carol b.
tom
francis s. blake
carol b. tom
chairman&
chief financial officer &
chief executive officer
executive vice president corporate services
table of contents
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and stockholders
the home depot, inc.:
we have audited the home depot inc.s internal control over
financial reporting as of february1, 2009, based on
criteria established in internal control
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the home depot
inc.s management is responsible for maintaining effective
internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting, included in the accompanying managements report
on internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility
is to express an opinion on the companys internal control
over financial reporting based on our audit.
we conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states). those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of
internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk
that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the
design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on
the assessed risk. our audit also included performing such other
procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we
believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (1)pertain to the maintenance
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (2)provide reasonable assurance that transactions
are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company
are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the company; and (3)provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
in our opinion, the home depot, inc. maintained, in all material
respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as
of february1, 2009, based on criteria established in
internal control integrated framework issued
by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission.
we also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states), the
consolidated balance sheets of the home depot, inc. and
subsidiaries as of february1, 2009 and february3,
2008, and the related consolidated statements of earnings,
stockholders equity and comprehensive income, and cash
flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period
ended february1, 2009, and our report dated march26,
2009 expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated
financial statements.
/s/ kpmg llp
atlanta, georgia
march26, 2009
table of contents
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and stockholders
the home depot, inc.:
we have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries as of february1,
2009 and february3, 2008, and the related consolidated
statements of earnings, stockholders equity and
comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the fiscal
years in the three-year period ended february1, 2009.
these consolidated financial statements are the responsibility
of the companys management. our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements
based on our audits.
we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states). those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a
test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred
to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries as of
february1, 2009 and february3, 2008, and the results
of their operations and their cash flows for each of the fiscal
years in the three-year period ended february1, 2009, in
conformity with u.s.generally accepted accounting
principles.
as discussed in note7 to the consolidated financial
statements, effective january29, 2007, the beginning of
the fiscal year ended february3, 2008, the company adopted
financial accounting standards board interpretation no.48,
accounting for uncertainty in income taxes.
we also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states), the
home depot, inc.s internal control over financial
reporting as of february1, 2009, based on criteria
established in internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso), and our report
dated march26, 2009 expressed an unqualified opinion on
the effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting.
/s/ kpmg llp
atlanta, georgia
march26, 2009
table of contents
the home
depot, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of earnings
fiscal year
ended(1)
february1,
february3,
january28,
amounts in millions, except per share data
net sales
$
71,288
$
77,349
$
79,022
cost of sales
47,298
51,352
52,476
gross profit
23,990
25,997
26,546
operating expenses:
selling, general and administrative
17,846
17,053
16,106
depreciation and amortization
1,785
1,702
1,574
total operating expenses
19,631
18,755
17,680
operating income
4,359
7,242
8,866
interest and other (income) expense:
interest and investment income
(18
)
(74
)
(27
)
interest expense
other
interest and other, net
earnings from continuing operations before provision for
income taxes
3,590
6,620
8,502
provision for income taxes
1,278
2,410
3,236
earnings from continuing operations
2,312
4,210
5,266
earnings (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
(52
)
net earnings
$
2,260
$
4,395
$
5,761
weighted average common shares
1,682
1,849
2,054
basic earnings per share from continuing operations
$
1.37
$
2.28
$
2.56
basic earnings (loss) per share from discontinued
operations
$
(0.03
)
$
0.10
$
0.24
basic earnings per share
$
1.34
$
2.38
$
2.80
diluted weighted average common shares
1,686
1,856
2,062
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$
1.37
$
2.27
$
2.55
diluted earnings (loss) per share from discontinued
operations
$
(0.03
)
$
0.10
$
0.24
diluted earnings per share
$
1.34
$
2.37
$
2.79
(1)
fiscal years ended february1, 2009 and january28,
2007 include 52weeks. fiscal year ended february3,
2008 includes 53weeks.
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial
statements.
table of contents
the home
depot, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated
balance sheets
february1,
february3,
amounts in millions, except share and per share data
assets
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
short-term investments
receivables, net
1,259
merchandise inventories
10,673
11,731
other current assets
1,192
1,227
total current assets
13,362
14,674
property and equipment, at cost:
land
8,301
8,398
buildings
16,961
16,642
furniture, fixtures and equipment
8,741
8,050
leasehold improvements
1,359
1,390
construction in progress
1,435
capital leases
36,477
36,412
less accumulated depreciation and amortization
10,243
8,936
net property and equipment
26,234
27,476
notes receivable
goodwill
1,134
1,209
other assets
total assets
$
41,164
$
44,324
liabilities and stockholders equity
current liabilities:
short-term debt
$
$
1,747
accounts payable
4,822
5,732
accrued salaries and related expenses
1,129
1,094
sales taxes payable
deferred revenue
1,165
1,474
income taxes payable
current installments of long-term debt
1,767
other accrued expenses
1,644
1,854
total current liabilities
11,153
12,706
long-term debt, excluding current installments
9,667
11,383
other long-term liabilities
2,198
1,833
deferred income taxes
total liabilities
23,387
26,610
stockholders equity
common stock, par value $0.05; authorized: 10billion
shares; issued 1.707billion shares at february1,
2009 and 1.698billion shares at february3, 2008;
outstanding 1.696billion shares at february1, 2009
and 1.690billion shares at february3, 2008
paid-in capital
6,048
5,800
retained earnings
12,093
11,388
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
(77
)
treasury stock, at cost, 11million shares at
february1, 2009 and 8million shares at
february3, 2008
(372
)
(314
)
total stockholders equity
17,777
17,714
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
41,164
$
44,324
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial
statements.
table of contents
the home
depot, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of stockholders
equity
and comprehensive income
accumulated
other
total
common stock
paid-in
retained
comprehensive
treasury stock
stockholders
comprehensive
amounts in millions, except per share data
shares
amount
capital
earnings
income (loss)
shares
amount
equity
income
balance, january 29, 2006
2,401
$
$
7,149
$
28,943
$
(277
)
$
(9,712
)
$
26,909
cumulative effect of adjustment resulting from the adoption of
sab108, net of tax
(257
)
(56
)
adjusted balance, january29, 2006
2,401
$
$
7,350
$
28,686
$
(277
)
$
(9,712
)
$
26,853
net earnings
5,761
5,761
$
5,761
shares issued under employee stock plans
tax effect of sale of option shares by employees
translation adjustments
(77
)
(77
)
(77
)
cash flow hedges
(22
)
(22
)
(22
)
stock options, awards and amortization of restricted stock
repurchase of common stock
(174
)
(6,671
)
(6,671
)
cash dividends ($0.675 per share)
(1,395
)
(1,395
)
other
(85
)
(85
)
comprehensive income
$
5,662
balance, january 28, 2007
2,421
$
$
7,930
$
33,052
$
(451
)
$
(16,383
)
$
25,030
cumulative effect of the adoption of fin48
(111
)
(111
)
net earnings
4,395
4,395
$
4,395
shares issued under employee stock plans
tax effect of sale of option shares by employees
translation adjustments
cash flow hedges
(10
)
(10
)
(10
)
stock options, awards and amortization of restricted stock
repurchase of common stock
(292
)
(10,815
)
(10,815
)
retirement of treasury stock
(735
)
(37
)
(2,608
)
(24,239
)
26,884
cash dividends ($0.90 per share)
(1,709
)
(1,709
)
other
comprehensive income
$
4,840
balance, february 3, 2008
1,698
$
$
5,800
$
11,388
$
(8
)
$
(314
)
$
17,714
net earnings
2,260
2,260
$
2,260
shares issued under employee stock plans
tax effect of sale of option shares by employees
translation adjustments
(831
)
(831
)
(831
)
cash flow hedges
(1
)
(1
)
(1
)
stock options, awards and amortization of restricted stock
repurchase of common stock
(3
)
(70
)
(70
)
cash dividends ($0.90 per share)
(1,521
)
(1,521
)
other
(3
)
(34
)
(25
)
comprehensive income
$
1,428
balance, february 1, 2009
1,707
$
$
6,048
$
12,093
$
(77
)
(11
)
$
(372
)
$
17,777
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial
statements.
table of contents
the home
depot, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of cash flows
fiscal year
ended(1)
february1,
february3,
january28,
amounts in millions
cash flows from operating activities:
net earnings
$
2,260
$
4,395
$
5,761
reconciliation of net earnings to net cash provided by operating
activities:
depreciation and amortization
1,902
1,906
1,886
impairment related to rationalization charges
impairment of investment
stock-based compensation expense
changes in assets and liabilities, net of the effects of
acquisitions and disposition:
decrease in receivables, net
decrease (increase) in merchandise inventories
(491
)
(563
)
(increase) decrease in other current assets
(7
)
(225
)
(decrease) increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities
(646
)
(465
)
decrease in deferred revenue
(292
)
(159
)
(123
)
increase (decrease) in income taxes payable
(172
)
(decrease) increase in deferred income taxes
(282
)
(348
)
increase (decrease) in other long-term liabilities
(51
)
other
net cash provided by operating activities
5,528
5,727
7,661
cash flows from investing activities:
capital expenditures, net of $37, $19 and $49 of non-cash
capital expenditures in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively
(1,847
)
(3,558
)
(3,542
)
proceeds from sale of business, net
8,337
payments for businesses acquired, net
(13
)
(4,268
)
proceeds from sales of property and equipment
purchases of investments
(168
)
(11,225
)
(5,409
)
proceeds from sales and maturities of investments
10,899
5,434
net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
(1,729
)
4,758
(7,647
)
cash flows from financing activities:
(repayments of) proceeds from short-term borrowings, net
(1,732
)
1,734
(900
)
proceeds from long-term borrowings, net of discount
8,935
repayments of long-term debt
(313
)
(20
)
(509
)
repurchases of common stock
(70
)
(10,815
)
(6,684
)
proceeds from sale of common stock
cash dividends paid to stockholders
(1,521
)
(1,709
)
(1,395
)
other financing activities
(128
)
(105
)
(31
)
net cash used in financing activities
(3,680
)
(10,639
)
(203
)
increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(154
)
(189
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(45
)
(1
)
(4
)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash payments made for:
interest, net of interest capitalized
$
$
$
income taxes
$
1,265
$
2,524
$
3,963
(1)
fiscal years ended february1, 2009 and january28,
2007 include 52weeks. fiscal year ended february3,
2008 includes 53weeks.
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial
statements.
table of contents
notesto
consolidated financial statements
1.
summary
of significant accounting policies
business,
consolidation and presentation
the home depot, inc. and its subsidiaries (the
company) operate the home depot stores, which are
full-service, warehouse-style stores averaging approximately
105,000square feet in size. the stores stock approximately
30,000 to 40,000 different kinds of building materials, home
improvement supplies and lawn and garden products that are sold
to do-it-yourself customers, do-it-for-me customers, home
improvement contractors, tradespeople and building maintenance
professionals. at the end of fiscal 2008, the company was
operating 2,274 stores, which included 1,971 the home depot
stores, 34 expo stores, five yardbirds stores and two thd design
center stores in the united states, including the commonwealth
of puerto rico and the territories of the u.s. virgin islands
and guam (u.s.), 176 the home depot stores in
canada, 74 the home depot stores in mexico and 12 the home depot
stores in china. on january26, 2009, the company announced
plans to close the expo, thd design center and yardbirds stores
as part of the companys focus on its core business. the
consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the
company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. all significant
intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
fiscal
year
the companys fiscal year is a 52- or 53-week period ending
on the sunday nearest to january31. fiscal year ended
february1, 2009 (fiscal 2008) includes
52weeks, fiscal year ended february3, 2008
(fiscal 2007) includes 53weeks and fiscal year
ended january28, 2007 (fiscal 2006) includes
52weeks.
use of
estimates
management of the company has made a number of estimates and
assumptions relating to the reporting of assets and liabilities,
the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and
reported amounts of revenues and expenses in preparing these
financial statements in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the u.s.actual results could differ
from these estimates.
fair
value of financial instruments
the carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, receivables,
short-term debt and accounts payable approximate fair value due
to the short-term maturities of these financial instruments. the
fair value of the companys investments is discussed under
the caption short-term investments in this
note1. the fair value of the companys long-term debt
is discussed in note6.
cash
equivalents
the company considers all highly liquid investments purchased
with original maturities of three months or less to be cash
equivalents. the companys cash equivalents are carried at
fair market value and consist primarily of high-grade commercial
paper, money market funds and u.s.government agency
securities.
short-term
investments
short-term investments are recorded at fair value based on
current market rates and are classified as available-for-sale.
accounts
receivable
the company has an agreement with a third-party service provider
who directly extends credit to customers, manages the
companys private label credit card program and owns the
related receivables. we evaluated the third-party entities
holding the receivables under the program and concluded that
they should not be consolidated by the company in accordance
with the provisions of financial accounting standards board
(fasb) interpretation no.46(r),
consolidation of variable interest entities. the
agreement with the third-party service provider expires in 2018,
with the company having the option, but no obligation, to
purchase the receivables at the end of the agreement. the
deferred
table of contents
interest charges incurred by the company for its deferred
financing programs offered to its customers are included in cost
of sales. the interchange fees charged to the company for the
customers use of the cards and the profit sharing with the
third-party administrator are included in selling, general and
administrative expenses (sg&a). the sum of the
three is referred to by the company as the cost of
credit of the private label credit card program.
in addition, certain subsidiaries of the company extend credit
directly to customers in the ordinary course of business. the
receivables due from customers were $37million and
$57million as of february1, 2009 and
february3, 2008, respectively. the companys
valuation reserve related to accounts receivable was not
material to the consolidated financial statements of the company
as of the end of fiscal 2008 or 2007.
merchandise
inventories
the majority of the companys merchandise inventories are
stated at the lower of cost
(first-in,
first-out) or market, as determined by the retail inventory
method. as the inventory retail value is adjusted regularly to
reflect market conditions, the inventory valued using the retail
method approximates the lower of cost or market. certain
subsidiaries, including retail operations in canada, mexico and
china, and distribution centers record merchandise inventories
at the lower of cost or market, as determined by a cost method.
these merchandise inventories represent approximately 18% of the
total merchandise inventories balance. the company evaluates the
inventory valued using a cost method at the end of each quarter
to ensure that it is carried at the lower of cost or market. the
valuation allowance for merchandise inventories valued under a
cost method was not material to the consolidated financial
statements of the company as of the end of fiscal 2008 or 2007.
independent physical inventory counts or cycle counts are taken
on a regular basis in each store and distribution center to
ensure that amounts reflected in the accompanying consolidated
financial statements for merchandise inventories are properly
stated. during the period between physical inventory counts in
stores, the company accrues for estimated losses related to
shrink on a
store-by-store
basis based on historical shrink results and current trends in
the business. shrink (or in the case of excess inventory,
swell) is the difference between the recorded amount
of inventory and the physical inventory. shrink may occur due to
theft, loss, inaccurate records for the receipt of inventory or
deterioration of goods, among other things.
income
taxes
the company provides for federal, state and foreign income taxes
currently payable, as well as for those deferred due to timing
differences between reporting income and expenses for financial
statement purposes versus tax purposes. federal, state and
foreign tax benefits are recorded as a reduction of income
taxes. deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for
the future tax consequences attributable to temporary
differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of
existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases.
deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted
income tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the
years in which those temporary differences are expected to be
recovered or settled. the effect of a change in income tax rates
is recognized as income or expense in the period that includes
the enactment date.
the company and its eligible subsidiaries file a consolidated
u.s.federal income tax return.
non-u.s.subsidiaries
and certain u.s.subsidiaries, which are consolidated for
financial reporting purposes, are not eligible to be included in
the companys consolidated u.s.federal income tax
return. separate provisions for income taxes have been
determined for these entities. the company intends to reinvest
substantially all of the unremitted earnings of its
non-u.s.subsidiaries
and postpone their remittance indefinitely. accordingly, no
provision for u.s.income taxes for these
non-u.s.subsidiaries
was recorded in the accompanying consolidated statements of
earnings.
depreciation
and amortization
the companys buildings, furniture, fixtures and equipment
are recorded at cost and depreciated using the straight-line
method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. leasehold
improvements are amortized using the straight-line method
table of contents
over the original term of the lease or the useful life of the
improvement, whichever is shorter. the companys property
and equipment is depreciated using the following estimated
useful lives:
life
buildings
5-45years
furniture, fixtures and equipment
3-20years
leasehold improvements
5-45years
capitalized
software costs
the company capitalizes certain costs related to the acquisition
and development of software and amortizes these costs using the
straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the
software, which is three to six years. these costs are included
in furniture, fixtures and equipment in the accompanying
consolidated balance sheets. certain development costs not
meeting the criteria for capitalization are expensed as incurred.
revenues
the company recognizes revenue, net of estimated returns and
sales tax, at the time the customer takes possession of
merchandise or receives services. the liability for sales
returns is estimated based on historical return levels. when the
company receives payment from customers before the customer has
taken possession of the merchandise or the service has been
performed, the amount received is recorded as deferred revenue
in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets until the sale
or service is complete. the company also records deferred
revenue for the sale of gift cards and recognizes this revenue
upon the redemption of gift cards in net sales. gift card
breakage income is recognized based upon historical redemption
patterns and represents the balance of gift cards for which the
company believes the likelihood of redemption by the customer is
remote. during fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, the company
recognized $37million, $36million and
$33million, respectively, of gift card breakage income.
this income is recorded as other income and is included in the
accompanying consolidated statements of earnings as a reduction
in sg&a.
services
revenue
net sales include services revenue generated through a variety
of installation, home maintenance and professional service
programs. in these programs, the customer selects and purchases
material for a project and the company provides or arranges
professional installation. these programs are offered through
the companys stores. under certain programs, when the
company provides or arranges the installation of a project and
the subcontractor provides material as part of the installation,
both the material and labor are included in services revenue.
the company recognizes this revenue when the service for the
customer is complete.
all payments received prior to the completion of services are
recorded in deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets. services revenue was $3.1billion,
$3.5billion and $3.8billion for fiscal 2008, 2007
and 2006, respectively.
self-insurance
the company is self-insured for certain losses related to
general liability, product liability, automobile, workers
compensation and medical claims. the expected ultimate cost for
claims incurred as of the balance sheet date is not discounted
and is recognized as a liability. the expected ultimate cost of
claims is estimated based upon analysis of historical data and
actuarial estimates.
prepaid
advertising
television and radio advertising production costs, along with
media placement costs, are expensed when the advertisement first
appears. included in other current assets in the accompanying
consolidated balance sheets are $18million and
$31million, respectively, at the end of fiscal 2008 and
2007 relating to prepayments of production costs for print and
broadcast advertising as well as sponsorship promotions.
table of contents
vendor
allowances
vendor allowances primarily consist of volume rebates that are
earned as a result of attaining certain purchase levels and
advertising co-op allowances for the promotion of vendors
products that are typically based on guaranteed minimum amounts
with additional amounts being earned for attaining certain
purchase levels. these vendor allowances are accrued as earned,
with those allowances received as a result of attaining certain
purchase levels accrued over the incentive period based on
estimates of purchases.
volume rebates and certain advertising co-op allowances earned
are initially recorded as a reduction in merchandise inventories
and a subsequent reduction in cost of sales when the related
product is sold. certain advertising co-op allowances that are
reimbursements of specific, incremental and identifiable costs
incurred to promote vendors products are recorded as an
offset against advertising expense. in fiscal 2008, 2007 and
2006, gross advertising expense was $1.0billion,
$1.2billion and $1.2billion, respectively, which was
recorded in sg&a. specific, incremental and identifiable
advertising co-op allowances were $107million,
$120million and $83million for fiscal 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively, and were recorded as an offset to
advertising expense in sg&a.
cost of
sales
cost of sales includes the actual cost of merchandise sold and
services performed, the cost of transportation of merchandise
from vendors to the companys stores, locations or
customers, the operating cost of the companys sourcing and
distribution network and the cost of deferred interest programs
offered through the companys private label credit card
program.
the cost of handling and shipping merchandise from the
companys stores, locations or distribution centers to the
customer is classified as sg&a. the cost of shipping and
handling, including internal costs and payments to third
parties, classified as sg&a was $501million,
$571million and $545million in fiscal 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively.
goodwill
and other intangible assets
goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair
value of net assets acquired. the company does not amortize
goodwill, but does assess the recoverability of goodwill in the
third quarter of each fiscal year by determining whether the
fair value of each reporting unit supports its carrying value.
the fair values of the companys identified reporting units
were estimated using the present value of expected future
discounted cash flows.
the company amortizes the cost of other intangible assets over
their estimated useful lives, which range from 1 to
20years, unless such lives are deemed indefinite.
intangible assets with indefinite lives are tested in the third
quarter of each fiscal year for impairment. the company recorded
no impairment charges for goodwill or other intangible assets
for fiscal 2008, 2007 or 2006.
impairment
of long-lived assets
the company evaluates the carrying value of long-lived assets
when management makes the decision to relocate or close a store
or other location, or when circumstances indicate the carrying
amount of an asset may not be recoverable. a stores assets
are evaluated for impairment by comparing its undiscounted cash
flows with its carrying value. if the carrying value is greater
than the undiscounted cash flows, a provision is made to write
down the related assets to fair value if the carrying value is
greater than the fair value. impairment losses are recorded as a
component of sg&a in the accompanying consolidated
statements of earnings. when a location closes, the company also
recognizes in sg&a the net present value of future lease
obligations, less estimated sublease income.
in fiscal 2008, the company recorded $580million of asset
impairments and $252million of lease obligation costs as
part of its rationalization charges. see note2 for more
details on the rationalization charges. the company also
recorded impairments on the other closings and relocations in
the ordinary course of business, which were not material to the
consolidated financial statements in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006.
table of contents
stock-based
compensation
effective january30, 2006, the company adopted the fair
value recognition provisions of statement of financial
accounting standards (sfas) no.123(r),
share-based payment (sfas123(r)),
using the modified prospective transition method. under the
modified prospective transition method, the company began
expensing unvested options granted prior to fiscal 2003 in
addition to continuing to recognize stock-based compensation
expense for all share-based payments awarded since the adoption
of sfas123 accounting for stock-based
compensation in fiscal 2003. during fiscal 2006, the
company recognized additional stock compensation expense of
approximately $40million as a result of the adoption of
sfas123(r). results of prior periods have not been
restated.
the per share weighted average fair value of stock options
granted during fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $6.46, $9.45 and
$11.88, respectively. the fair value of these options was
determined at the date of grant using the black- scholes
option-pricing model with the following assumptions:
fiscal year ended
february1,
february3,
january28,
risk-free interest rate
2.9%
4.4%
4.7%
assumed volatility
33.8%
25.5%
28.5%
assumed dividend yield
3.5%
2.4%
1.5%
assumed lives of option
6years
6years
5years
derivatives
the company uses derivative financial instruments from time to
time in the management of its interest rate exposure on
long-term debt and its exposure on foreign currency
fluctuations. the company accounts for its derivative financial
instruments in accordance with sfasno.133,
accounting for derivative instruments and hedging
activities.
comprehensive
income
comprehensive income includes net earnings adjusted for certain
revenues, expenses, gains and losses that are excluded from net
earnings under accounting principles generally accepted in the
u.s.adjustments to net earnings and accumulated other
comprehensive income consist primarily of foreign currency
translation adjustments.
foreign
currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in a foreign currency are
translated into u.s.dollars at the current rate of
exchange on the last day of the reporting period. revenues and
expenses are generally translated using average exchange rates
for the period and equity transactions are translated using the
actual rate on the day of the transaction.
segment
information
the company operates within a single reportable segment
primarily within north america. net sales for the company
outside of the u.s.were $7.4billion for fiscal 2008
and 2007 and were $6.3billion for fiscal 2006. long-lived
assets outside of the u.s.totaled $2.8billion and
$3.1billion as of february1, 2009 and
february3, 2008, respectively.
2.
rationalization
charges
in fiscal 2008, the company reduced its square footage growth
plans to improve free cash flow, provide stronger returns for
the company and invest in its existing stores to continue
improving the customer experience. as a result of this store
rationalization plan, the company determined that it would no
longer pursue the opening of approximately 50 u.s.stores
that had been in its new store pipeline. the company expects to
dispose of or sublet these pipeline locations over varying
periods. the company also closed 15 underperforming
u.s.stores in the second quarter of fiscal 2008, and the
company expects to dispose of or sublet those locations over
varying periods.
also in fiscal 2008, the company announced that it would exit
its expo, thd design center, yardbirds and hd bath businesses in
order to focus on its core the home depot stores. the company
expects to close 34 expo design center
table of contents
stores, five yardbirds stores, two thd design center stores and
seven hd bath locations in the first quarter of fiscal 2009, and
expects to dispose or sublet those locations over varying
periods. these steps will impact approximately 5,000 associates
in those locations, their support functions and their
distribution centers.
the company also restructured its support functions to better
align the companys cost structure with the current
economic environment. these actions impacted approximately 2,000
associates.
the company recognized $951million in total pretax charges
for fiscal 2008 related to these actions. the significant
components of the total expected charges and charges incurred to
date are as follows (in millions):
total
fiscal
estimated
expected
remaining
charges
charges
charges
asset impairments
$
$
$
lease obligation costs, net
severance
other
total
$
1,101
$
$
inventory markdown costs in other are included in cost of sales
in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings and
costs related to asset impairments, lease obligations, severance
and other are included in sg&a expenses. asset impairment
charges, including contractual costs to complete certain assets,
were determined based on fair market value using market data for
each individual property. lease obligations represent the
present value of contractually obligated rental payments offset
by estimated sublet income, and therefore are not generally
incremental uses of cash.
activity related to rationalization charges for fiscal 2008 was
as follows (in millions):
accrued
fiscal
balance,
cash
non-cash
february1,
charges
uses
uses
asset impairments
$
$
$
$
lease obligation costs, net
severance
other
total
$
$
$
$
3.
change in
accounting principle
during fiscal 2008, the company implemented a new enterprise
resource planning (erp) system, including a new
inventory system, for its retail operations in canada. along
with this implementation, the company changed its method of
accounting for merchandise inventories for its retail operations
in canada from the lower of cost
(first-in,
first-out) or market, as determined by the retail inventory
method, to the lower of cost or market using a weighted-average
cost method. as of the end of fiscal 2008, the implementation of
the new inventory system and related conversion to the
weighted-average cost method for canadian retail operations was
complete.
the new erp system allows the company to utilize the
weighted-average cost method, which the company believes will
result in greater precision in the costing of inventories and a
better matching of cost of sales with revenue generated. the
effect of the change on the merchandise inventories and retained
earnings balances was not material. prior to the inventory
system conversion, the company could not determine the impact of
the change to the weighted-average cost method and therefore,
could not retroactively apply the change to periods prior to
fiscal 2008.
4.
disposition
and acquisitions
on august30, 2007, the company closed the sale of hd
supply. the company received $8.3billion of net proceeds
for the sale of hd supply and recognized a $4million loss,
net of tax, in fiscal 2007. in fiscal 2008, the company
finalized working capital adjustments related to the sale and
recorded a loss of $52million, net of tax.
table of contents
in connection with the sale, the company purchased a 12.5%
equity interest in the newly formed hd supply for
$325million. in fiscal 2008, the company determined its
12.5% equity interest in hd supply was impaired and recorded a
$163million charge to write-down the investment, which is
included in interest and other, net, in the accompanying
consolidated statements of earnings.
also in connection with the sale, the company guaranteed a
$1.0billion senior secured loan (guaranteed
loan) of hd supply. the fair value of the guarantee, which
was determined to be approximately $16million, is recorded
as a liability of the company and included in other long-term
liabilities. the guaranteed loan has a term of five years and
the company is responsible for up to $1.0billion and any
unpaid interest in the event of non-payment by hd supply. the
guaranteed loan is collateralized by certain assets of hd supply.
in accordance with statement of financial accounting standards
no.144, accounting for the impairment or disposal of
long-lived assets (sfas144), the company
reclassified the results of hd supply as discontinued operations
in its consolidated statements of earnings for all periods
presented.
the following table presents net sales and earnings of hd supply
through august30, 2007 and the losses on disposition which
have been classified as discontinued operations in the
consolidated statements of earnings for fiscal 2008, 2007 and
2006 (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
february1,
february3,
january28,
net sales
$
$
7,391
$
11,815
earnings before provision for income taxes
$
$
$
provision for income taxes
(102
)
(311
)
loss on discontinued operations, net
(52
)
(4
)
earnings (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
$
(52
)
$
$
the company made no acquisitions during fiscal 2008. the
aggregate purchase price for acquisitions in fiscal 2007 and
2006 was $25million and $4.5billion, respectively,
including $3.5billion for hughes supply in fiscal 2006.
the company recorded goodwill related to the hd supply
businesses of $20million and $2.8billion for fiscal
2007 and 2006, respectively, and recorded no goodwill related to
its retail businesses for fiscal 2007 and $229million for
fiscal 2006.
5.
staff
accounting bulletinno.108
in fiscal 2006, the company adopted staff accounting
bulletinno.108, considering the effects of
prior year misstatements when quantifying misstatements in
current year financial statements
(sab108). sab108 addresses the process
of quantifying prior year financial statement misstatements and
their impact on current year financial statements. the
provisions of sab108 allowed companies to report the
cumulative effect of correcting immaterial prior year
misstatements, based on the companys historical method for
evaluating misstatements, by adjusting the opening balance of
retained earnings in the financial statements of the year of
adoption rather than amending previously filed reports. in
accordance with sab108, the company adjusted beginning
retained earnings for fiscal 2006 in the accompanying
consolidated financial statements for the items described below.
the company does not consider these adjustments to have a
material impact on the companys consolidated financial
statements in any of the prior years affected.
historical
stock option practices
during fiscal 2006, the company requested that its board of
directors review its historical stock option granting practices.
a subcommittee of the audit committee undertook the review with
the assistance of independent outside counsel, and it has
completed its review. the principal findings of the 2006 review
were as follows:
all options granted in the period from 2002 through the present
had an exercise price based on the market price of the
companys stock on the date the grant was approved by the
board of directors or an officer acting pursuant to delegated
authority. during this period, the stock administration
department corrected
table of contents
administrative errors retroactively and without separate
approvals. the administrative errors included inadvertent
omissions of grantees from lists that were approved previously
and miscalculations of the number of options granted to
particular employees on approved lists.
all options granted from december1, 2000 through the end
of 2001 had an exercise price based on the market price of the
companys stock on the date of a meeting of the board of
directors or some other date selected without the benefit of
hindsight. the february 2001 annual grant was not finally
allocated to recipients until several weeks after the grant was
approved. during this period, the stock administration
department also corrected administrative errors retroactively
and without separate approvals as in the period 2002 to the
present.
for annual option grants and certain quarterly option grants
from 1981 through november 2000, the stated grant date was
routinely earlier than the actual date on which the grants were
approved by a committee of the board of directors. in almost
every instance, the stock price on the apparent approval date
was higher than the price on the stated grant date. the
backdating occurred for grants at all levels of the company.
management personnel, who have since left the company, generally
followed a practice of reviewing closing prices for a prior
period and selecting a date with a low stock price to increase
the value of the options to employees on lists of grantees
subsequently approved by a committee of the board of directors.
the annual option grants in 1994 through 2000, as well as many
quarterly grants during this period, were not finally allocated
among the recipients until several weeks after the stated grant
date. because of the absence of records prior to 1994, it is
unclear whether allocations also postdated the selected grant
dates from 1981 through 1993. moreover, for many of these annual
and quarterly grants from 1981 through december 2000, there is
insufficient documentation to determine with certainty when the
grants were actually authorized by a committee of the board of
directors. finally, the companys stock administration
department also retroactively added employees to lists of
approved grantees, or changed the number of options granted to
specific employees, without authorization of the board of
directors or a board committee, to correct administrative errors.
numerous option grants to
rank-and-file
employees were made pursuant to delegations of authority that
may not have been effective under delaware law.
in numerous instances, and primarily prior to 2003,
beneficiaries of grants who were required to report them to the
sec failed to do so in a timely manner or at all.
the subcommittee concluded that there was no intentional
wrongdoing by any current member of the companys
management team or its board of directors.
the company believes that because of these errors, it had
unrecorded expense over the affected period (1981 through
2005)of $227million in the aggregate, including
related tax items. in accordance with the provisions of
sab108, the company decreased beginning retained earnings
for fiscal 2006 by $227million within the accompanying
consolidated financial statements.
as previously disclosed, the staff of the sec began in june 2006
an informal inquiry into the companys stock option
practices, and the office of the u.s.attorney for the
southern district of new york also requested information on the
subject. on december10, 2008, the sec stated in a letter
to the company that it did not intend to take any action as a
result of the inquiry. the sec matter is therefore now closed,
and the company has not received any communication from the
office of the u.s.attorney since 2006.
table of contents
the company does not believe that the effect of the stock option
adjustment was material, either quantitatively or qualitatively,
in any of the years covered by the review of these items. in
reaching that determination, the following quantitative measures
were considered (dollars in millions):
net after-tax
percent of
effect of
reported net
reported net
fiscal year
adjustment
earnings
earnings
$
$
5,838
0.19
%
5,001
0.36
4,304
0.42
3,664
0.57
1981-2001
14,531
1.09
total
$
$
33,338
0.68
%
vendor
credits
the company records credits against vendor invoices for various
issues related to the receipt of goods. the company previously
identified that it was not recording an allowance for subsequent
reversals of these credits based on historical experience.
beginning retained earnings for fiscal 2006 was decreased by
$30million in the accompanying consolidated financial
statements to reflect the appropriate adjustments to merchandise
inventories and accounts payable, net of tax.
impact of
adjustments
the impact of each of the items noted above, net of tax, on
fiscal 2006 beginning balances are presented below (amounts in
millions):
cumulative effect as of january30, 2006
stock option
vendor
practices
credits
total
merchandise inventories
$
$
$
accounts payable
(59
)
(59
)
deferred income taxes
other accrued expenses
(37
)
(37
)
paid-in capital
(201
)
(201
)
retained earnings
total
$
$
$
table of contents
6.
debt
the company has commercial paper programs that allow for
borrowings up to $3.25billion. all of the companys
short-term borrowings in fiscal 2008 and 2007 were under these
commercial paper programs. in connection with the commercial
paper programs, the company has a
back-up
credit facility with a consortium of banks for borrowings up to
$3.25billion. the credit facility, which expires in
december 2010, contains various restrictive covenants, all of
which we are in compliance. none of the covenants are expected
to impact the companys liquidity or capital resources.
short-term debt under the commercial paper programs was as
follows (dollars in millions):
february1,
february3,
balance outstanding at fiscal year-end
$
$
1,747
maximum amount outstanding at any month-end
$
1,771
$
1,747
average daily short-term borrowings
$
$
weighted average interest rate
3.4
%
5.0
%
the companys long-term debt at the end of fiscal 2008 and
2007 consisted of the following (amounts in millions):
february1,
february3,
3.75%senior notes; due september15, 2009; interest
payable
semi-annually
on march 15 and september 15
$
$
floating rate senior notes; due december16, 2009; interest
payable on march16, june16, september 16 and
december 16
4.625%senior notes; due august15, 2010; interest
payable semi-annually on february 15 and august 15
5.20%senior notes; due march1, 2011; interest
payable semi-annually on march 1 and september 1
1,000
1,000
5.25%senior notes; due december16, 2013; interest
payable
semi-annually
on june 16 and december 16
1,245
1,244
5.40%senior notes; due march1, 2016; interest
payable semi-annually on march 1 and september 1
3,047
3,017
5.875%senior notes; due december16, 2036; interest
payable
semi-annually
on june 16 and december 16
2,959
2,959
capital lease obligations; payable in varying installments
through january31, 2055
other
total debt
11,434
11,683
less current installments
1,767
long-term debt, excluding current installments
$
9,667
$
11,383
during fiscal 2008 and 2007, the company entered into interest
rate swaps, accounted for as fair value hedges, with notional
amounts of $3.0billion, that swapped fixed rate interest
on the companys $3.0billion 5.40%senior notes
for variable rate interest equal to libor plus 60 to
149basis points. in fiscal 2008, the company received
$56million to settle these swaps, which will be amortized
to reduce netinterest expense over the remaining term of
the debt.
at february1, 2009, the company had outstanding an
interest rate swap, accounted for as a cash flow hedge, with a
notional amount of $750million that swaps variable rate
interest on the companys $750million floating rate
senior notes for fixed rate interest at 4.36% that expires on
december16, 2009. at february1, 2009, the
approximate fair value of this agreement was a liability of
$21million, which is the estimated amount the company
would have paid to settle the interest rate swap agreement.
the senior notes may be redeemed by the company at any time, in
whole or in part, at a redemption price plus accrued interest up
to the redemption date. the redemption price is equal to the
greater of (1)100% of the principal amount of the senior
notes to be redeemed, or (2)the sum of the present values
of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest to
maturity.
table of contents
additionally, if a change in control triggering event occurs, as
defined by the terms of the floating rate senior notes and
5.25%senior notes issuance (together the december
2006 issuance), holders of the december 2006 issuance have
the right to require the company to redeem those notes at 101%
of the aggregate principal amount of the notes plus accrued
interest up to the redemption date.
the company is generally not limited under the indentures
governing the senior notes in its ability to incur additional
indebtedness or required to maintain financial ratios or
specified levels of net worth or liquidity. however, the
indenture governing the senior notes contains various
restrictive covenants, none of which is expected to impact the
companys liquidity or capital resources.
interest expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of
earnings is net of interest capitalized of $20million,
$46million and $47million in fiscal 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively. maturities of long-term debt are
$1.8billion for fiscal 2009, $1.0billion for fiscal
2010, $1.0billion for fiscal 2011, $24million for
fiscal 2012, $1.3billion for fiscal 2013 and
$6.3billion thereafter. as of february1, 2009, the
market value of the senior notes was approximately
$10.0billion.
7.
income
taxes
the components of earnings from continuing operations before
provision for income taxes for fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006 were
as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
february1,
february3,
january28,
united states
$
3,136
$
5,905
$
7,915
foreign
total
$
3,590
$
6,620
$
8,502
the provision for income taxes consisted of the following
(amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
february1,
february3,
january28,
current:
federal
$
1,283
$
2,055
$
2,557
state
foreign
1,566
2,650
3,244
deferred:
federal
(209
)
(242
)
(2
)
state
(56
)
(1
)
foreign
(23
)
(15
)
(5
)
(288
)
(240
)
(8
)
total
$
1,278
$
2,410
$
3,236
the companys combined federal, state and foreign effective
tax rates for fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, net of offsets
generated by federal, state and foreign tax benefits, were
approximately 35.6%, 36.4% and 38.1%, respectively.
table of contents
the reconciliation of the provision for income taxes at the
federal statutory rate of 35% to the actual tax expense for the
applicable fiscal years was as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
february1,
february3,
january28,
income taxes at federal statutory rate
$
1,257
$
2,317
$
2,976
state income taxes, net of federal income tax benefit
other, net
(71
)
(103
)
total
$
1,278
$
2,410
$
3,236
the tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to
significant portions of the deferred tax assets and deferred tax
liabilities as of february1, 2009 and february3,
2008, were as follows (amounts in millions):
february1,
february3,
current:
deferred tax assets:
property and equipment
$
$
accrued self-insurance liabilities
other accrued liabilities
current deferred tax assets
deferred tax liabilities:
accelerated inventory deduction
(114
)
(118
)
other
(118
)
(113
)
current deferred tax liabilities
(232
)
(231
)
current deferred tax assets, net
noncurrent:
deferred tax assets:
accrued self-insurance liabilities
state income taxes
capital loss carryover
net operating losses
other
valuation allowance
(12
)
(7
)
noncurrent deferred tax assets
deferred tax liabilities:
property and equipment
(1,068
)
(1,133
)
goodwill and other intangibles
(78
)
(69
)
other
(31
)
noncurrent deferred tax liabilities
(1,146
)
(1,233
)
noncurrent deferred tax liabilities, net
(365
)
(688
)
net deferred tax assets (liabilities)
$
$
(163
)
current deferred tax assets and current deferred tax liabilities
are netted by tax jurisdiction and noncurrent deferred tax
assets and noncurrent deferred tax liabilities are netted by tax
jurisdiction, and are included in the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets as follows (amounts in millions):
february1,
february3,
other current assets
$
$
other assets
other accrued expenses
(5
)
(10
)
deferred income taxes
(369
)
(688
)
net deferred tax assets (liabilities)
$
$
(163
)
table of contents
the company believes that the realization of the deferred tax
assets is more likely than not, based upon the expectation that
it will generate the necessary taxable income in future periods
and, except for certain net operating losses discussed below, no
valuation reserves have been provided.
at february1, 2009, the company had state and foreign net
operating loss carryforwards available to reduce future taxable
income, expiring at various dates from 2010 to 2028. management
has concluded that it is more likely than not that the tax
benefits related to the net operating losses will be realized.
however, certain foreign net operating losses are in
jurisdictions where the expiration period is too short to be
assured of utilization. therefore, a $12million valuation
allowance has been provided to reduce the deferred tax asset
related to net operating losses to an amount that is more likely
than not to be realized. total valuation allowances at
february1, 2009 and february3, 2008 were
$12million and $7million, respectively.
as a result of its sale of hd supply, the company incurred a tax
loss, resulting in a net capital loss carryover of approximately
$187million. the tax loss on sale resulted primarily from
the companys tax basis in excess of its book investment in
hd supply. the net capital loss carryover will expire if not
used by 2012. however, the company has concluded that it is more
likely than not that the tax benefits related to the capital
loss carryover will be realized based on its ability to generate
adequate capital gain income during the carryover period.
therefore, no valuation allowance has been provided.
the company has not provided for u.s.deferred income taxes
on approximately $1.3billion of undistributed earnings of
international subsidiaries because of its intention to
indefinitely reinvest these earnings outside the u.s.the
determination of the amount of the unrecognized deferred
u.s.income tax liability related to the undistributed
earnings is not practicable; however, unrecognized foreign
income tax credits would be available to reduce a portion of
this liability.
on january29, 2007, the company adopted fasb
interpretation no.48, accounting for uncertainty in
income taxes an interpretation of fasb statement
no.109 (fin48). among other
things, fin48 requires application of a more likely
than not threshold to the recognition and derecognition of
tax positions. it further requires that a change in judgment
related to prior years tax positions be recognized in the
quarter of such change. the adoption of fin48 reduced the
companys retained earnings by $111million. as a
result of the implementation, the gross amount of unrecognized
tax benefits at january29, 2007 for continuing operations
totaled $667million. a reconciliation of the beginning and
ending amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits for continuing
operations is as follows (amounts in millions):
february1,
february3,
unrecognized tax benefits balance at beginning of fiscal year
$
$
additions based on tax positions related to the current year
additions for tax positions of prior years
reductions for tax positions of prior years
(142
)
(115
)
reductions due to settlements
(65
)
(31
)
reductions due to lapse of statute of limitations
(4
)
(4
)
unrecognized tax benefits balance at end of fiscal year
$
$
the gross amount of unrecognized tax benefits as of
february1, 2009 includes $401million of net
unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the
annual effective income tax rate.
during fiscal 2008, the company decreased its interest accrual
associated with uncertain tax positions by approximately
$19million and paid interest of approximately
$12million. during fiscal 2007, the company increased its
interest accrual associated with uncertain tax positions by
approximately $32million and paid interest of
approximately $8million. total accrued interest as of
february1, 2009 and february3, 2008 is
$109million and $140million, respectively. there
were no penalty accruals during fiscal 2008 or 2007. interest
and penalties are included in net interest expense and operating
expenses, respectively. our classification of interest and
penalties did not change as a result of the adoption of
fin48.
the companys income tax returns are routinely examined by
domestic and foreign tax authorities. these audits generally
include queries regarding the cost recovery of certain assets,
which may result in timing differences. during 2007, the irs
completed its examination of the companys fiscal 2003 and
2004 income tax returns, with the exception of certain issues
table of contents
that are currently under appeal. during 2008, the irs began its
examination of the companys u.s.federal income tax
returns for fiscal years 2005 and 2006. the canadian
governments, including various provinces, are currently auditing
income tax returns for the years 2004 through 2005. also, during
2008, the company entered into an advance pricing agreement
which settled a transfer pricing issue for the years 2004
through 2008 related to intangible assets provided from the
u.s.there are also ongoing u.s.state and local
audits covering tax years 2001 to 2006. at this time, the
company does not expect the results from any income tax audit to
have a material impact on the companys financial
statements.
the company believes that certain adjustments under appeal for
the completed irs examination, as well as certain state audits,
will be agreed upon within the next twelve months. the company
has classified approximately $18million of the reserve for
unrecognized tax benefits as a short-term liability in the
accompanying consolidated balance sheets. final settlement of
these audit issues may result in payments that are more or less
than these amounts, but the company does not anticipate the
resolution of these matters will result in a material change to
its consolidated financial position or results of operations.
8.
employee
stock plans
the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan
(2005 plan) and the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus
stock incentive plan (1997 plan and collectively
with the 2005 plan, the plans) provide that
incentive and non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation
rights, restricted shares, performance shares, performance units
and deferred shares may be issued to selected associates,
officers and directors of the company. under the 2005 plan, the
maximum number of shares of the companys common stock
authorized for issuance is 255million shares, with any
award other than a stock option reducing the number of shares
available for issuance by 2.11shares. as of
february1, 2009, there were 205million shares
available for future grants under the 2005 plan. no additional
equity awards may be issued from the 1997 plan after the
adoption of the 2005 plan on may26, 2005.
under the terms of the plans, incentive stock options and
non-qualified stock options are to be priced at or above the
fair market value of the companys stock on the date of the
grant. typically, incentive stock options and non-qualified
stock options vest at the rate of 25% per year commencing on the
first or second anniversary date of the grant and expire on the
tenth anniversary date of the grant. certain of the
non-qualified stock options also include performance options
which vest on the later of the first anniversary date of the
grant and the date the closing price of the companys
common stock has been 25% greater than the exercise price of the
options for 30 consecutive trading days. the company recognized
$47million, $61million and $148million of
stock-based compensation expense in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively, related to stock options.
restrictions on the restricted stock issued under the plans
generally lapse according to one of the following schedules:
(1)the restrictions of the restricted stock lapse over
various periods up to five years, (2)the restrictions on
25% of the restricted stock lapse upon the third and sixth
anniversaries of the date of issuance with the remaining 50% of
the restricted stock lapsing upon the associates
attainment of age62, or (3)the restrictions on 25%
of the restricted stock lapse upon the third and sixth
anniversaries of the date of issuance with the remaining 50% of
the restricted stock lapsing upon the earlier of the
associates attainment of age60 or the tenth
anniversary date. the restricted stock also includes the
companys performance shares, the payout of which is
dependent on the companys total shareholders return
percentile ranking compared to the performance of individual
companies included in the s&p 500 index at the end of the
three-year performance cycle. additionally, certain awards may
become non-forfeitable upon the attainment of age60,
provided the associate has had five years of continuous service.
the fair value of the restricted stock is expensed over the
period during which the restrictions lapse. the company recorded
stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock of
$109million, $122million and $95million in
fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, there were 641 thousand, 593
thousand and 417 thousand deferred shares, respectively, granted
under the plans. each deferred share entitles the person to one
share of common stock to be received up to five years after the
vesting date of the deferred shares, subject to certain deferral
rights of the associate. the company recorded stock-based
compensation expense related to deferred shares of
$9million, $10million and $37million in fiscal
2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
as of february1, 2009, there were 2.5million
non-qualified stock options outstanding under non-qualified
stock option plans that are not part of the plans.
table of contents
the company maintains two employee stock purchase plans
(espps) (u.s.and
non-u.s.plans).
the plan for u.s.associates is a tax-qualified plan under
section423 of the internal revenue code. the
non-u.s.plan
is not a section423 plan. as of february1, 2009,
there were 15million shares available under the plan for
u.s associates and 21million shares available under the
non-u.s.plan.
the purchase price of shares under the espps is equal to 85% of
the stocks fair market value on the last day of the
purchase period. during fiscal 2008, there were 3million
shares purchased under the espps at an average price of $19.74.
under the outstanding espps as of february1, 2009,
employees have contributed $6million to purchase shares at
85% of the stocks fair market value on the last day
(june30, 2009)of the purchase period. the company
recognized $11million, $14million and
$17million of stock-based compensation in fiscal 2008,
2007 and 2006, respectively, related to the espps.
in total, the company recorded stock-based compensation expense,
including the expense of stock options, espps, restricted stock
and deferred stock units, of $176million,
$207million and $297million, in fiscal 2008, 2007
and 2006, respectively.
the following table summarizes stock options outstanding at
february1, 2009, february3, 2008 and
january28, 2007, and changes during the fiscal years ended
on these dates (shares in thousands):
weighted
number of
average exercise
shares
price
outstanding at january29, 2006
84,032
$
37.24
granted
39.53
exercised
(10,045
)
28.69
canceled
(8,103
)
40.12
outstanding at january28, 2007
66,141
$
38.20
granted
2,926
37.80
exercised
(6,859
)
28.50
canceled
(9,843
)
40.68
outstanding at february3, 2008
52,365
$
38.98
granted
5,226
26.09
exercised
(777
)
22.55
canceled
(4,800
)
39.14
outstanding at february1, 2009
52,014
$
37.91
the total intrinsic value of stock options exercised was
$4million, $63million and $120million in
fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. as of february1,
2009, there were approximately 52million stock options
outstanding with a weighted average remaining life of
4years and an intrinsic value of $1.4million. as of
february1, 2009, there were approximately 42million
options exercisable with a weighted average exercise price of
$39.33, a weighted average remaining life of 4years, and
no intrinsic value. as of february1, 2009, there were
approximately 51million shares vested or expected to
ultimately vest. as of february1, 2009, there was
$47million of unamortized stock-based compensation expense
related to stock options which is expected to be recognized over
a weighted average period of 3years.
table of contents
the following table summarizes restricted stock outstanding at
february1, 2009 (shares in thousands):
weighted
number of
average grant
shares
date fair value
outstanding at january29, 2006
5,308
$
35.76
granted
7,575
41.37
restrictions lapsed
(1,202
)
38.03
canceled
(1,551
)
39.00
outstanding at january28, 2007
10,130
$
39.20
granted
7,091
39.10
restrictions lapsed
(2,662
)
39.01
canceled
(2,844
)
39.37
outstanding at february3, 2008
11,715
$
39.14
granted
7,938
27.14
restrictions lapsed
(1,251
)
34.37
canceled
(2,115
)
34.86
outstanding at february1, 2009
16,287
$
34.22
as of february1, 2009, there was $320million of
unamortized stock-based compensation expense related to
restricted stock which is expected to be recognized over a
weighted average period of 3years. the total fair value of
restricted stock shares vesting during fiscal 2008, 2007 and
2006 were $33million, $103million and
$48million, respectively.
9.
leases
the company leases certain retail locations, office space,
warehouse and distribution space, equipment and vehicles. while
most of the leases are operating leases, certain locations and
equipment are leased under capital leases. as leases expire, it
can be expected that, in the normal course of business, certain
leases will be renewed or replaced.
certain lease agreements include escalating rents over the lease
terms. the company expenses rent on a straight-line basis over
the lease term which commences on the date the company has the
right to control the property. the cumulative expense recognized
on a straight-line basis in excess of the cumulative payments is
included in other accrued expenses and other long-term
liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
the company had a lease agreement under which the company leased
certain assets totaling $282million. this lease was
originally created under a structured financing arrangement and
involved two special purpose entities. the company financed a
portion of its new stores opened in fiscal years 1997 through
2003 under this lease agreement. under this agreement, the
lessor purchased the properties, paid for the construction costs
and subsequently leased the facilities to the company. the
company recorded the rental payments under the terms of the
operating lease agreements as sg&a in the accompanying
consolidated statements of earnings.
the $282million lease agreement expired in fiscal 2008,
and the company exercised its option to purchase the assets
under this lease for $282million. as a result of this
purchase, the company paid off $282million of long-term
debt included in the structured financing arrangement and
reclassified $282million from long-term notes receivable
to property and equipment in the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets.
total rent expense, net of minor sublease income for fiscal
2008, 2007 and 2006 was $846million, $824million and
$768million, respectively. certain store leases also
provide for contingent rent payments based on percentages of
sales in excess of specified minimums. contingent rent expense
for fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006 was approximately
$5million, $6million and $9million,
respectively. real estate taxes, insurance, maintenance and
operating expenses applicable to the leased property are
obligations of the company under the lease agreements.
table of contents
the approximate future minimum lease payments under capital and
all other leases at february1, 2009 were as follows (in
millions):
capital
operating
fiscal year
leases
leases
$
$
thereafter through 2097
5,474
1,366
$
8,738
less imputed interest
net present value of capital lease obligations
less current installments
long-term capital lease obligations, excluding current
installments
$
short-term and long-term obligations for capital leases are
included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets in
current installments of long-term debt and long-term debt,
respectively. the assets under capital leases recorded in
property and equipment, net of amortization, totaled
$309million and $327million at february1, 2009
and february3, 2008, respectively.
10.
employee
benefit plans
the company maintains active defined contribution retirement
plans for its employees (the benefit plans). all
associates satisfying certain service requirements are eligible
to participate in the benefit plans. the company makes cash
contributions each payroll period up to specified percentages of
associates contributions as approved by the board of
directors.
the company also maintains a restoration plan to provide certain
associates deferred compensation that they would have received
under the benefit plans as a matching contribution if not for
the maximum compensation limits under the internal revenue code.
the company funds the restoration plan through contributions
made to a grantor trust, which are then used to purchase shares
of the companys common stock in the open market.
the companys contributions to the benefit plans and the
restoration plan were $158million, $152million and
$135million for fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
at february1, 2009, the benefit plans and the restoration
plan held a total of 20million shares of the
companys common stock in trust for plan participants.
11.
basic and
diluted weighted average common shares
the reconciliation of basic to diluted weighted average common
shares for fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006 is as follows (amounts in
millions):
fiscal year ended
february1,
february3,
january28,
weighted average common shares
1,682
1,849
2,054
effect of potentially dilutive securities:
stock plans
diluted weighted average common shares
1,686
1,856
2,062
stock plans include shares granted under the companys
employee stock plans as described in note8 to the
consolidated financial statements. options to purchase
52.2million, 43.4million and 45.4million
shares of common stock at february1, 2009,
february3, 2008 and january28, 2007, respectively,
were excluded from the computation of diluted earnings per share
because their effect would have been anti-dilutive.
table of contents
12.
commitments
and contingencies
at february1, 2009, the company was contingently liable
for approximately $695million under outstanding letters of
credit and open accounts issued for certain business
transactions, including insurance programs, trade contracts and
construction contracts. the companys letters of credit are
primarily performance-based and are not based on changes in
variable components, a liability or an equity security of the
other party.
the company is a defendant in numerous cases containing
class-action
allegations in which the plaintiffs are current and former
hourly associates who allege that the company failed to provide
work breaks. the complaints generally seek unspecified monetary
damages, injunctive relief or both. class or collective-action
certification has yet to be addressed in most of these cases.
the company has reached a tentative settlement with the
plaintiffs in certain of these cases, subject to court approval.
the reserve recorded by the company for these cases is not
material to the consolidated financial statements. the company
cannot reasonably estimate the possible loss which may arise
from the remainder of these lawsuits. these matters, if decided
adversely to or settled by the company, individually or in the
aggregate, may result in a liability material to the
companys consolidated financial condition or results of
operations. the company is vigorously defending itself against
these actions.
13.
quarterly
financial data (unaudited)
the following is a summary of the quarterly consolidated results
of operations from continuing operations for the fiscal years
ended february1, 2009 and february3, 2008 (dollars
in millions, except per share data):
basic
diluted
earnings (loss)
earnings per
earnings per
from
share from
share from
continuing
continuing
continuing
net sales
gross profit
operations
operations
operations
fiscal year ended february1, 2009:
first quarter
$
17,907
$
6,072
$
$
0.21
$
0.21
second quarter
20,990
6,964
1,202
0.72
0.71
third quarter
17,784
5,994
0.45
0.45
fourth quarter
14,607
4,960
(2
)
0.00
0.00
fiscal year
$
71,288
$
23,990
$
2,312
$
1.37
$
1.37
fiscal year ended february3, 2008:
first quarter
$
18,545
$
6,263
$
$
0.48
$
0.48
second quarter
22,184
7,341
1,521
0.78
0.77
third quarter
18,961
6,339
1,071
0.59
0.59
fourth quarter
17,659
6,054
0.40
0.40
fiscal year
$
77,349
$
25,997
$
4,210
$
2.28
$
2.27
note: the quarterly data may not sum to fiscal year
totals.
table of contents
item9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure.
not applicable.
item9a.
controls
and procedures.
disclosure
controls and procedures
the company maintains disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in
rule13a-15(e)
under the securities exchange act) that are designed to ensure
that information required to be disclosed in the companys
securities exchange act reports is recorded, processed,
summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the
securities and exchange commissions rules and forms, and
that such information is accumulated and communicated to the
companys management, including the chief executive officer
and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely
decisions regarding required disclosure.
the companys management, with the participation of the
companys chief executive officer and chief financial
officer, have evaluated the effectiveness of the companys
disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period
covered by this report. based on such evaluation, the chief
executive officer and the chief financial officer have concluded
that, as of the end of the period covered by this report, the
companys disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
internal
control over financial reporting
there have not been any changes in the companys internal
control over financial reporting (as such term is defined in
rules13a-15(f)
under the securities exchange act) during the fiscal quarter
ended february1, 2009 that have materially affected, or
are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys
internal control over financial reporting.
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
the information required by this item is incorporated by
reference to item8. financial statements and
supplementary data of this report.
item9b.
other
information.
none.
table of contents
partiii
item10.
directors,
executive officers and corporate governance.
information required by this item, other than the information
regarding the executive officers of the company set forth below,
is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled
election of directors and director biographies,
board of directors information, general
and audit committee report in the companys
proxy statement for the 2009 annual meeting of shareholders (the
proxy statement).
executive officers of the company are appointed by, and serve at
the pleasure of, the board of directors. the current executive
officers of the company are as follows:
francis s. blake, age59, has been chairman and chief
executive officer since january 2007. from march 2002 through
january 2007, he served as the companys executive vice
president business development and corporate
operations. mr.blake serves as a director of the southern
company.
timothy m. crow, age53, has been executive vice
president human resources since february 2007. from
march 2005 through february 2007, he served as senior vice
president human resources, organization, talent and
performance systems and he served as vice president
human resources, performance systems from may 2002 through march
2005. mr.crow previously served as senior vice
president human resources of k-mart corporation, a
mass merchandising company, from january 2001 through may 2002.
marvin r. ellison, age44, has been executive vice
president u.s.stores since august 2008. from
january 2006 through august 2008, he served as
president northern division. from august2005
through january 2006, he served as senior vice
president logistics and from october 2004 through
august 2005 he served as vice president logistics.
from june 2002 through october 2004, he served as vice
president loss prevention. from 1987 until june
2002, mr.ellison held various management and executive
level positions with target corporation, a general merchandise
retailer. his final position with target was director, assets
protection.
craig a. menear, age51, has been executive vice
president merchandising since april 2007. from
august 2003 through april 2007, he served as senior vice
president merchandising. from 1997 through august
2003, mr.menear served in various management and vice
president level positions in the companys merchandising
department, including merchandising vice president of hardware,
merchandising vice president of the southwest division, and
divisional merchandise manager of the southwest division.
ricardo e. saldvar, age56, has been
president mexico since march 2006. from august 2001
through march 2006, he served as region president
mexico. from 1985 to august 2001, mr.saldivar held various
management and executive level positions with grupo alfa, a
mexican conglomerate. his final position with grupo alfa was
president and chief executive officer of total home.
carol b. tom, age52, has been chief financial
officer since may 2001 and executive vicepresident
corporate services since january 2007. prior
thereto, ms.tom served as senior vice president
finance and accounting/treasurer from february 2000
through may 2001 and as vice president and treasurer from 1995
through february 2000. from 1992 until 1995, when she joined the
company, ms.tom was vice president and treasurer of
riverwood international corporation, a provider of paperboard
packaging. ms.tom serves as a director of united
parcel service, inc. and the federal reserve bank of atlanta.
jack a. vanwoerkom, age55, has been executive vice
president, general counsel and corporate secretary since june
2007. prior thereto, mr.vanwoerkom served as executive
vice president, general counsel and secretary of staples, inc.,
an office products company, from march 2003 through may 2007 and
as senior vice president, general counsel and secretary of
staples, inc. from march 1999 until march 2003.
mr.vanwoerkom serves as a director of wright express
corporation.
annette m. verschuren, age52, has been president, the home
depot canada since march 1996 and president, the home depot asia
since september 2006. from april 2003 through october 2005, she
also served as president, expo design center.
ms.verschuren serves as a director of liberty mutual
holding company inc.
table of contents
item11.
executive
compensation.
the information required by this item is incorporated by
reference to the sections entitled executive
compensation, compensation discussion&
analysis, compensation committee report and
director compensation in the companys proxy
statement.
item12.security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters.
the information required by this item is incorporated by
reference to the sections entitled beneficial ownership of
common stock and executive compensation in the
companys proxy statement.
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions, and director
independence.
the information required by this item is incorporated by
reference to the sections entitled board of directors
information and general in the companys
proxy statement.
item14.
principal
accounting fees and services.
the information required by this item is incorporated by
reference to the section entitled independent registered
public accounting firms fees in the companys
proxy statement.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibits,
financial statement schedules.
(a)(1)financial statements
the following financial statements are set forth in item8
hereof:
consolidated statements of earnings for the fiscal years ended
february1, 2009, february3, 2008 and
january28, 2007;
consolidated balance sheets as of february1, 2009 and
february3, 2008;
consolidated statements of stockholders equity and
comprehensive income for the fiscal years ended february1,
2009, february3, 2008 and january28, 2007;
consolidated statements of cash flows for the fiscal years ended
february1, 2009, february3, 2008 and
january28, 2007;
notes to consolidated financial statements;
managements responsibility for financial statements and
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting;and
reports of independent registered public accounting firm.
(2)
financial statement schedules
all schedules are omitted as the required information is
inapplicable or the information is presented in the consolidated
financial statements or related notes.
(3)
exhibits
exhibits marked with an asterisk (*) are incorporated by
reference to exhibits or appendices previously filed with the
securities and exchange commission, as indicated by the
references in brackets. all other exhibits are filed herewith.
our current, quarterly and annual reports are filed with the
securities and exchange commission under file
no.1-8207.
our registration statements have the file numbers noted wherever
such statements are identified in the following list of exhibits.
*2
.1
purchase and sale agreement, dated as of june 19, 2007, by and
between the home depot, inc., thd holdings, llc, home depot
international, inc., homer tlc, inc. and pro acquisition
corporation. [form 8-k filed on june 20, 2007, exhibit
2.1]
*2
.2
letter agreement, dated august 14, 2007, by and between the home
depot, inc., thd holdings, llc, home depot international, inc.,
homer tlc, inc. and pro acquisition corporation. [form 8-k
filed on august 15, 2007, exhibit 2.1]
*2
.3
amendment, dated august 27, 2007, by and between the home depot,
inc., thd holdings, llc, home depot international, inc., homer
tlc, inc. and pro acquisition corporation. [form 10-q for the
fiscal quarter ended july 29, 2007, exhibit 2.3]
*3
.1
amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the home
depot, inc. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august 4,
2002, exhibit 3.1]
*3
.2
by-laws, as amended and restated. [form 8-k filed on november
21, 2008, exhibit 3.1]
*4
.1
indenture, dated as of september 16, 2004, between the home
depot, inc. and the bank of newyork. [form 8-k filed
september 17, 2004, exhibit 4.1]
*4
.2
indenture, dated as of may 4, 2005, between the home depot, inc.
and the bank of new york trust company, n.a., as trustee.
[form s-3 (file no. 333-124699) filed may 6, 2005, exhibit
4.1]
table of contents
*4
.3
form of 3.75%senior note due september 15, 2009. [form
8-k filed on september 17, 2004, exhibit 4.2]
*4
.4
form of 4.625%senior note due august 15, 2010. [form
10-k for the fiscal year ended january 29, 2006, exhibit 4.6]
*4
.5
form of 5.20%senior note due march 1, 2011. [form 8-k
filed march 23, 2006, exhibit 4.1]
*4
.6
form of 5.40%senior note due march 1, 2016. [form 8-k
filed march 23, 2006, exhibit 4.2]
*4
.7
form of floating rate senior note due december 16, 2009.
[form 8-k filed december 19, 2006, exhibit 4.1]
*4
.8
form of 5.250%senior note due december 16, 2013. [form
8-k filed december 19, 2006, exhibit4.2]
*4
.9
form of 5.875%senior note due december 16, 2036. [form
8-k filed december 19, 2006, exhibit4.3]
*10
.1
the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form
10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august 4, 2002, exhibit
10.1]
*10
.2
the home depot executive life insurance, death benefit only
plan. [form 10-k for the fiscal year ended february 2, 2003,
exhibit 10.39]
*10
.3
home depot u.s.a., inc. deferred compensation plan for officers.
[form 10-k for the fiscal year ended february 2, 2003,
exhibit 10.38]
*10
.4
the home depot futurebuilder for puerto rico. [form 10-k for
the fiscal year ended february 2, 2003, exhibit 10.35]
*10
.5
first amendment to the home depot futurebuilder for puerto rico,
effective july 5, 2004. [form s-8 (file no. 333- 125332)
filed may 27, 2005, exhibit 10.3]
*10
.6
the home depot futurebuilder, a 401(k) and stock ownership plan,
as amended and restated effective july 1, 2004. [form 10-q
for the fiscal quarter ended october 31, 2004, exhibit 10.5]
*10
.7
the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form
8-k filed on may 27, 2005, exhibit 10.8]
*10
.8
the home depot futurebuilder restoration plan. [form 8-k
filed on august 20, 2007, exhibit10.10]
*10
.9
the home depot, inc. non-employee directors deferred stock
compensation plan. [form 8-k filed on august 20, 2007,
exhibit 10.3]
*10
.10
the home depot, inc. management incentive plan (effective
february 2, 2008).  [form 8-k filed on may 28, 2008, exhibit
10.1]
*10
.11
the home depot, inc. amended and restated employee stock
purchase plan, as amended and restated effective july 1, 2008.
[form s-8 (file no. 333-151849) filed june 23, 2008, exhibit
10.1]
*10
.12
form of executive officer restricted stock award pursuant to the
home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form
10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october 31, 2004, exhibit
10.1]
*10
.13
form of restricted stock award pursuant to the home depot, inc.
2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march
3, 2008, exhibit 10.2]
*10
.14
form of u.s. restricted stock award pursuant to the home depot,
inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on
march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.1]
*10
.15
form of executive officer nonqualified stock option award
pursuant to the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive
plan. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october 31,
2004, exhibit10.2]
*10
.16
form of nonqualified stock option pursuant to the home depot,
inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on
march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.6]
*10
.17
form of executive officer nonqualified stock option award
pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive
plan. [form 8-k filed on march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.4]
*10
.18
form of outside director nonqualified stock option award
pursuant to the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive
plan. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october 31,
2004, exhibit10.3]
*10
.19
form of nonqualified stock option (non-employee directors)
pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive
plan. [form 8-k filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.5]
*10
.20
form of non-employee director nonqualified stock option award
pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive
plan. [form 8-k filed on march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.5]
*10
.21
form of deferred share award (non-employee director) pursuant to
the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form
8-k filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.2]
table of contents
*10
.22
form of canada deferred share award pursuant to the home depot,
inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on
march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.2]
*10
.23
form of mexico deferred share award pursuant to the home depot,
inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on
march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.3]
*10
.24
form of performance vested option award pursuant to the home
depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k
filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.9]
*10
.25
non-qualified stock option and deferred stock unit plan and
agreement dated as of december 4, 2000. [form 10-k for the
fiscal year ended january 28, 2001, exhibit 10.20]
*10
.26
form of performance share award pursuant to the home depot, inc.
2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march
27, 2007, exhibit 10.7]
*10
.27
form of performance share award (mexico) pursuant to the home
depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k
filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.8]
*10
.28
form of ltip performance unit award pursuant to the home depot,
inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on
march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.10]
*10
.29
form of performance share award pursuant to the home depot, inc.
2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march
13, 2009, exhibit 10.6]
*10
.30
separation agreement between the company and robert nardelli
effective as of january 2, 2007. [form 10-k for the fiscal
year ended january 28, 2007, exhibit 10.37]
*10
.31
deferred payment trust dated as of january 12, 2007. [form
10-k for the fiscal year ended january 28, 2007, exhibit
10.38]
*10
.32
employment arrangement between frank blake and the home depot,
inc., dated january 23, 2007. [form 8-k/a filed on january
24, 2007, exhibit 10.1]
*10
.33
employment arrangement between carol b. tom and the home
depot, inc., dated january 22, 2007. [form 8- k/a filed on
january 24, 2007, exhibit 10.2]
*10
.34
letter agreement between joseph j. deangelo and the home depot,
inc. and hd supply, inc., dated may 24, 2007 [form 10-q for
the fiscal quarter ended july 29, 2007, exhibit 10.3]
*10
.35
separation agreement and release between robert derodes and the
home depot, inc., dated as of may 27, 2008. [form 8-k filed
on may 28, 2008, exhibit 10.2]
*10
.36
employment arrangement between craig a. menear and the home
depot, inc., dated april 25, 2007. [form 10-k for the fiscal
year ended february 3, 2008, exhibit 10.47]
*10
.37
non-competition agreement between annette m. verschuren and the
home depot, inc., dated may10, 2006. [form 10-k for the
fiscal year ended february 3, 2008, exhibit 10.49]
*10
.38
separation agreement & release between roger w. adams and
the home depot, inc., dated november 25, 2007. [form 10-k for
the fiscal year ended february 3, 2008, exhibit 10.50]
*10
.39
employment arrangement between marvin r. ellison and the home
depot, inc., dated august 27, 2008.
*10
.40
participation agreement dated as of october 22, 1998 among the
home depot, inc. as guarantor; home depot u.s.a., inc. as
lessee; hd real estate funding corp. ii as facility lender;
credit suisse leasing 92a l.p. as lessor; the bank of new york
as indenture trustee; and credit suisse first boston corporation
and invemed associates, inc. as initial purchasers. [form
10-k for the fiscal year ended january 31, 1999, exhibit
10.10]
*10
.41
master modification agreement dated as of april 20, 1998 among
the home depot, inc. as guarantor; home depot u.s.a., inc., as
lessee and construction agent; hd real estate funding corp., as
facility lender; credit suisse leasing 92a l.p. as lessor; the
lenders named on the schedule thereto as lenders; and credit
suisse first boston corporation as agent bank. [form 10-k for
the fiscal year ended january 31, 1999, exhibit 10.13]
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
*18
preferability letter of independent registered public accounting
firm. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended november 2,
2008, exhibit 18.1]
list of subsidiaries of the company.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
table of contents
.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to rule
13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934,
as amended.
.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to rule
13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934,
as amended.
.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to
18u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906
of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to
18u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906
of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement required
to be filed as an exhibit to this form pursuant to
item15(a) of this report.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
the home depot, inc.
(registrant)
by:
/s/francis
s. blake
(francis s. blake, chairman& ceo)
date: march25, 2009
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of
1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons
on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/francis
s. blake
(francis
s. blake)
chairman& chief executive officer (principal
executive officer)
march25, 2009
/s/carol
b. tom
(carol
b. tom)
chief financial officer and executive vice president
corporate services (principal financial officer and principal
accounting officer)
march25, 2009
/s/f.
duane ackerman
(f.
duane ackerman)
director
march24, 2009
/s/david
h. batchelder
(david
h. batchelder)
director
march20, 2009
/s/ari
bousbib
(ari
bousbib)
director
march20, 2009
/s/gregory
d. brenneman
(gregory
d. brenneman)
director
march20, 2009
/s/albert
p. carey
(albert
p. carey)
director
march30, 2009
/s/armando
codina
(armando
codina)
director
march31, 2009
/s/bonnie
g. hill
(bonnie
g. hill)
director
march30, 2009
/s/karen
l. katen
(karen
l. katen)
director
march25, 2009
table of contents
index
of attached exhibits
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
list of subsidiaries of the company.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to
rule13a-14(a)
promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as
amended.
.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to
rule13a-14(a)
promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as
amended.
.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to
18u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to
18u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
table of contents
10-year
summary of financial and operating results
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries
10-year
compound annual
amounts in millions, except where noted
growth rate
2007(1)
statement of earnings
data(2)
net sales
9.0
%
$
71,288
$
77,349
$
79,022
net sales increase (decrease) (%)
(7.8
)
(2.1
)
2.6
earnings before provision for income taxes
3.1
3,590
6,620
8,502
net earnings
3.7
2,312
4,210
5,266
net earnings increase (decrease) (%)
(45.1
)
(20.1
)
(6.6
)
diluted earnings per share ($)
6.9
1.37
2.27
2.55
diluted earnings per share increase (decrease) (%)
(39.6
)
(11.0
)
(3.0
)
diluted weighted average number of common shares
(3.1
)
1,686
1,856
2,062
gross margin % of sales
33.7
33.6
33.6
total operating expenses % of sales
27.5
24.3
22.4
interest and other, net % of sales
1.1
0.8
0.5
earnings before provision for income taxes % of sales
5.0
8.6
10.8
net earnings % of sales
3.2
5.4
6.7
balance sheet data and financial
ratios(3)
total assets
11.8
%
$
41,164
$
44,324
$
52,263
working capital
0.6
2,209
1,968
5,069
merchandise inventories
9.5
10,673
11,731
12,822
net property and equipment
12.4
26,234
27,476
26,605
long-term debt
20.0
9,667
11,383
11,643
stockholders equity
7.4
17,777
17,714
25,030
book value per share ($)
10.3
10.48
10.48
12.71
long-term
debt-to-equity
(%)
54.4
64.3
46.5
total
debt-to-equity
(%)
64.3
75.8
46.6
current ratio
1.20:1
1.15:1
1.39:1
inventory
turnover(2)
4.0x
4.2x
4.5x
return on invested capital
(%)(2)
9.5
13.9
16.8
statement of cash flows data
depreciation and amortization
17.7
%
$
1,902
$
1,906
$
1,886
capital expenditures
(1.2
)
1,847
3,558
3,542
payments for businesses acquired, net
(100.0
)
4,268
cash dividends per share ($)
28.0
0.900
0.900
0.675
store data
number of stores
11.6
%
2,274
2,234
2,147
square footage at fiscal year-end
11.4
increase in square footage (%)
1.3
4.9
4.2
average square footage per store (in thousands)
(0.2
)
store sales and other data
comparable store sales increase (decrease)
(%)(4)(5)
(8.7
)
(6.7
)
(2.8
)
weighted average weekly sales per operating store (in thousands)
(3.3
)%
$
$
$
weighted average sales per square foot ($)
(3.1
)
number of customer transactions
6.7
1,272
1,336
1,330
average ticket ($)
2.1
55.61
57.48
58.90
number of associates at fiscal
year-end(3)
7.5
322,000
331,000
364,400
(1)
fiscal years 2007 and 2001 include 53weeks; all other
fiscal years reported include 52weeks.
(2)
fiscal years 2003 through 2008 include continuing operations
only. the discontinued operations in fiscal years prior to 2003
were not material.
(3)
amounts for fiscal years 2008 and 2007 include continuing
operations only. all amounts in other fiscal years reported
include discontinued operations.
f-1
table of contents
2001(1)
statement of earnings
data(2)
net sales
$
77,019
$
71,100
$
63,660
$
58,247
$
53,553
$
45,738
$
38,434
net sales increase (decrease) (%)
8.3
11.7
9.3
8.8
17.1
19.0
27.2
earnings before provision for income taxes
8,967
7,790
6,762
5,872
4,957
4,217
3,804
net earnings
5,641
4,922
4,253
3,664
3,044
2,581
2,320
net earnings increase (decrease) (%)
14.6
15.7
16.1
20.4
17.9
11.3
43.7
diluted earnings per share ($)
2.63
2.22
1.86
1.56
1.29
1.10
1.00
diluted earnings per share increase (decrease) (%)
18.5
19.4
19.2
20.9
17.3
10.0
40.8
diluted weighted average number of common shares
2,147
2,216
2,289
2,344
2,353
2,352
2,342
gross margin % of sales
33.7
33.4
31.7
31.1
30.2
29.9
29.7
total operating expenses % of sales
21.9
22.4
21.1
21.1
20.9
20.7
19.8
interest and other, net % of sales
0.1
(0.1
)
earnings before provision for income taxes % of sales
11.6
11.0
10.6
10.1
9.3
9.2
9.9
net earnings % of sales
7.3
6.9
6.7
6.3
5.7
5.6
6.0
balance sheet data and financial
ratios(3)
total assets
$
44,405
$
39,020
$
34,437
$
30,011
$
26,394
$
21,385
$
17,081
working capital
2,563
3,818
3,774
3,882
3,860
3,392
2,734
merchandise inventories
11,401
10,076
9,076
8,338
6,725
6,556
5,489
net property and equipment
24,901
22,726
20,063
17,168
15,375
13,068
10,227
long-term debt
2,672
2,148
1,321
1,250
1,545
stockholders equity
26,909
24,158
22,407
19,802
18,082
15,004
12,341
book value per share ($)
12.67
11.06
9.93
8.38
7.71
6.46
5.36
long-term
debt-to-equity
(%)
9.9
8.9
3.8
6.7
6.9
10.3
6.1
total
debt-to-equity
(%)
15.2
8.9
6.1
6.7
6.9
10.3
6.1
current ratio
1.20:1
1.37:1
1.40:1
1.48:1
1.59:1
1.77:1
1.75:1
inventory
turnover(2)
4.7x
4.9x
5.0x
5.3x
5.4x
5.1x
5.4x
return on invested capital
(%)(2)
20.4
19.9
19.2
18.8
18.3
19.6
22.5
statement of cash flows data
depreciation and amortization
$
1,579
$
1,319
$
1,076
$
$
$
$
capital expenditures
3,881
3,948
3,508
2,749
3,393
3,574
2,618
payments for businesses acquired, net
2,546
cash dividends per share ($)
0.400
0.325
0.26
0.21
0.17
0.16
0.11
store data
number of stores
2,042
1,890
1,707
1,532
1,333
1,134
square footage at fiscal year-end
increase in square footage (%)
7.0
9.8
10.2
14.1
18.5
22.6
23.5
average square footage per store (in thousands)
store sales and other data
comparable store sales increase (decrease)
(%)(4)(5)
3.1
5.1
3.7
(0.5
)
weighted average weekly sales per operating store (in thousands)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
weighted average sales per square foot ($)
number of customer transactions
1,330
1,295
1,246
1,161
1,091
average ticket ($)
57.98
54.89
51.15
49.43
48.64
48.65
47.87
number of associates at fiscal
year-end(3)
344,800
323,100
298,800
280,900
256,300
227,300
201,400
(4)
includes net sales at locations open greater than
12months, including relocated and remodeled stores. stores
become comparable on the monday following their 365th day of
operation. comparable store sales is intended only as
supplemental information and is not a substitute for net sales
or net earnings presented in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles.
(5)
comparable store sales in fiscal years prior to 2002 were
reported to the nearest percent.
f-2
