10-k
d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states  securities and exchange commission  washington,d.c. 20549    form10-k
x
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934  for the fiscal year ended january31, 2010  or
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934  commission file number 1-8207  the home depot, inc.  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware  (state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)  95-3261426
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)  2455 paces ferry road, n.w., atlanta, georgia 30339  (address of principal executive offices) (zip code)  registrants telephone number, including area code: (770)433-8211  securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, $0.05par value per share
new york stock exchange securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act: none  indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known
seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities act.yesxno  indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the act.yesnox  indicate by check mark whether the
registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports),
and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.yesxno  indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every interactive data file required
to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). yesxno  indicate by check mark if
disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference
in partiii of this form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.x  indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated
filer and smaller reporting company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act. (check one):
largeacceleratedfilerx
acceleratedfiler
non-acceleratedfiler (donotcheckifasmallerreporting company)
smallerreportingcompany indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the exchange act).yesnox  the aggregate market value of the common stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the
registrant on august3, 2009 was $43.9billion.  the number of shares outstanding of the registrants common stock as of
march22, 2010 was 1,693,341,736 shares.  documents incorporated by reference  portions of the registrants proxy statement for the 2010 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form10-k to the extent described herein.
table of contents
the home depot, inc.  fiscal year 2009 form10-k  table of contents
parti
item1.
business
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
[reserved]
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuerpurchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results
ofoperations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
item9b.
other information
partiii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and relatedstockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
table of contents
cautionary statement pursuant to the  private securities litigation reform act of 1995  certain statements regarding our future performance constitute forward-looking statements as defined in the private securities litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements may
relate to, among other things, the demand for our products and services, net sales growth, comparable store sales, state of the economy, state of the residential construction, housing and home improvement markets, state of the credit markets,
including mortgages, home equity loans and consumer credit, commodity price inflation and deflation, implementation of store initiatives, continuation of reinvestment plans, net earnings performance, earnings per share, stock-based compensation
expense, capital allocation and expenditures, liquidity, the effect of adopting certain accounting standards, return on invested capital, management of our purchasing or customer credit policies, the effect of accounting charges, the planned
recapitalization of the company, timing of the completion of the recapitalization, the ability to issue debt securities on terms and at rates acceptable to us, impact of cannibalization, store openings and closures and financial outlook.
forward-looking statements are based on currently available information and our current assumptions, expectations and projections about future events. you
are cautioned not to place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements. these statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to future events, risks and uncertaintiesmany of which are beyond our control or
are currently unknown to usas well as potentially inaccurate assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations and projections. these risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to,
those described in item1a, risk factors.  forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and we do not
undertake to update these statements other than as required by law. you are advised, however, to review any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our periodic filings with the securities and exchange commission (sec).
parti
item1.
business.  introduction
the home depot, inc. is the worlds largest home improvement retailer based on net sales for the fiscal year ended january31, 2010
(fiscal 2009). the home depot stores sell a wide assortment of building materials, home improvement and lawn and garden products and provide a number of services. the home depot stores average approximately 105,000square feet of
enclosed space, with approximately 24,000 additional square feet of outside garden area. as of the end of fiscal 2009, we had 2,244 the home depot stores located throughout the united states including the commonwealth of puerto rico and the
territories of the u.s.virgin islands and guam (u.s.), canada, china and mexico.  the home depot, inc. is a delaware
corporation that was incorporated in 1978. our store support center (corporate office) is located at 2455 paces ferry road, n.w., atlanta, georgia 30339. our telephone number is (770)433-8211.  we maintain an internet website at www.homedepot.com. we make available on our website, free of charge, our annual reports to shareholders, annual reports on
form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q, current reports on form8-k, proxy statements and forms3, 4 and 5 as soon as reasonably practicable after filing such documents with, or furnishing such documents to, the sec.
we include our website addresses throughout this filing only as textual references. the information contained on our websites is not
incorporated by reference into this report.
table of contents
our business  operating strategy.in fiscal 2009, despite prolonged difficulties in the economy, we continued to focus on our core retail business, investing in our associates and
stores and improving our customer service. this focus reflected a continuation of strategies implemented in the fiscal year ended february1, 2009 (fiscal 2008), including the decision, announced in late january 2009, to close our
expo design center, thd design center, yardbirds and hd bath businesses (the exited businesses). in fiscal 2009, we maintained our focus on maximizing the productivity of our existing store base. during the year, we continued to
implement significant changes in our store operations to make them simpler, more consistent and more customer-focused. we shifted associate hours to be more customer facing, provided additional customer service and product knowledge training to our
associates and refocused our efforts on offering every day values in the stores. additionally, we continued to make strategic decisions intended to optimize our capital allocation, control expenses and create long-term value for our shareholders.
customers.the home depot stores serve three primary customer groups:
do-it-yourself (d-i-y) customers:these customers are typically home owners who purchase products and complete their own
projects and installations.
do-it-for-me (d-i-f-m) customers:these customers are typically home owners who purchase materials themselves and hire third
parties to complete the project or installation. we arrange for the installation of a variety of the home depot products through qualified independent contractors.
professional customers:these customers are professional remodelers, general contractors, repairmen, small business owners and tradesmen.
in many stores, we offer a variety of programs to these customers, including delivery and will-call services, dedicated staff and expanded credit programs, all of which we believe increase sales to these customers.  products.a typical home depot store stocks approximately 30,000 to 40,000 products during the year, including both
national brand name and proprietary items. the following table shows the percentage of net sales of each major product group (and related services) for each of the last three fiscal years:
percentage of net sales forfiscal year
ended
product group
january31,2010
february1,2009
february3,2008
plumbing, electrical and kitchen
29.8
%
30.6
%
31.0
%
hardware and seasonal
29.1
28.7
28.0
building materials, lumber and millwork
21.9
22.1
22.3
paint and flooring
19.2
18.6
18.7
total
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
in fiscal 2009, we reduced our inventory while improving our in-stock rate. we also reduced a number of
one-time discount promotions and refocused our efforts on offering every day values. we continued to introduce innovative and distinctive products to our customers, including thomasville deep seating patio furniture, behr premium plus ultra paint and primer in one, charbroil
infrared grills, ridgid pressure washers and homelite trimmers.  to complement
and enhance our product selection, we have formed strategic alliances and exclusive relationships with selected suppliers to market products under a variety of well-recognized brand names. during fiscal 2009, we offered a number of proprietary and
exclusive brands across a wide range of departments including, but not limited to, behr premium plus paint,
hampton bay lighting, vigoro lawn care products, husky
hand tools, ridgid and ryobi power tools and glacier bay
bath fixtures. we also announced our
table of contents
partnership with martha stewart living omnimedia to offer an exclusive martha stewart living brand of home improvement products in select categories including outdoor living and paint. we may
consider additional strategic alliances and relationships with other suppliers and will continue to assess opportunities to expand the range of products available under brand names that are exclusive to the home depot.  from our store support center we maintain a global sourcing merchandise program to source high-quality products directly from manufacturers around the world.
our merchant team identifies and purchases market leading innovative products directly for our stores. additionally, we have three sourcing offices located in the chinese cities of shanghai, shenzhen and dalian, and offices in gurgaon, india; rome,
italy; monterrey, mexico and toronto, canada.  services.our stores offer a variety of installation
services. these services target d-i-f-m customers who select and purchase products and installation of those products from us. these installation programs include products such as carpeting, flooring, cabinets, countertops and water heaters. in
addition, we provide professional installation of a number of products sold through our in-home sales programs, such as generators and furnace and central air systems.  store growth.  united states.at the end of fiscal
2009, we were operating 1,976 the home depot stores in the u.s., including the commonwealth of puerto rico and the territories of the u.s.virgin islands and guam. during fiscal 2009, we opened five new the home depot stores in the u.s.
canada.at the end of fiscal 2009, we were operating 179 the home depot stores in ten canadian provinces. of
these stores, three were opened during fiscal 2009.  mexico.at the end of fiscal 2009, we were operating 79 the
home depot stores in mexico. of these stores, five were opened during fiscal 2009.  china.at the end of fiscal
2009, we were operating 10 the home depot stores in four chinese cities.  net sales for the company outside of the u.s.were
$7.0billion for fiscal 2009 and were $7.4billion for fiscal 2008 and 2007. long-lived assets outside of the u.s.totaled $3.0billion, $2.8billion and $3.1 billion as of january31, 2010,february1, 2009
and february3, 2008, respectively.  store support services  information technologies.during fiscal 2009, we continued to make information technology investments to better support our customers and provide an improved overall
shopping environment and experience. we invested in our supply chain and merchandising tools to improve inventory management capabilities and streamline our operations.  with regard to our supply chain, in fiscal 2009 we continued implementation of our new warehouse management system and new transportation management system. we also made additional enhancements to our
central automated replenishment system.  we provided additional tools and made improvements to existing tools utilized in merchandising systems
in the areas of assortment management, forecasting and replenishment.  with our continued focus on the stores, we provided additional
technology improvements designed to help store associates perform their tasks and improve customer service. in fiscal 2009, we equipped 1,977 stores with new servers, 211 stores with new computers, registers and printers and 63 stores with new paint
dispensers.  credit services.we offer private label credit products in our stores through a third-party
credit provider to professional, d-i-y and d-i-f-m customers. in fiscal 2009, approximately 2.8million new the home depot
table of contents
private label credit accounts were opened, and the total number of the home depot active account holders was approximately 12million. private label credit card sales accounted for
approximately 25% of store sales in fiscal 2009. in fiscal 2008, home depot renegotiated and extended the term of the primary contracts governing the private label program. in fiscal 2009, we continued to benefit from our new contracts which
established a ceiling for the cost of credit for the program while retaining the ability for portfolio performance improvements to lower the cost of credit.  logistics.we continued our supply chain transformation in fiscal 2009 to ensure product availability for customers, effective use of our investment in inventory and
low total supply chain costs. across our supply chain operations in the u.s., canada and mexico, we restructured our distribution center network to meet the changing needs of our business, including the rapid deployment center (rdc)
build-out in the u.s. and general distribution center space rationalization initiatives. rdcs allow for aggregation of store product needs to a single purchase order, and then rapid allocation and deployment of inventory to individual stores upon
arrival at the center. this process allows improved transportation, simplified order processing at suppliers and reduced lead time from the time that product needs at stores are determined to actual replenishment.  as a result of the changes to our distribution network, in fiscal 2009 we added 5.2million square feet of distribution center space, primarily for new
rdcs, and closed other distribution center operations occupying approximately 2.4million square feet, primarily as a result of eliminating conventional distribution center space in the u.s. at the end of fiscal 2009, we operated 30lumber
distribution centers, 36 conventional distribution centers and two transit facilities, all located in the u.s., canada and mexico. additionally in fiscal 2009, we opened seven new rdcs in the u.s., bringing our total number of rdcs to 12. we now
serve approximately 1,250 of our u.s. stores from rdcs, which represents approximately 65% of our u.s. stores, and have onboarded approximately 35% of our costs of sales for those stores. we plan to open additional rdcs during fiscal 2010 and
ultimately serve all of our u.s.stores from rdcs. we remain committed to our overall rdc roll-out strategy, supporting our goal of increasing our central distribution penetration.  associates.at the end of fiscal 2009, we employed approximately 317,000 associates, of whom approximately 19,000 were salaried, with the remainder compensated on an
hourly or temporary basis. approximately 61% of our associates are employed on a full-time basis. we believe that our employee relations are very good. to attract and retain qualified personnel, we seek to maintain competitive salary and wage levels
in each market we serve.  intellectual property.our business has one of the most
recognized brands in north america. as a result, we believe that the home depot trademark has significant value
and is an important factor in the marketing of our products, e-commerce, stores and business. we have registered or applied for registration of trademarks, service marks, copyrights and internet domain names, both domestically and internationally,
for use in our business. we also maintain patent portfolios relating to some of our products and services and seek to patent or otherwise protect innovations we incorporate into our products or business operations.  quality assurance program.we have both quality assurance and engineering resources that are dedicated to overseeing the
quality of our directly imported, globally-sourced and proprietary products at the factory, product and packaging levels. through these programs, we have established criteria for supplier and product performance that are designed to ensure that our
products comply with federal, state and local safety, quality and performance standards and to allow us to measure and track the timeliness of shipments. we also have a supplier social and environmental responsibility program designed to ensure that
our suppliers adhere to the highest standards of social and environmental responsibility.  environmental, health& safety
(eh&s).we are committed to maintaining a safe environment for our customers and associates and protecting the environment of the communities in which we do business. our eh&s function in the field
is directed by trained associates focused primarily on the execution of the eh&s programs. additionally, we have a store support center-based team of dedicated eh&s professionals who evaluate, develop, implement and enforce policies,
processes and programs on a company-wide basis.
table of contents
environmental.the home depot is committed to conducting business in an
environmentally responsible manner. this commitment impacts all areas of our business, including store construction and maintenance, energy usage, supply chain, product selection and delivery of product knowledge to our customers.  in fiscal 2009, we spent approximately $22million for energy efficiency-related projects and saved over 114million kilowatt hours (kwh) compared
to fiscal 2008, enough to power over 10,000 u.s. homes for one year. we continued to implement strict operational standards that establish energy efficient practices in all of our facilities. these include hvac unit temperature regulation and
adherence to strict lighting schedules, which are the largest sources of energy consumption in our stores, as well as utilizing the novar energy management and alarm system in each store to monitor energy efficiency. we estimate that by implementing
and utilizing these energy saving programs, we have saved over 2.6 billion kwh since 2004, enough to power approximately 203,000 u.s. homes for one year. we have achieved a 16 percent reduction in kwh per square foot of energy consumption in our
u.s. stores since 2004, and our goal is to achieve a 20 percent reduction in our u.s. stores by 2015, through our energy conservation initiatives. we have also partnered with the u.s.green building council and have built seven leadership in
energy and environmental design (leed) green certified and equivalent stores.  through our supply chain
efficiencies created by the actions described above under logistics, we are also targeting a 20 percent reduction in our domestic supply chain greenhouse gas emissions from 2008 to 2015, which would equate to annual fuel savings of
approximately 25million gallons or approximately 8,000 trips around the earths circumference. we received the 2009 environmental excellence award from the u.s. environmental protection agency smartwaysm transport partnership for our leadership in conserving energy and
lowering greenhouse gas emission from our supply chain activities.  as the worlds largest home improvement retailer,
we are in a unique position to enable our customers to achieve energy savings through our products and services. through our eco optionssm program introduced in 2007, we have created product categories that allow consumers to easily identify environmentally
preferred product selections in our stores. our eco optionssm program has certified approximately 4,000 products that meet specifications for energy efficiency, water conservation, healthy home, clean air and sustainable forestry. during 2009, we sold more than 90million energy star refrigerators, dishwashers, compact fluorescent light bulbs, programmable thermostats, water heaters and other
products, which are capable of saving our customers approximately $740 million on their utility bills. we also sold more than sixmillion watersense-labeled bath faucets, aerators and toilets, giving our customers the potential to save at least 1.8 billion gallons of water. in 2009, we also upgraded our eco
optionssm page on our website, which offers consumer
education on environmental impacts of various products as well as identifying easy green d-i-y projects. this online experience, coupled with our d-i-y in-store how-to clinics on green projects and our continual enhancement
of our eco optionssm product categories, helps us to meet
a growing customer demand for environmentally responsible and cost-saving products and projects.  we continue to offer our nationwide, in-store
compact fluorescent light bulb recycling program launched in june 2008. this service is offered to customers free of charge and is available in all u.s.stores. we also maintain an in-store rechargeable battery recycling program. launched in
2001 in partnership with the rechargeable battery recycling corporation, this program is also available to customers free of charge in all u.s. and canada stores.  seasonality.our business is seasonal to a certain extent. generally, our highest volume of sales occurs in our second fiscal quarter, and the lowest volume occurs
during our fourth fiscal quarter.  competition.our business is highly competitive, based primarily on
customer service, price, store location and assortment of merchandise. in each of the markets we serve, there are a number of other home improvement stores, electrical, plumbing and building materials supply houses and lumber yards. with respect to
some products, we also compete with specialty design stores, showrooms, discount stores, local, regional and national hardware stores, mail order firms, warehouse clubs, independent building supply stores and, to a lesser
table of contents
extent, other retailers. due to the variety of competition we face, we are unable
to precisely measure the impact on our sales by our competitors.
item1a.
risk factors.  the risks and
uncertainties described below could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations and could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations and projections. the risk factors described
below include the considerable risks associated with the current economic environment and the related potential adverse effects on our financial condition and results of operations. you should read these risk factors in conjunction with
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in item7 and our consolidated financial statements and related notes in item8. there also may be other factors that we cannot
anticipate or that are not described in this report generally because we do not currently perceive them to be material. those factors could cause results to differ materially from our expectations.  sustained uncertainty regarding current economic conditions and other factors beyond our control could adversely affect demand for our products and
services, our costs of doing business and our financial performance.  our financial performance depends significantly on the stability
of the housing, residential construction and home improvement markets. adverse conditions in or sustained uncertainty about these markets could adversely impact consumer confidence, causing our customers to delay purchasing or determine not to
purchase home improvement products and services. other factors  including high levels of unemployment and foreclosures, interest rate fluctuations, fuel and other energy costs, labor and healthcare costs, the availability of financing, the
state of the credit markets, including mortgages, home equity loans and consumer credit, weather, natural disasters and other conditions beyond our control  could further adversely affect demand for our products and services, our costs of
doing business and our financial performance.  strong competition could adversely affect prices and demand for our products and services
and could decrease our market share.  we operate in markets that are highly competitive. we compete principally based on customer
services, price, store location and assortment of merchandise. in each market we serve, there are a number of other home improvement stores, electrical, plumbing and building materials supply houses and lumber yards. with respect to some products,
we also compete with specialty design stores, showrooms, discount stores, local, regional and national hardware stores, mail order firms, warehouse clubs, independent building supply stores and other retailers. intense competitive pressures from one
or more of our competitors could affect prices or demand for our products and services. if we are unable to timely and appropriately respond to these competitive pressures, including through maintenance of superior customer service and customer
loyalty, our financial performance and our market share could be adversely affected.  we may not timely identify or effectively respond
to consumer needs, expectations or trends, which could adversely affect our relationship with customers, the demand for our products and services and our market share.  it is difficult to successfully predict the products and services our customers will demand. the success of our business depends in part on our ability to identify and respond promptly to evolving trends
in demographics and consumer preferences, expectations and needs. failure to maintain attractive stores and to timely identify or effectively respond to changing consumer tastes, preferences, expectations as to service levels, spending patterns and
home improvement needs could adversely affect our relationship with customers, the demand for our products and services and our market share.
table of contents
our success depends upon our ability to attract, train and retain highly qualified associates while
also controlling our labor costs.  our customers expect a high level of customer service and product knowledge from our associates. to
be successful, we must attract, train and retain a large number of highly qualified associates to meet the needs and expectations of our customers while at the same time controlling labor costs. our ability to control labor costs is subject to
numerous external factors, including prevailing wage rates, the impact of legislation or regulations governing healthcare benefits or labor relations, such as the proposed employee free choice act, and health and other insurance costs. in addition,
we compete with other retail businesses for many of our associates in hourly positions, and we invest significant resources in training and motivating them. these positions have historically had high turnover rates, which can lead to increased
training and retention costs. there is no assurance that we will be able to attract or retain highly qualified associates in the future. in addition, our centralization of certain human resources functions might not be readily adapted by our
associates and therefore might not provide the anticipated benefits.  the inflation or deflation of commodity prices could affect our
prices, demand for our products, our sales and our profit margins.  prices of certain commodity products, including lumber and other
raw materials, are historically volatile and are subject to fluctuations arising from changes in domestic and international supply and demand, labor costs, competition, market speculation, government regulations and periodic delays in delivery.
rapid and significant changes in commodity prices may affect the demand for our products, our sales and our profit margins.  we rely on
third party suppliers. if we fail to identify and develop relationships with a sufficient number of qualified suppliers, or if our current suppliers experience financial difficulties, our ability to timely and efficiently access products that meet
our high standards for quality could be adversely affected.  we buy our products from suppliers located throughout the world. our
ability to continue to identify and develop relationships with qualified suppliers who can satisfy our high standards for quality and our need to access products in a timely and efficient manner is a significant challenge. our ability to access
products also can be adversely affected by political instability, the financial instability of suppliers (particularly in light of recent economic conditions), suppliers noncompliance with applicable laws, trade restrictions, tariffs, currency
exchange rates, transport capacity and cost and other factors beyond our control.  if we are unable to effectively manage and expand our
alliances and relationships with selected suppliers of brand name products, we may be unable to effectively execute our strategy to differentiate ourselves from our competitors.  as part of our focus on product differentiation, we have formed strategic alliances and exclusive relationships with selected suppliers to market products under a variety of well-recognized brand names.
if we are unable to manage and expand these alliances and relationships or identify alternative sources for comparable products, we may not be able to effectively execute product differentiation.  if we do not maintain the security of customer, associate or company information, we could damage our reputation, incur substantial additional costs
and become subject to litigation.  any significant compromise or breach of customer, associate or company data security could
significantly damage our reputation and result in additional costs, lost sales, fines and lawsuits. the regulatory environment related to information security and privacy is increasingly rigorous, with new and constantly changing requirements
applicable to our business, and compliance with those requirements could result in additional costs. there is no guarantee that the procedures that we have implemented to protect against unauthorized access to secured data are adequate to safeguard
against all data security breaches.
table of contents
a failure of a key information technology system or process could adversely affect our business.
we rely extensively on information technology systems, some of which are managed by third-party service providers, to analyze, process
and manage transactions and data. we also rely heavily on the integrity of this data in managing our business. we or our service providers could experience errors, interruptions, delays or cessations of service in key portions of our information
technology infrastructure, which could significantly disrupt our operations and be expensive, time consuming and resource-intensive to remedy.  the implementation of our supply chain and technology initiatives could disrupt our operations in the near term, and these initiatives might not provide the anticipated benefits or might fail.  we have made, and we plan to continue to make, significant investments in our supply chain and technology. these initiatives are designed to streamline our
operations to allow our associates to continue to provide high quality service to our customers. the cost and potential problems and interruptions associated with the implementation of these initiatives, including those associated with managing
third-party service providers, could disrupt or reduce the efficiency of our operations in the near term. in addition, our improved supply chain and new or upgraded technology might not provide the anticipated benefits, it might take longer than
expected to realize the anticipated benefits, or the initiatives might fail altogether.  our costs of doing business could increase as a
result of changes in federal, state or local regulations.  changes in the federal, state or local minimum wage or living wage
requirements or changes in other wage or workplace regulations could increase our costs of doing business. in addition, changes in federal, state or local regulations governing the sale of some of our products or tax regulations could increase our
costs of doing business. passage of the employee free choice act or other similar laws in congress could lead to higher labor costs by encouraging unionization efforts among our associates and disruption of store operations. healthcare reform, if
enacted, could also adversely impact our labor costs and our ability to negotiate favorable terms under our benefit plans for our associates.  our ability to obtain additional financing on favorable terms, if needed, could be adversely affected by the volatility in the capital markets.  we obtain and manage liquidity from the positive cash flow we generate from our operating activities and our access to capital markets, including our commercial paper programs supported by a back-up
credit facility with a consortium of banks. although we currently maintain a strong investment grade rating and had no outstanding commercial paper obligations as of the end of fiscal 2009, there is no assurance that our ability to obtain additional
financing through the capital markets, if needed, will not be adversely impacted due to current economic conditions. new or incremental tightening in the credit markets, low liquidity and continued volatility in the capital markets could result in
diminished availability of credit, higher cost of borrowing and lack of confidence in the equity market, making it more difficult to obtain additional financing on terms that are favorable to us.  if we cannot successfully manage the unique challenges presented by international markets, we may not be successful in our international operations.
our ability to successfully operate in international markets is affected by many of the same operational risks we face in our
u.s.operations, as well as unique costs and difficulties of managing international operations. our international operations, including any expansion in international markets, may be adversely affected by our inability to identify and gain
access to local suppliers as well as by local laws and customs, u.s. laws applicable to foreign operations, such as the foreign corrupt practices act (fcpa), other legal and regulatory constraints, political and economic conditions and
currency regulations of the countries or regions in which we currently operate or intend to operate in the future. risks inherent in international operations also include, among others, adverse tax consequences, greater difficulty in enforcing
intellectual property rights and risks associated with fcpa and local anti-bribery law compliance. additionally, foreign currency exchange rates and fluctuations may have an impact on our future costs or on future cash flows from our international
operations.
table of contents
if we are unable to manage effectively our installation service business, we could be subject to fines
and lawsuits.  we act as a general contractor to provide installation services to our d-i-f-m customers through third-party installers.
as such, we are subject to regulatory requirements and risks applicable to general contractors, which include management of licensing, permitting and quality of our third-party installers. we have established processes and procedures that provide
protections beyond those required by law to manage these requirements and ensure customer satisfaction. if we fail to manage these processes effectively, we could suffer lost sales, fines and lawsuits.  changes in accounting standards and subjective assumptions, estimates and judgments by management related to complex accounting matters could
significantly affect our financial results or financial condition.  generally accepted accounting principles and related accounting
pronouncements, implementation guidelines and interpretations with regard to a wide range of matters that are relevant to our business, such as revenue recognition, asset impairment, impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets, inventories,
lease obligations, self-insurance, tax matters and litigation, are highly complex and involve many subjective assumptions, estimates and judgments. changes in these rules or their interpretation or changes in underlying assumptions, estimates or
judgments could significantly change our reported or expected financial performance or financial condition.  we are involved in a number
of legal proceedings, and while we cannot predict the outcomes of those proceedings and other contingencies with certainty, some of these outcomes may adversely affect our operations or increase our costs.  we are involved in a number of legal proceedings, including government inquiries and investigations, and consumer, employment, tort and other litigation that
arise from time to time in the ordinary course of business. litigation is inherently unpredictable, and the outcome of some of these proceedings and other contingencies could require us to take or refrain from taking actions which could adversely
affect our operations or could result in excessive verdicts. additionally, defending against these lawsuits and proceedings may involve significant expense and diversion of managements attention and resources from other matters.
item1b.
unresolved staff comments.  not
applicable.
table of contents
item2.
properties.  the following tables show
locations of the 1,976 the home depot stores located in the u.s.and its territories and the 268 the home depot stores outside of the u.s.at the end of fiscal 2009:
u.s. locations
numberofstores
alabama
alaska
arizona
arkansas
california
colorado
connecticut
delaware
district of columbia
florida
georgia
guam
hawaii
idaho
illinois
indiana
iowa
kansas
kentucky
louisiana
maine
maryland
massachusetts
michigan
minnesota
mississippi
missouri
montana
u.s. locations
numberofstores
nebraska
nevada
new hampshire
new jersey
new mexico
new york
north carolina
north dakota
ohio
oklahoma
oregon
pennsylvania
puerto rico
rhode island
south carolina
south dakota
tennessee
texas
utah
vermont
virgin islands
virginia
washington
west virginia
wisconsin
wyoming
total u.s.
1,976
table of contents
international locations
numberofstores
canada:
alberta
british columbia
manitoba
new brunswick
newfoundland
nova scotia
ontario
prince edward island
quebec
saskatchewan
total canada
china:
beijing
henan
shaanxi
tianjin
total china
international locations
numberofstores
mexico:
aguascalientes
baja california norte
baja california sur
chiapas
chihuahua
coahuila
colima
distrito federal
durango
guanajuato
guerrero
hidalgo
jalisco
michoacn
morelos
nuevo len
puebla
queretaro
quintana roo
sanluis potosi
sinaloa
sonora
state of mexico
tabasco
tamaulipas
veracruz
yucatan
total mexico
additionally, at the end of fiscal
2009, we had six home decorators collection locations in illinois, kansas, missouri and new jersey.  of our 2,244 stores operating at the end
of fiscal 2009, approximately 89% were owned (including those owned subject to a ground lease) consisting of approximately 209.4million square feet, and approximately 11% of such stores were leased consisting of approximately 25.8million
square feet.  at the end of fiscal 2009, we utilized 188 warehouses and distribution centers located in 33states or provinces, consisting
of approximately 32.1million square feet, of which approximately 0.2million is owned and approximately 31.9million is leased.  our executive, corporate staff, divisional staff and financial offices occupy approximately 2.1million square feet of leased and owned space in atlanta, georgia. at the end of fiscal 2009, we occupied an aggregate of approximately
3.7million square feet, of which approximately 2.4million square feet is owned and approximately 1.3million square feet is leased, for store support centers and customer support centers.
table of contents
item3.
legal proceedings.  in july 2005, the
company received a grand jury subpoena from the united states attorneys office in los angeles, california, seeking documents and information relating to the companys handling, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. the company is
cooperating fully with the united states attorneys office. although the company cannot predict the outcome of this proceeding, it does not expect any such outcome to have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition or
results of operations.  in august 2005, the company received an informal request from the staff of the sec for information related to the
companys return-to-vendor policies and procedures. subsequent to august 2005, the sec staff requested additional information related to those policies and procedures. the sec staff last contacted the company regarding this matter in january
2007. the company responded to the requests and will continue to fully cooperate with the sec staff. the sec has informed the company that the informal inquiry is not an indication that any violations of law have occurred. although the company
cannot predict the outcome of this matter, it does not expect that this informal inquiry will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition or results of operations.  the following actions have been filed against the company and, in some cases, against certain of its current and former officers and directors as described
below. although the company cannot predict their outcome, it does not expect these actions, individually or together, will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition or results of operations.  as previously reported, in the second and third quarters of fiscal 2006, three purported, but uncertified, class actions were filed against the company, the
home depot futurebuilder administrative committee and certain of the companys current and former directors and employees alleging breach of fiduciary duty in violation of the employee retirement income security act of 1974 (erisa)
in connection with the companys return-to-vendor and stock option practices. these actions were joined into one case in 2007, and the joint amended complaint seeks certification as a class action, unspecified damages, costs, attorneys
fees and equitable and injunctive relief. the case is currently before the u.s.district court for the northern district of georgia in atlanta, following the decision by the u.s.court of appeals for the eleventh circuit in july 2008
reversing the district courts prior decision on standing, affirming its finding that the plaintiffs failed to exhaust the administrative remedies provided under erisa, and remanding the matter to the district court for further adjudication. on
november9, 2009, plaintiffs filed a third amended complaint following their pursuit of administrative remedies. although the company cannot predict the outcome of this matter, it does not expect the outcome to have a material effect on its
consolidated financial condition or results of operations.  on january27, 2010, the superior court of the county of los angeles in
california approved the companys settlement with the plaintiffs in five lawsuits containing multiple class-action allegations that the company failed to provide meal breaks. the complaints were filed by current and former hourly associates
from the first quarter of 2004 through the fourth quarter of 2008. the disposition of this matter is now complete. as previously disclosed, the company established a reserve for this settlement in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008. the settlement
did not have a material effect on the companys consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
item4.
[reserved]
table of contents
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities.  since april19, 1984, our common stock has been listed on the new york stock exchange, trading under the symbol hd. the company paid its
first cash dividend on june22, 1987, and has paid cash dividends during each subsequent quarter. future dividend payments will depend on the companys earnings, capital requirements, financial condition and other factors considered
relevant by the board of directors.  the table below sets forth the high and low sales prices of our common stock on the new york stock
exchange and the quarterly cash dividends declared per share of common stock for the periods indicated.
price range
cashdividendsdeclared
high
low
fiscal year 2009
first quarter ended may3, 2009
$26.34
$18.00
$0.225
second quarter ended august2, 2009
$26.21
$22.40
$0.225
third quarter ended november1, 2009
$28.23
$25.09
$0.225
fourth quarter ended january31, 2010
$29.29
$24.96
$0.23625
fiscal year 2008
first quarter ended may4, 2008
$30.12
$25.00
$0.225
second quarter ended august3, 2008
$29.53
$21.46
$0.225
third quarter ended november2, 2008
$30.16
$18.51
$0.225
fourth quarter ended february1, 2009
$25.26
$18.52
$0.225 as of march22, 2010, there were approximately
149,000 shareholders of record and approximately 1,222,000 additional shareholders holding stock under nominee security position listings.
table of contents
stock performance graph  this graph depicts the companys cumulative total shareholder returns relative to the performance of the standard& poors 500 composite stock index and the standard&
poors retail composite index for the five-year period commencing january31, 2005, the first trading day of fiscal 2005, and ending january29, 2010, the last trading day of fiscal 2009. the graph assumes $100 invested at the closing
price of the companys common stock on the new york stock exchange and each index on january28, 2005 and assumes that all dividends were reinvested on the date paid. the points on the graph represent fiscal year-end amounts based on the
last trading day in each fiscal year.
fiscal2004
fiscal2005
fiscal2006
fiscal2007
fiscal2008
fiscal2009
the home depot
$
100.00
$
99.97
$
101.64
$
79.54
$
58.25
$
78.64
s&p 500 index
$
100.00
$
111.62
$
126.01
$
126.05
$
76.42
$
101.75
s&pretailcompositeindex
$
100.00
$
108.76
$
121.44
$
102.17
$
63.63
$
98.97
table of contents
issuer purchases of equity securities  since fiscal 2002, the company has repurchased shares of its common stock having a value of approximately $27.5billion pursuant to its share repurchase program. the number and average price of
shares purchased in each fiscal month of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 are set forth in the table below:
period
total number ofsharespurchased(1)
averagepricepaidper share
total number ofshares purchased aspart of publiclyannouncedprogram(2)
approximatedollarvalue of sharesthatmay yet bepurchased underthe
program
nov. 2, 2009nov. 29, 2009
1,362,738
$
27.53
1,285,226
$
12,598,234,372
nov. 30, 2009dec. 27, 2009
2,826,352
$
28.33
2,818,380
$
12,518,394,686
dec. 28, 2009jan. 31, 2010
3,758
$
28.48
$
12,518,394,686
(1)
these amounts include repurchases pursuant to the companys 1997 and 2005 omnibus stock incentive plans (the plans). under the plans, participants
may exercise stock options by surrendering shares of common stock that the participants already own as payment of the exercise price. participants in the plans may also surrender shares as payment of applicable tax withholding on the vesting of
restricted stock and deferred share awards. shares so surrendered by participants in the plans are repurchased pursuant to the terms of the plans and applicable award agreements and not pursuant to publicly announced share repurchase programs.
(2)
the companys common stock repurchase program was initially announced on july15, 2002. as of the end of fiscal 2009, the board approved purchases up to
$40.0billion. the program does not have a prescribed expiration date.  sales of unregistered securities
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, the company issued 427 deferred stock units under the home depot, inc. nonemployee
directors deferred stock compensation plan pursuant to the exemption from registration provided by section4(2) of the securities act of 1933, as amended. the deferred stock units were credited to the accounts of those nonemployee
directors who elected to receive board retainers in the form of deferred stock units instead of cash during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. the deferred stock units convert to shares of common stock on a one-for-one basis following a termination
of service as described in this plan.  during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, the company credited 41,675 deferred stock units to
participant accounts under the home depot futurebuilder restoration plan pursuant to an exemption from the registration requirements of the securities act of 1933, as amended, for involuntary, non-contributory plans. the deferred stock units convert
to shares of common stock on a one-for-one basis following the termination of services as described in this plan.
item6.
selected financial data.  the information
required by this item is incorporated by reference to pages f-1 and f-2 of this report.
table of contents
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.  executive summary and selected consolidated statements of earnings data  for fiscal year ended january31, 2010 (fiscal 2009), we reported net earnings of $2.7billion and diluted earnings per share of $1.57 compared to net earnings of $2.3billion
and diluted earnings per share of $1.34 for fiscal year ended february1, 2009 (fiscal 2008).  the results for fiscal 2009 and
2008 reflect the impact of several strategic actions initiated in fiscal 2008. these strategic actions resulted in store rationalization charges related to the closing of 15 underperforming stores and the removal of approximately 50 stores from our
new store pipeline, business rationalization charges related to the exit of our expo, thd design center, yardbirds and hd bath businesses (the exited businesses) and charges related to the restructuring of support functions
(collectively, the rationalization charges). these actions resulted in pretax rationalization charges of $146 million and $951 million for fiscal 2009 and 2008, respectively.  our fiscal 2009 and 2008 results included a pretax charge of $163 million in each year to write-down our investment in hd supply, inc. additionally, fiscal 2009 included earnings of $41 million from
discontinued operations, net of tax, compared to a loss of $52 million from discontinued operations, net of tax, in fiscal 2008 for the settlement of working capital matters arising from the sale of hd supply.  we reported earnings from continuing operations of $2.6billion and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $1.55 for fiscal 2009
compared to earnings from continuing operations of $2.3billion and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $1.37 for fiscal 2008. excluding the rationalization charges and the write-downs of our investment in hd supply,
earnings from continuing operations were $2.8billion and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations were $1.66 for fiscal 2009 compared to earnings from continuing operations of $3.0 billion and diluted earnings per share from
continuing operations of $1.78 for fiscal 2008.  net sales decreased 7.2% to $66.2billion for fiscal 2009 from $71.3billion for
fiscal 2008. the slowdown in the global economy and weakness in the u.s.residential construction, housing and home improvement markets negatively impacted our net sales for fiscal 2009. our comparable store sales declined 6.6% in fiscal 2009
driven by a 6.3% decline in our comparable store average ticket to $51.65, as well as a 0.3% decline in comparable store customer transactions. comparable store sales for our u.s. stores declined 6.2% in fiscal 2009.  in fiscal 2009, we continued to focus on our core retail business, investing in our associates and stores and improving our customer service. the roll-out of
our customers first training to all store associates and support staff in the first quarter of fiscal 2009 has brought simplification and focus across the business, and we are seeing the benefit of this in improved customer service ratings for
fiscal 2009.  we also made significant progress on our merchandising tools in the u.s. that helped us to better manage markdown and clearance
activity and to better control inventory. at the end of fiscal 2009, our inventory had decreased by $485 million, or 4.5%, from fiscal 2008. additionally, our average inventory per store decreased by 3.3% at the end of fiscal 2009 compared to last
year. we continued our supply chain transformation to improve product availability. at the end of fiscal 2009, we had 12 rapid deployment centers (rdcs) operating that serve approximately 65% of our u.s. stores. we remain committed to
our overall rdc roll-out strategy, supporting our goal of increasing our central distribution penetration. our supply chain transformation also includes restructuring our stocking distribution centers.  we opened 13 new stores in fiscal 2009, closed two stores in china and closed 41 stores related to our exited businesses, bringing our total store count at
the end of fiscal 2009 to 2,244. as of the end of fiscal 2009, a total of 268 stores, or approximately 12%, were located in canada, mexico and china compared to 262 stores, or approximately 12%, as of fiscal 2008.
table of contents
we generated $5.1billion of cash flow from operations in fiscal 2009. we used a portion of this cash
flow to repay $1.8billion of long-term debt, pay $1.5billion of dividends, fund $966 million in capital expenditures and fund $213 million of share repurchases.  at the end of fiscal 2009, our long-term debt-to-equity ratio was 44.7% compared to 54.4% at the end of fiscal 2008. our return on invested capital for continuing operations (computed on net operating
profit after tax for the trailing twelve months and the average of beginning and ending long-term debt and equity) was 10.7% at the end of fiscal 2009 compared to 9.5% for fiscal 2008. excluding rationalization charges, our return on invested
capital for continuing operations was 11.1% for fiscal 2009 compared to 11.4% for fiscal 2008.
table of contents
we believe the selected sales data, the percentage relationship between net sales and major categories in
the consolidated statements of earnings and the percentage change in the dollar amounts of each of the items presented below are important in evaluating the performance of our business operations.
% of net sales
% increase(decrease)indollaramounts
fiscal year(1)
2009vs.2008
2008vs.2007
net sales
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
(7.2
)%
(7.8
)%
gross profit
33.9
33.7
33.6
(6.6
)
(7.7
)
operating expenses:
selling, general and administrative
24.0
25.0
22.1
(10.9
)
4.7
depreciation and amortization
2.6
2.5
2.2
(4.4
)
4.9
total operating expenses
26.6
27.5
24.3
(10.3
)
4.7
operating income
7.3
6.1
9.4
10.2
(39.8
)
interest and other (income) expense:
interest and investment income
(0.1
)
0.0
(75.7
)
interest expense
1.0
0.9
0.9
8.3
(10.3
)
other
0.2
0.2
0.0
0.0
interest and other, net
1.2
1.1
0.8
6.8
23.6
earnings from continuing operations before provision for income taxes
6.0
5.0
8.6
10.9
(45.8
)
provision for income taxes
2.1
1.8
3.1
6.6
(47.0
)
earnings from continuing operations
4.0
%
3.2
%
5.4
%
13.3
%
(45.1
)%
selected sales data
number of customer transactions (in millions)(2)
1,274
1,272
1,336
0.2
%
(4.8
)%
average ticket(2)
$
51.76
$
55.61
$
57.48
(6.9
)
(3.3
)
weighted average weekly sales per operating store (in thousands)(2)
$
$
$
(6.3
)
(8.7
)
weighted average sales per square foot(2)
$
278.97
$
298.19
$
331.86
(6.4
)
(10.1
)
comparable store sales decrease (%)(3)
(6.6
)%
(8.7
)%
(6.7
)%
n/a
n/a
note: certain
percentages may not sum to totals due to rounding.
(1)
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 refer to the fiscal years ended january31, 2010,february1, 2009 and february3, 2008, respectively. fiscal
years 2009 and 2008 include 52weeks; fiscal year 2007 includes 53weeks.
(2)
the 53rd week of fiscal 2007 increased customer transactions by 20million, negatively impacted average ticket by $0.05, negatively impacted weighted average weekly sales per operating store by $3 thousand
and increased weighted average sales per square foot by $4.77.
(3)
includes net sales at locations open greater than 12months, including relocated and remodeled stores. retail stores become comparable on the
monday following their 365th day of operation. comparable store
sales is intended only as supplemental information and is not a substitute for net sales or net earnings presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
table of contents
results of operations  for an understanding of the significant factors that influenced our performance during the past three fiscal years, the following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial
statements and the notes to consolidated financial statements presented in this report.  fiscal 2009 compared to fiscal 2008
net sales  net sales for
fiscal 2009 decreased 7.2% to $66.2billion from $71.3billion for fiscal 2008. the decrease in net sales for fiscal 2009 reflects the impact of negative comparable store sales as well as the net impact of fewer open stores in fiscal 2009
versus fiscal 2008. total comparable store sales decreased 6.6% for fiscal 2009 compared to a decrease of 8.7% for fiscal 2008.  there were a
number of factors that contributed to our comparable store sales decline. the u.s.residential construction, housing and home improvement markets continued to be soft, and consumers were challenged due to a number of factors including higher
unemployment. we saw relative strength in our building materials, flooring, paint, plumbing and garden/seasonal product categories as comparable store sales in these areas were above the company average for fiscal 2009. comparable store sales for
our lumber, hardware, electrical, kitchen/bath and millwork product categories were below the company average for fiscal 2009. in fiscal 2009, we also saw significant strengthening of the u.s. dollar against all currencies. fluctuating exchange
rates negatively impacted our total company sales by approximately $565 million for fiscal 2009 compared to last year.  we believe that our
sales performance has been, and could continue to be, negatively impacted by the level of competition that we encounter in various markets. we estimate our share of the u.s.home improvement market is approximately 21%.  gross profit  gross profit decreased 6.6%
to $22.4billion for fiscal 2009 from $24.0billion for fiscal 2008. gross profit as a percent of net sales was 33.9% for fiscal 2009 compared to 33.7% for fiscal 2008, an increase of 22 basis points. through our focused bay portfolio
approach, our u.s. merchants continued to introduce new lower prices while growing overall gross margin. additionally, gross margin expansion for fiscal 2009 was driven by lower markdowns as compared to last year.  operating expenses  selling, general and
administrative expenses (sg&a) decreased 10.9% to $15.9billion for fiscal 2009 from $17.8billion for fiscal 2008. as a percent of net sales, sg&a was 24.0% for fiscal 2009 compared to 25.0% for fiscal 2008. excluding
the rationalization charges, sg&a as a percent of net sales was 23.9% for fiscal 2009 compared to 23.7% for fiscal 2008. our sg&a results for fiscal 2009 reflect the impact of a negative comparable store sales environment, offset by a lower
cost of credit associated with the private label credit card program and solid expense control. for fiscal 2009, the penetration of the private label credit card sales was 25.1% compared to 28.1% for fiscal 2008.  depreciation and amortization decreased 4.4% to $1.7billion for fiscal 2009 from $1.8billion for fiscal 2008. depreciation and amortization as a
percent of net sales was 2.6% for fiscal 2009 and 2.5% for fiscal 2008. the increase in depreciation and amortization as a percent of net sales was primarily due to lower sales.  operating income  operating income increased 10.2% to $4.8billion for fiscal 2009
from $4.4billion for fiscal 2008. operating income as a percent of net sales was 7.3% for fiscal 2009 compared to 6.1% for fiscal 2008. excluding the
table of contents
rationalization charges, operating income as a percent of net sales was 7.5% for fiscal 2009 compared to 7.4% for fiscal 2008.  interest and other, net  in fiscal 2009, we recognized $821million of interest and
other, net, compared to $769million in fiscal 2008. interest and other, net, as a percent of net sales was 1.2% for fiscal 2009 compared to 1.1% for fiscal 2008. interest and other, net, reflects a $163million charge in each of fiscal
2009 and 2008 to write-down our investment in hd supply. excluding these charges, interest and other, net, as a percent of net sales was 1.0% for fiscal 2009 compared to 0.9% for fiscal 2008. the increase in interest and other, net, as a percent of
net sales was primarily due to lower sales.  provision for income taxes  our combined effective income tax rate for continuing operations decreased to 34.2% for fiscal 2009 from 35.6% for fiscal 2008. the decrease in our effective income tax rate for fiscal 2009 reflects
benefits arising from a favorable foreign tax settlement and realignment of our foreign corporate structure. these benefits positively impacted diluted earnings per share by approximately $0.06 for fiscal 2009.  diluted earnings per share from continuing operations  diluted earnings per share from continuing operations were $1.55 for fiscal 2009 and $1.37 for fiscal 2008. excluding the rationalization charges and the write-downs of our investment in hd supply,
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations for fiscal 2009 were $1.66 compared to $1.78 for fiscal 2008, a decrease of 6.7%.  discontinued operations  on august30, 2007, the company closed the sale of hd supply. discontinued operations for fiscal
2009 consist of earnings of $41million, net of tax, or $0.02 per diluted share, compared to a loss of $52 million, net of tax, or $0.03 per diluted share in fiscal 2008, in each case for the settlement of working capital matters arising from
the sale of hd supply.  non-gaapmeasures  to provide clarity, internally and externally, about our operating performance for fiscal 2009 and 2008, we supplement our reporting with non-gaap financial measures to reflect adjustments for the
rationalization charges as described more fully in note2 to the consolidated financial statements, as well as the net sales from exited businesses during the period from closing announcement to actual closing, and the charges to write-down our
investment in hd supply as described in note4 to the consolidated financial statements. we believe these non-gaap financial measures better enable management and investors to understand and analyze our performance by providing them with
meaningful information relevant to events of unusual nature or frequency. however, this supplemental information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related gaap measures.
table of contents
the following reconciles the non-gaap financial measures to the corresponding gaap measures for fiscal 2009
and 2008 (amounts in millions, except per share data):
fiscal year ended january31, 2010
asreported
adjustments
non-gaapmeasures
% ofnetsales
net sales
$
66,176
$
$
65,955
100.0
%
cost of sales
43,764
43,571
66.1
gross profit
22,412
22,384
33.9
operating expenses:
selling, general and administrative
15,902
15,732
23.9
depreciation and amortization
1,707
1,703
2.6
total operating expenses
17,609
17,435
26.4
operating income
4,803
(146
)
4,949
7.5
interest and other, net
1.0
earnings from continuing operations before provisionfor income taxes
3,982
(309
)
4,291
6.5
provision for income taxes
1,362
(118
)
1,480
2.2
earnings from continuing operations
$
2,620
$
(191
)
$
2,811
4.3
%
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$
1.55
$
(0.11
)
$
1.66
n/a
fiscal year ended february1, 2009
asreported
adjustments
non-gaapmeasures
% ofnetsales
net sales
$
71,288
$
$
71,288
100.0
%
cost of sales
47,298
47,268
66.3
gross profit
23,990
(30
)
24,020
33.7
operating expenses
selling, general and administrative
17,846
16,928
23.7
depreciation and amortization
1,785
1,782
2.5
total operating expenses
19,631
18,710
26.2
operating income
4,359
(951
)
5,310
7.4
interest and other, net
0.9
earnings from continuing operations before provisionfor income taxes
3,590
(1,114
)
4,704
6.6
provision for income taxes
1,278
(430
)
1,708
2.4
earnings from continuing operations
$
2,312
$
(684
)
$
2,996
4.2
%
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$
1.37
$
(0.41
)
$
1.78
n/a
table of contents
fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal year ended february3, 2008 (fiscal 2007)
net sales  fiscal 2008 consisted of
52weeks compared to 53weeks in fiscal 2007. net sales for fiscal 2008 decreased 7.8% to $71.3billion from $77.3billion for fiscal 2007. the decrease in net sales for fiscal 2008 reflects the impact of negative comparable
store sales and $1.1billion of net sales attributable to the additional week in fiscal 2007, partially offset by net sales of $1.8billion from new stores in fiscal 2008. comparable store sales decreased 8.7% for fiscal 2008 compared to a
decrease of 6.7% for fiscal 2007.  there were a number of factors that contributed to our comparable store sales decline. the
u.s.residential construction and home improvement markets continued to be soft and consumers were challenged due to higher unemployment and an across-the-board tightening of consumer credit availability. we saw relative strength in building
materials, plumbing, garden/seasonal and hardware as comparable store sales in these areas were above or at the company average for fiscal 2008. comparable store sales for lumber, flooring, paint, electrical, kitchen/bath and millwork were below the
company average for fiscal 2008. softness in our big ticket categories negatively impacted average ticket, which decreased 3.3% to $55.61 for fiscal 2008. our new stores cannibalized approximately 5% of our existing stores as of the end of fiscal
2008, which had a negative impact to comparable store sales of approximately 1%.  gross profit  gross profit decreased 7.7% to $24.0billion for fiscal 2008 from $26.0billion for fiscal 2007. gross profit as a percent of net sales was 33.7%
for fiscal 2008 compared to 33.6% for fiscal 2007, an increase of four basis points. this gross margin expansion included $30million in markdowns taken in connection with our rationalization charges. excluding these markdowns, our gross profit
as a percent of net sales increased eight basis points for fiscal 2008, reflecting our focused bay portfolio approach to product assortment.  operating expenses  sg&a increased 4.7% to $17.8billion for fiscal 2008 from $17.1billion for fiscal 2007. as a
percent of net sales, sg&a was 25.0% for fiscal 2008 compared to 22.1% for fiscal 2007. excluding the rationalization charges, sg&a as a percent of net sales for fiscal 2008 was 23.7%, an increase of approximately 170basis points over
the prior year. the increase in sg&a as a percent of net sales for fiscal 2008 was primarily the result of expense deleverage in the negative comparable store sales environment, as well as an increase of approximately 70basis points due to
a higher cost of credit associated with the private label credit card program. for fiscal 2008, the penetration of the private label credit card sales was 28.1% compared to 29.4% for fiscal 2007.  depreciation and amortization increased 4.9% to $1.8billion for fiscal 2008 from $1.7billion for fiscal 2007. depreciation and amortization as a
percent of net sales was 2.5% for fiscal 2008 and 2.2% for fiscal 2007. the increase as a percent of net sales was primarily due to sales deleverage and the depreciation of our investments in shorter lived assets such as store resets and technology.
operating income  operating
income decreased 39.8% to $4.4billion for fiscal 2008 from $7.2billion for fiscal 2007. operating income as a percent of net sales was 6.1% for fiscal 2008 compared to 9.4% for fiscal 2007. excluding the rationalization charges,
operating income as a percent of net sales was 7.4% for fiscal 2008.  interest and other, net  in fiscal 2008, we recognized $769million of interest and other, net, compared to $622million in fiscal 2007. interest and other, net, as a
percent of net sales was 1.1% for fiscal 2008 compared to 0.8% for fiscal 2007.
table of contents
interest and other, net, reflects a $163million charge to write-down our investment in hd supply. excluding this charge, interest and other, net, as a percent of net sales was 0.9% for
fiscal 2008.  provision for income taxes  our combined effective income tax rate for continuing operations decreased to 35.6% for fiscal 2008 from 36.4% for fiscal 2007. the decrease in our effective income tax rate for fiscal 2008 reflects lower
state and foreign effective tax rates.  diluted earnings per share from continuing operations  diluted earnings per share from continuing operations were $1.37 for fiscal 2008 and $2.27 for fiscal 2007. excluding the rationalization
charges and the write-down of our investment in hd supply, diluted earnings per share from continuing operations for fiscal 2008 were $1.78, a decrease of 21.6% from fiscal 2007. the 53rdweek in fiscal 2007 increased diluted earnings per share from continuing operations by approximately $0.04 for
fiscal 2007.  diluted earnings per share from continuing operations were favorably impacted by the repurchase of shares of our common stock. we
repurchased 2.4million shares for $70million in fiscal 2008 and 293million shares for $10.8billion in fiscal 2007.  discontinued operations  on august30, 2007, the company closed the sale of hd supply. discontinued operations for fiscal
2008 consist of a loss of $52million, net of tax, or $0.03 per diluted share, related to the settlement of working capital matters arising from the sale of hd supply. discontinued operations for fiscal 2007 consist of the results of operations
for hd supply through august30, 2007 and a $4million loss on the sale of hd supply. net sales from discontinued operations were $7.4billion for fiscal 2007 and earnings from discontinued operations, net of tax, were
$185million for fiscal 2007.  liquidity and capital resources  cash flow generated from operations provides us with a significant source of liquidity. for fiscal 2009, net cash provided by operating activities was
$5.1billion compared to $5.5billion for fiscal 2008. this change was a result of lower earnings excluding noncash impairment charges and reduced cash flows from working capital items.  net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2009 was $755million compared to $1.7billion for fiscal 2008. this decrease was primarily the
result of $881 million less in capital expenditures in fiscal 2009 compared to fiscal 2008.  in fiscal 2009, we spent $966million on
capital expenditures, allocated as follows: 26% for merchandising and operations, 19% for maintenance, 19% for core technology, 15% for new stores and 21% for other initiatives. in fiscal 2009, we added 13 new stores.  net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2009 was $3.5billion compared with $3.7billion for fiscal 2008. this decrease was primarily due
to repayments in fiscal 2008 of $1.7billion of short-term commercial paper and $282million of structured financing debt compared to $1.8 billion in repayments of long-term debt in fiscal 2009.  we repurchased 7.7million shares of our common stock for $213million in fiscal 2009 and 2.4million shares for $70million in fiscal
2008. since the inception of our share repurchase program in 2002, we have repurchased 753.6million shares of our common stock for a total of $27.5billion. as of january31, 2010, $12.5billion remained under our share
repurchase authorization.  we have commercial paper programs that allow for borrowings up to $3.25billion. in connection with the
programs, we have a back-up credit facility with a consortium of banks for borrowings up to $3.25billion. as
table of contents
of january31, 2010, there were no borrowings outstanding under the commercial paper programs or the related credit facility. the credit facility expires in december 2010 and contains
various restrictive covenants. as of january31, 2010, we were in compliance with all of the covenants, and they are not expected to impact our liquidity or capital resources. in august 2009, we filed a shelf registration statement with the sec
for the potential future issuance of debt securities, replacing a shelf registration statement that had expired.  we use capital and operating
leases to finance a portion of our real estate, including our stores, distribution centers and store support centers. the net present value of capital lease obligations is reflected in our consolidated balance sheets in long-term debt and current
installments of long-term debt. in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the operating leases are not reflected in our consolidated balance sheets. as of the end of fiscal 2009, our long-term debt-to-equity ratio was 44.7%
compared to 54.4% at the end of fiscal 2008.  as of january 31, 2010, we guaranteed a $1.0billion senior secured amortizing term loan
(guaranteed loan) in connection with the sale of hd supply. the fair value of the guarantee, which was determined to be approximately $16million, is recorded as a liability and included in other long-term liabilities. we are
responsible for up to $1.0billion and any unpaid interest in the event of nonpayment by hd supply. the guaranteed loan is collateralized by certain assets of hd supply. the original expiration date of the guarantee was august 30, 2012. on
march 19, 2010, we amended the expiration date and extended it to april 1, 2014.  as of january31, 2010, we had $1.4 billion in cash,
cash equivalents and short-term investments. we believe that our current cash position, access to the debt capital markets and cash flow generated from operations should be sufficient to enable us to complete our capital expenditure programs and
fund dividend payments and any required long-term debt payments through the next several fiscal years. in addition, we have funds available from our commercial paper programs and the ability to obtain alternative sources of financing.  at january31, 2010, we had outstanding interest rate swaps, accounted for as fair value hedges, that expire on december16, 2013 with a notional
amount of $1.25billion that swap fixed rate interest on our $1.25billion 5.25% senior notes for variable interest equal to libor plus 259 basis points. at january31, 2010, the approximate fair value of these agreements was an asset
of $12million, which is the estimated amount we would have received to settle the agreements.  in november 2009, we entered into a
forward starting interest rate swap agreement with a notional amount of $500 million, accounted for as a cash flow hedge, to hedge interest rate fluctuations in anticipation of issuing long-term debt to refinance debt maturing in fiscal 2010. at
january31, 2010, the approximate fair value of this agreement was an asset of $3 million, which is the estimated amount we would have received to settle the agreement.  during fiscal 2008 and 2007, we entered into interest rate swaps, accounted for as fair value hedges, with notional amounts of $3.0billion, that swapped fixed rate interest on our $3.0billion
5.40%senior notes for variable rate interest equal to libor plus 60 to 149basis points. in fiscal 2008, we received $56million to settle these swaps, which is being amortized to reduce netinterest expense over the remaining
term of the debt.  off-balance sheet arrangements  in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, operating leases for a portion of our real estate and other assets are not reflected in our consolidated balance sheets.
table of contents
contractual obligations  the following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of january31, 2010 (amounts in millions):
payments due by fiscal year
contractual obligations
total
2011-2012
2013-2014
thereafter
total debt(1)
$
15,495
$
1,476
$
1,824
$
2,017
$
10,178
capital lease obligations(2)
1,242
operating leases
8,536
1,357
1,119
5,258
purchase obligations(3)
5,073
1,494
1,779
1,769
unrecognized tax benefits(4)
total
$
30,369
$
3,885
$
5,140
$
5,082
$
16,262
(1)
excludes present value of capital lease obligations of $408 million. includes $6.2 billion of interest payments.
(2)
includes $834 million of imputed interest.
(3)
purchase obligations include all legally binding contracts such as firm commitments for inventory purchases, utility purchases, capital expenditures, software
acquisition and license commitments and legally binding service contracts. purchase orders that are not binding agreements are excluded from the table above.
(4)
excludes $636 million of noncurrent unrecognized tax benefits due to uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash payments.  quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk  our exposure to market risk results primarily from fluctuations in interest rates. interest rate swap agreements are used, at times, to manage our fixed/floating debt portfolio. at january31, 2010,
after giving consideration to our interest rate swap agreements, approximately 87% of our debt portfolio was comprised of fixed-rate debt and 13% was floating-rate debt. a 1.0 percentage point change in the interest costs of floating-rate debt would
not have a material impact on our results of operations.  as of january31, 2010 we had, net of discounts, $9.3 billion of senior notes
outstanding. the aggregate market value of the publicly traded senior notes as of january31, 2010, was approximately $9.5 billion.  although we have international operating entities, our exposure to foreign currency rate fluctuations is not significant to our financial condition or results of operations.  impact of inflation, deflation and changing prices  we have experienced inflation and
deflation related to our purchase of certain commodity products. we do not believe that changing prices for commodities have had a material effect on our net sales or results of operations. although we cannot precisely determine the overall effect
of inflation and deflation on operations, we do not believe inflation and deflation have had a material effect on our results of operations.  critical accounting policies  our significant accounting policies are disclosed in note1 to the consolidated
financial statements. the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require significant judgment or
use of significant assumptions or complex estimates.
table of contents
revenue recognition  we recognize revenue, net of estimated returns and sales tax, at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise or receives services. we estimate the liability for sales returns based on our
historical return levels. we believe that our estimate for sales returns is an accurate reflection of future returns. we have never recorded a significant adjustment to our estimated liability for sales returns. however, if these estimates are
significantly below the actual amounts, our sales could be adversely impacted. when we receive payment from customers before the customer has taken possession of the merchandise or the service has been performed, the amount received is recorded as
deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets until the sale or service is complete. we also record deferred revenue for the sale of gift cards and recognize this revenue upon the redemption of gift cards in net sales.
merchandise inventories  our merchandise
inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market, with approximately 82% valued under the retail inventory method and the remainder under a cost method. retailers like the home depot, with many different types of
merchandise at low unit cost and a large number of transactions, frequently use the retail inventory method. under the retail inventory method, merchandise inventories are stated at cost, which is determined by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the
ending retail value of inventories. as our inventory retail value is adjusted regularly to reflect market conditions, our inventory valued under the retail method approximates the lower of cost or market. we evaluate our inventory valued under a
cost method at the end of each quarter to ensure that it is carried at the lower of cost or market. the valuation allowance for merchandise inventories valued under a cost method was not material to our consolidated financial statements as of the
end of fiscal 2009 or 2008.  independent physical inventory counts or cycle counts are taken on a regular basis in each store and distribution
center to ensure that amounts reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for merchandise inventories are properly stated. during the period between physical inventory counts in our stores, we accrue for estimated losses related
to shrink on a store-by-store basis. shrink (or in the case of excess inventory, swell) is the difference between the recorded amount of inventory and the physical inventory. shrink may occur due to theft, loss, inaccurate records for
the receipt of inventory or deterioration of goods, among other things. we estimate shrink as a percent of net sales using the average shrink results from the previous two physical inventories. the estimates are evaluated quarterly and adjusted
based on recent shrink results and current trends in the business. actual shrink results did not vary materially from estimated amounts for fiscal 2009, 2008 or 2007.  self-insurance  we are self-insured for certain losses related to general liability,
product liability, automobile, workers compensation and medical claims. our liability represents an estimate of the ultimate cost of claims incurred as of the balance sheet date. the estimated liability is not discounted and is established
based upon analysis of historical data and actuarial estimates, and is reviewed by management and third-party actuaries on a quarterly basis to ensure that the liability is appropriate. while we believe these estimates are reasonable based on the
information currently available, if actual trends, including the severity or frequency of claims, medical cost inflation, or fluctuations in premiums, differ from our estimates, our results of operations could be impacted. actual results related to
these types of claims did not vary materially from estimated amounts for fiscal 2009, 2008 or 2007.  vendor allowances  vendor allowances primarily consist of volume rebates that are earned as a result of attaining certain purchase levels and advertising co-op allowances for
the promotion of vendors products that are typically based on guaranteed minimum amounts with additional amounts being earned for attaining certain purchase levels. these vendor allowances are accrued as earned, with those allowances received
as a result of attaining certain purchase levels accrued over the incentive period based on estimates of purchases. we believe that our estimate
table of contents
of vendor allowances earned based on expected volume of purchases over the incentive period is an accurate reflection of the ultimate allowance to be received from our vendors.  volume rebates and advertising co-op allowances earned are initially recorded as a reduction in merchandise inventories and a subsequent reduction in cost of
sales when the related product is sold. certain advertising co-op allowances that are reimbursements of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred to promote vendors products are recorded as an offset against advertising expense in
sg&a.  impairment of long-lived assets  we evaluate our long-lived assets each quarter for indicators of potential impairment. indicators of impairment include current period losses combined with a history of losses, managements decision
to relocate or close a store or other location before the end of its previously estimated useful life, or when changes in other circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. the evaluation for long-lived assets is
performed at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows, which is generally the individual store level.  the assets of a store with indicators
of impairment are evaluated by comparing its undiscounted cash flows with its carrying value. the estimate of cash flows includes managements assumptions of cash inflows and outflows directly resulting from the use of those assets in
operations, including gross margin on net sales, payroll and related items, occupancy costs, insurance allocations and other costs to operate a store. if the carrying value is greater than the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment loss is
recognized for the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair market value. impairment losses are recorded as a component of sg&a in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings. when a leased location closes, we also
recognize in sg&a the net present value of future lease obligations less estimated sublease income.  we make critical assumptions and
estimates in completing impairment assessments of long-lived assets. our cash flow projections look several years into the future and include assumptions on variables such as future sales and operating margin growth rates, economic conditions,
market competition and inflation. a 10% decrease in the estimated undiscounted cash flows for the stores with indicators of impairment would not have a material impact on our results of operations. our estimates of fair market value are generally
based on market appraisals of owned locations and estimates on the amount of potential sublease income and the time required to sublease for leased locations.  as part of our rationalization charges, we recorded no asset impairment and $84 million of lease obligation costs in fiscal 2009 compared to $580 million of asset impairments and $252 million of lease
obligation costs in fiscal 2008. see note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for more details on the rationalization charges. a 10% decrease in estimated sublease income and a 10% increase in the time required to sublease would not have a
material impact on results of operations. we also recorded impairments on other closings and relocations in the ordinary course of business, which were not material to the consolidated financial statements in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007.
goodwill and other intangible assets  goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired. we do not amortize goodwill, but do assess the recoverability of goodwill in the third quarter of each fiscal year, or more often if indicators
warrant, by determining whether the fair value of each reporting unit supports its carrying value. the fair values of our identified reporting units were estimated using the present value of expected future discounted cash flows.  we make critical assumptions and estimates in completing impairment assessments of goodwill and other intangible assets. our cash flow projections look
several years into the future and include assumptions on variables such as future sales and operating margin growth rates, economic conditions, market competition, inflation and discount rates. a 10% decrease in the estimated discounted cash flows
for the reporting units tested would result in an impairment that is not material to our results of operations. a 1.0 percentage point
table of contents
increase in the discount rate used would also result in an impairment that is not material to our results of
operations.  we amortize the cost of other intangible assets over their estimated useful lives, which range from 1 to 20years, unless
such lives are deemed indefinite. intangible assets with indefinite lives are tested in the third quarter of each fiscal year for impairment, or more often if indicators warrant. we recorded no impairment charges for goodwill or other intangible
assets for fiscal 2009, 2008 or 2007.  recent accounting pronouncements  in june 2009, the financial accounting standards board (fasb) issued the fasb accounting standards codification and the hierarchy of
generally accepted accounting principles (fasb asc 105-10), which establishes the fasb accounting standards codification (codification) as the sole source for authoritative u.s. gaap and supersedes all accounting
standards in u.s. gaap, aside from those issued by the sec. fasb asc 105-10 was effective for financial statements issued for interim and annual periods ending after september15, 2009. the adoption of the codification did not have an impact on
the companys financial condition or results of operations. in accordance with the codification, references to previously issued accounting standards have been replaced by fasb asc references.  in june 2009, the fasb issued amendments to fasb interpretation no.46(r) (fasb asc 810-10), which clarifies that the
determination of whether a company is required to consolidate an entity is based on, among other things, an entitys purpose and design and a companys ability to direct the activities of the entity that most significantly impact the
entitys economic performance. fasb asc 810-10 requires ongoing reassessments of whether a company is the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity and eliminates the qualifying special purpose entity concept. fasb asc 810-10 also
requires additional disclosures about a companys involvement in variable interest entities and any significant changes in risk exposure due to that involvement. this guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after
november15, 2009, for interim periods within that first annual reporting period, and for interim and annual reporting periods thereafter. this guidance is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
in june 2008, the fasb issued guidance to clarify that unvested share-based payment awards that contain nonforfeitable rights to dividends or
dividend equivalents (whether paid or unpaid) are participating securities and are to be included in the computation of earnings per share under the two-class method. this guidance was effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years
beginning after december15, 2008, and interim periods within those years. this guidance did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.  the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to item7, managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of this report.
table of contents
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data.  managements responsibility for financial statements  the financial statements presented in this annual report have been
prepared with integrity and objectivity and are the responsibility of the management of the home depot, inc. these financial statements have been prepared in conformity with u.s.generally accepted accounting principles and properly reflect
certain estimates and judgments based upon the best available information.  the financial statements of the company have been audited by kpmg
llp, an independent registered public accounting firm. their accompanying report is based upon an audit conducted in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).  the audit committee of the board of directors, consisting solely of independent directors, meets five times a year with the independent registered public
accounting firm, the internal auditors and representatives of management to discuss auditing and financial reporting matters. in addition, a telephonic meeting is held prior to each quarterly earnings release. the audit committee retains the
independent registered public accounting firm and regularly reviews the internal accounting controls, the activities of the independent registered public accounting firm and internal auditors and the financial condition of the company. both the
companys independent registered public accounting firm and the internal auditors have free access to the audit committee.  managements report on internal control over financial reporting  our management is responsible for establishing and
maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in rule13a-15(f) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (the exchange act). under the supervision and with the
participation of our management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of january31, 2010 based on the framework
in internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on our evaluation, our management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting
was effective as of january31, 2010 in providing reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting
principles. the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of january31, 2010 has been audited by kpmg llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included on page30 in
this form10-k.
/s/francis s.
blake
/s/carol b.
tom
francis s. blake chairman& chief executive officer
carol b. tom chief financial officer & executive vice president corporate services
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm  the board of directors and stockholders  the home
depot, inc.:  we have audited the home depot inc.s internal control over financial reporting as of january31, 2010,
based on criteria established in internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the home depot inc.s management is responsible for
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying managements report on internal control over financial
reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on the companys internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.  we conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. our audit also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe
that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.  a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (2)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company
are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  because of its inherent limitations,
internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  in our opinion, the home depot, inc.
maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of january31, 2010, based on criteria established in internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of
sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission.  we also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated balance sheets of the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries as of january31, 2010 and february1, 2009, and the related consolidated statements of earnings,
stockholders equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended january31, 2010, and our report dated march25, 2010 expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated
financial statements.  /s/ kpmg llp  atlanta, georgia  march25, 2010
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm  the board of directors and stockholders  the home
depot, inc.:  we have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries as of
january31, 2010 and february1, 2009, and the related consolidated statements of earnings, stockholders equity and comprehensive income, and cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended january31,
2010. these consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.  we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinion.  in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries as of january31, 2010 and february1, 2009, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period
ended january31, 2010, in conformity with u.s.generally accepted accounting principles.  we also have audited, in
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the home depot, inc.s internal control over financial reporting as of january31, 2010, based on criteria established in internal
controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso), and our report dated march25, 2010 expressed an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the
companys internal control over financial reporting.  /s/ kpmg llp  atlanta, georgia  march25, 2010
table of contents
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries  consolidated statements of earnings
fiscal year ended(1)
amounts in millions, except per share data
january31,2010
february1,2009
february3,2008
net sales
$
66,176
$
71,288
$
77,349
cost of sales
43,764
47,298
51,352
gross profit
22,412
23,990
25,997
operating expenses:
selling, general and administrative
15,902
17,846
17,053
depreciation and amortization
1,707
1,785
1,702
total operating expenses
17,609
19,631
18,755
operating income
4,803
4,359
7,242
interest and other (income) expense:
interest and investment income
(18)
(18)
(74)
interest expense
other
interest and other, net
earnings from continuing operations before provision for income taxes
3,982
3,590
6,620
provision for income taxes
1,362
1,278
2,410
earnings from continuing operations
2,620
2,312
4,210
earnings (loss) from discontinued operations,net of tax
(52)
net earnings
$
2,661
$
2,260
$
4,395
weighted average common shares
1,683
1,682
1,849
basic earnings per share from continuing operations
$
1.56
$
1.37
$
2.28
basic earnings (loss) per share from discontinued operations
$
0.02
$
(0.03)
$
0.10
basic earnings per share
$
1.58
$
1.34
$
2.38
diluted weighted average common shares
1,692
1,686
1,856
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
$
1.55
$
1.37
$
2.27
diluted earnings (loss) per share from discontinued operations
$
0.02
$
(0.03)
$
0.10
diluted earnings per share
$
1.57
$
1.34
$
2.37
(1)
fiscal years ended january31, 2010 and february1, 2009 include 52weeks. fiscal year ended february3, 2008 includes 53weeks.
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries  consolidated balance sheets
amounts in millions, except share and per share data
january31,2010
february1,2009
assets
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,421
$
short-term investments
receivables, net
merchandise inventories
10,188
10,673
other current assets
1,321
1,192
total current assets
13,900
13,362
property and equipment, at cost:
land
8,451
8,301
buildings
17,391
16,961
furniture, fixtures and equipment
9,091
8,741
leasehold improvements
1,383
1,359
construction in progress
capital leases
37,345
36,477
less accumulated depreciation and amortization
11,795
10,243
net property and equipment
25,550
26,234
notes receivable
goodwill
1,171
1,134
other assets
total assets
$
40,877
$
41,164
liabilities and stockholders equity
current liabilities:
accounts payable
$
4,863
$
4,822
accrued salaries and related expenses
1,263
1,129
sales taxes payable
deferred revenue
1,158
1,165
income taxes payable
current installments of long-term debt
1,020
1,767
other accrued expenses
1,589
1,644
total current liabilities
10,363
11,153
long-term debt, excluding current installments
8,662
9,667
other long-term liabilities
2,140
2,198
deferred income taxes
total liabilities
21,484
23,387
stockholders equity
common stock, par value $0.05; authorized: 10billion shares; issued: 1.716billion shares at january31, 2010 and
1.707billion shares at february1, 2009; outstanding: 1.698billion shares at january31, 2010 and 1.696billion shares at february1, 2009
paid-in capital
6,304
6,048
retained earnings
13,226
12,093
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
(77
)
treasury stock, at cost, 18million shares at january31, 2010 and 11million shares at february1,
(585
)
(372
)
total stockholders equity
19,393
17,777
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
40,877
$
41,164
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries  consolidated statements of stockholders  equity and comprehensive income
common stock
paid-incapital
retainedearnings
accumulatedothercomprehensiveincome (loss)
treasury stock
stockholdersequity
totalcomprehensiveincome
amounts in millions, except per share data
shares
amount
shares
amount
balance, january 28, 2007
2,421
$
$
7,930
$
33,052
$
(451
)
$
(16,383
)
$
25,030
cumulative effect of the adoption of fin48
(111
)
(111
)
net earnings
4,395
4,395
$
4,395
shares issued under employee stock plans
tax effect of sale of option shares by employees
translation adjustments
cash flow hedges, net of tax
(10
)
(10
)
(10
)
stock options, awards and amortization of restricted stock
repurchase of common stock
(292
)
(10,815
)
(10,815
)
retirement of treasury stock
(735
)
(37
)
(2,608
)
(24,239
)
26,884
cash dividends ($0.90 per share)
(1,709
)
(1,709
)
other
comprehensive income
$
4,840
balance, february 3, 2008
1,698
$
$
5,800
$
11,388
$
(8
)
$
(314
)
$
17,714
net earnings
2,260
2,260
$
2,260
shares issued under employee stock plans
tax effect of sale of option shares by employees
translation adjustments
(831
)
(831
)
(831
)
cash flow hedges, net of tax
(1
)
(1
)
(1
)
stock options, awards and amortization of restricted stock
repurchase of common stock
(3
)
(70
)
(70
)
cash dividends ($0.90 per share)
(1,521
)
(1,521
)
other
(3
)
(34
)
(25
)
comprehensive income
$
1,428
balance, february 1, 2009
1,707
$
$
6,048
$
12,093
$
(77
)
(11
)
$
(372
)
$
17,777
net earnings
2,661
2,661
$
2,661
shares issued under employee stock plans
tax effect of sale of option shares by employees
(2
)
(2
)
translation adjustments
cash flow hedges, net of tax
stock options, awards and amortization of restricted stock
repurchase of common stock
(7
)
(213
)
(213
)
cash dividends ($0.90 per share)
(1,525
)
(1,525
)
other
(3
)
(1
)
comprehensive income
$
3,100
balance, january 31, 2010
1,716
$
$
6,304
$
13,226
$
(18
)
$
(585
)
$
19,393
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries  consolidated statements of cash flows
fiscal year ended(1)
amounts in millions
january31,2010
february1,2009
february3,2008
cash flows from operating activities:
net earnings
$
2,661
$
2,260
$
4,395
reconciliation of net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities:
depreciation and amortization
1,806
1,902
1,906
impairment related to rationalization charges
impairment of investment
stock-based compensation expense
changes in assets and liabilities, net of the effects of acquisitions and disposition:
(increase) decrease in receivables, net
(23
)
decrease (increase) in merchandise inventories
(491
)
decrease (increase) in other current assets
(7
)
increase (decrease) in accounts payable and accrued expenses
(646
)
(465
)
decrease in deferred revenue
(21
)
(292
)
(159
)
(decrease) increase in income taxes payable
(174
)
decrease in deferred income taxes
(227
)
(282
)
(348
)
(decrease) increase in other long-term liabilities
(19
)
other
net cash provided by operating activities
5,125
5,528
5,727
cash flows from investing activities:
capital expenditures, net of $10, $37 and $19 of non-cash capitalexpenditures in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively
(966
)
(1,847
)
(3,558
)
proceeds from sale of business, net
8,337
payments for businesses acquired, net
(13
)
proceeds from sales of property and equipment
purchases of investments
(168
)
(11,225
)
proceeds from sales and maturities of investments
10,899
net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
(755
)
(1,729
)
4,758
cash flows from financing activities:
(repayments of) proceeds from short-term borrowings, net
(1,732
)
1,734
repayments of long-term debt
(1,774
)
(313
)
(20
)
repurchases of common stock
(213
)
(70
)
(10,815
)
proceeds from sales of common stock
cash dividends paid to stockholders
(1,525
)
(1,521
)
(1,709
)
other financing activities
(64
)
(128
)
(105
)
net cash used in financing activities
(3,503
)
(3,680
)
(10,639
)
increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(154
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(45
)
(1
)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
1,421
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash payments made for:
interest, net of interest capitalized
$
$
$
income taxes
$
2,082
$
1,265
$
2,524
(1)
fiscal years ended january31, 2010 and february1, 2009 include 52weeks. fiscal year ended february3, 2008 includes 53weeks.
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
notesto consolidated financial statements
1.
summary of significant accounting policies  business, consolidation and presentation  the home depot, inc. and its subsidiaries (the company) operate the home
depot stores, which are full-service, warehouse-style stores averaging approximately 105,000square feet in size. the stores stock approximately 30,000 to 40,000 different kinds of building materials, home improvement supplies and lawn and
garden products that are sold to do-it-yourself customers, do-it-for-me customers and professional customers. at the end of fiscal 2009, the company was operating 2,244 stores, which included 1,976 the home depot stores in the united states,
including the commonwealth of puerto rico and the territories of the u.s. virgin islands and guam (u.s.), 179 the home depot stores in canada, 79 the home depot stores in mexico and 10 the home depot stores in china. the consolidated
financial statements include the accounts of the company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. all significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.  fiscal year  the companys fiscal year is a 52- or 53-week period ending on the sunday
nearest to january31. fiscal years ended january31, 2010 (fiscal 2009) and february1, 2009 (fiscal 2008) include 52weeks. the fiscal year ended february3, 2008 (fiscal 2007) includes
53weeks.  use of estimates  management of the company has made a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and reported amounts of revenues and expenses in preparing
these financial statements in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles.actual results could differ from these estimates.  fair value of financial instruments  the carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, receivables and accounts payable
approximate fair value due to the short-term maturities of these financial instruments. the fair value of the companys investments is discussed under the caption short-term investments in this note1. the fair value of the
companys long-term debt is discussed in note11.  cash equivalents  the company considers all highly liquid investments purchased with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. the companys
cash equivalents are carried at fair market value and consist primarily of high-grade commercial paper, money market funds and u.s.government agency securities.  short-term investments  short-term investments are recorded at fair value based on current
market rates and are classified as available-for-sale.  accounts receivable  the company has an agreement with a third-party service provider who directly extends credit to customers, manages the companys private label credit
card program and owns the related receivables. we evaluated the third-party entities holding the receivables under the program and concluded that they should not be consolidated by the company. the agreement with the third-party service provider
expires in 2018, with the company having the option, but no obligation, to purchase the receivables at the end of the agreement. the deferred interest charges incurred by the company for its deferred financing programs offered to its customers are
included in cost of sales. the interchange fees charged to the company for the customers use of the cards
table of contents
and the profit sharing with the third-party administrator are included in selling, general and administrative expenses (sg&a). the sum of the three is referred to by the company
as the cost of credit of the private label credit card program.  in addition, certain subsidiaries of the company extend credit
directly to customers in the ordinary course of business. the receivables due from customers were $38million and $37million as of january31, 2010 and february1, 2009, respectively. the companys valuation reserve related
to accounts receivable was not material to the consolidated financial statements of the company as of the end of fiscal 2009 or 2008.  merchandise inventories  the majority of the companys merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in,
first-out) or market, as determined by the retail inventory method. as the inventory retail value is adjusted regularly to reflect market conditions, the inventory valued using the retail method approximates the lower of cost or market. certain
subsidiaries, including retail operations in canada, mexico and china, and distribution centers, record merchandise inventories at the lower of cost or market, as determined by a cost method. these merchandise inventories represent approximately 18%
of the total merchandise inventories balance. the company evaluates the inventory valued using a cost method at the end of each quarter to ensure that it is carried at the lower of cost or market. the valuation allowance for merchandise inventories
valued under a cost method was not material to the consolidated financial statements of the company as of the end of fiscal 2009 or 2008.  independent physical inventory counts or cycle counts are taken on a regular basis in each store and distribution center to ensure that amounts reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for merchandise inventories are
properly stated. during the period between physical inventory counts in stores, the company accrues for estimated losses related to shrink on a store-by-store basis based on historical shrink results and current trends in the business. shrink (or in
the case of excess inventory, swell) is the difference between the recorded amount of inventory and the physical inventory. shrink may occur due to theft, loss, inaccurate records for the receipt of inventory or deterioration of goods,
among other things.  income taxes  the company provides for federal, state and foreign income taxes currently payable, as well as for those deferred due to timing differences between reporting income and expenses for financial statement purposes versus tax purposes. deferred
tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. deferred tax assets
and liabilities are measured using enacted income tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. the effect of a change in income tax rates is recognized as
income or expense in the period that includes the enactment date.  the company and its eligible subsidiaries file a consolidated
u.s.federal income tax return. non-u.s.subsidiaries and certain u.s.subsidiaries, which are consolidated for financial reporting purposes, are not eligible to be included in the companys consolidated u.s.federal income
tax return. separate provisions for income taxes have been determined for these entities. the company intends to reinvest substantially all of the unremitted earnings of its non-u.s.subsidiaries and postpone their remittance indefinitely.
accordingly, no provision for u.s.income taxes for these non-u.s.subsidiaries was recorded in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings.
table of contents
depreciation and amortization  the companys buildings, furniture, fixtures and equipment are recorded at cost and depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. leasehold improvements
are amortized using the straight-line method over the original term of the lease or the useful life of the improvement, whichever is shorter. the companys property and equipment is depreciated using the following estimated useful lives:
life
buildings
545years
furniture, fixtures and equipment
320years
leasehold improvements
545years capitalized software costs  the company capitalizes certain costs related to the acquisition and development of software and
amortizes these costs using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the software, which is three to six years. these costs are included in furniture, fixtures and equipment in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. certain
development costs not meeting the criteria for capitalization are expensed as incurred.  revenues  the company recognizes revenue, net of estimated returns and sales tax, at the time the customer takes possession of merchandise or receives services. the
liability for sales returns is estimated based on historical return levels. when the company receives payment from customers before the customer has taken possession of the merchandise or the service has been performed, the amount received is
recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets until the sale or service is complete. the company also records deferred revenue for the sale of gift cards and recognizes this revenue upon the redemption of gift cards in
net sales. gift card breakage income is recognized based upon historical redemption patterns and represents the balance of gift cards for which the company believes the likelihood of redemption by the customer is remote. during fiscal 2009, 2008 and
2007, the company recognized $40million, $37million and $36million, respectively, of gift card breakage income. this income is recorded as other income and is included in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings as a
reduction in sg&a.  services revenue  net sales include services revenue generated through a variety of installation, home maintenance and professional service programs. in these programs, the customer selects and purchases material for a
project and the company provides or arranges professional installation. these programs are offered through the companys stores. under certain programs, when the company provides or arranges the installation of a project and the subcontractor
provides material as part of the installation, both the material and labor are included in services revenue. the company recognizes this revenue when the service for the customer is complete.  all payments received prior to the completion of services are recorded in deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. services revenue
was $2.6billion, $3.1billion and $3.5billion for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.  self-insurance
the company is self-insured for certain losses related to general liability, product liability, automobile, workers compensation and
medical claims. the expected ultimate cost for claims incurred as of the balance sheet date is not discounted and is recognized as a liability. the expected ultimate cost of claims is estimated based upon analysis of historical data and actuarial
estimates.
table of contents
prepaid advertising  television and radio advertising production costs, along with media placement costs, are expensed when the advertisement first appears. amounts included in other current assets in the accompanying
consolidated balance sheets relating to prepayments of production costs for print and broadcast advertising as well as sponsorship promotions were not material at the end of fiscal 2009 and 2008.  vendor allowances  vendor allowances
primarily consist of volume rebates that are earned as a result of attaining certain purchase levels and advertising co-op allowances for the promotion of vendors products that are typically based on guaranteed minimum amounts with additional
amounts being earned for attaining certain purchase levels. these vendor allowances are accrued as earned, with those allowances received as a result of attaining certain purchase levels accrued over the incentive period based on estimates of
purchases.  volume rebates and certain advertising co-op allowances earned are initially recorded as a reduction in merchandise inventories and
a subsequent reduction in cost of sales when the related product is sold. certain advertising co-op allowances that are reimbursements of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred to promote vendors products are recorded as an
offset against advertising expense. in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, gross advertising expense was $897 million, $1.0billion and $1.2billion, respectively, and is included in sg&a. specific, incremental and identifiable advertising
co-op allowances were $105 million, $107million and $120million for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively, and were recorded as an offset to advertising expense in sg&a.  cost of sales  cost of sales includes the
actual cost of merchandise sold and services performed, the cost of transportation of merchandise from vendors to the companys stores, locations or customers, the operating cost of the companys sourcing and distribution network and the
cost of deferred interest programs offered through the companys private label credit card program.  the cost of handling and shipping
merchandise from the companys stores, locations or distribution centers to the customer is classified as sg&a. the cost of shipping and handling, including internal costs and payments to third parties, classified as sg&a was
$426million, $501million and $571million in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.  impairment of long-lived assets
the company evaluates its long-lived assets each quarter for indicators of potential impairment. indicators of impairment include current
period losses combined with a history of losses, managements decision to relocate or close a store or other location before the end of its previously estimated useful life, or when changes in other circumstances indicate the carrying amount of
an asset may not be recoverable. the evaluation for long-lived assets is performed at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows, which is generally the individual store level.  the assets of a store with indicators of impairment are evaluated by comparing its undiscounted cash flows with its carrying value. the estimate of cash flows includes managements assumptions of
cash inflows and outflows directly resulting from the use of those assets in operations, including gross margin on net sales, payroll and related items, occupancy costs, insurance allocations and other costs to operate a store. if the carrying value
is greater than the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair market value. impairment losses are recorded as a component of sg&a in the accompanying
consolidated statements of earnings. when a leased location closes, the company also recognizes in sg&a the net present value of future lease obligations less estimated sublease income.  as part of its rationalization charges, the company recorded no asset impairment and $84 million of lease obligation costs in fiscal 2009 compared to $580
million of asset impairments and $252 million of lease obligation costs in fiscal 2008. see note 2 for more details on the rationalization charges. the company also
table of contents
recorded impairments on other closings and relocations in the ordinary course of business, which were not material to the consolidated financial statements in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007.
goodwill and other intangible assets  goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired. the company does not amortize goodwill, but does assess the recoverability of goodwill in the third quarter of each fiscal year, or more often if
indicators warrant, by determining whether the fair value of each reporting unit supports its carrying value. the fair values of the companys identified reporting units were estimated using the present value of expected future discounted cash
flows.  the company amortizes the cost of other intangible assets over their estimated useful lives, which range from 1 to 20years,
unless such lives are deemed indefinite. intangible assets with indefinite lives are tested in the third quarter of each fiscal year for impairment, or more often if indicators warrant. the company recorded no impairment charges for goodwill or
other intangible assets for fiscal 2009, 2008 or 2007.  stock-based compensation  the per share weighted average fair value of stock options granted during fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $6.61, $6.46 and $9.45, respectively. the fair
value of these options was determined at the date of grant using the black- scholes option-pricing model with the following assumptions:
fiscal year ended
january31,2010
february1,2009
february3,2008
risk-free interest rate
2.3%
2.9%
4.4%
assumed volatility
41.5%
33.8%
25.5%
assumed dividend yield
3.9%
3.5%
2.4%
assumed lives of option
6years
6years
6years derivatives
the company uses derivative financial instruments from time to time in the management of its interest rate exposure on long-term debt and its exposure on
foreign currency fluctuations. the company accounts for its derivative financial instruments in accordance with the financial accounting standards board accounting standards codification (fasb asc) 815-10. the fair value of the
companys derivative financial instruments is discussed in note 5.  comprehensive income  comprehensive income includes net earnings adjusted for certain revenues, expenses, gains and losses that are excluded from net earnings under u.s. generally
accepted accounting principles.adjustments to net earnings and accumulated other comprehensive income consist primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.  foreign currency translation  assets and liabilities denominated in a foreign currency are
translated into u.s.dollars at the current rate of exchange on the last day of the reporting period. revenues and expenses are generally translated using average exchange rates for the period and equity transactions are translated using the
actual rate on the day of the transaction.  segment information  the company operates within a single reportable segment primarily within north america. net sales for the company outside of the u.s.were $7.0billion for fiscal 2009 and were $7.4billion
for fiscal 2008 and 2007. long-lived assets outside of the u.s.totaled $3.0billion and $2.8billion as of january31, 2010 and february1, 2009, respectively.
table of contents
2.
rationalization charges  in fiscal 2008,
the company reduced its square footage growth plans to improve free cash flow, provide stronger returns for the company and invest in its existing stores to continue improving the customer experience. as a result of this store rationalization plan,
the company determined that it would no longer pursue the opening of approximately 50 u.s.stores that had been in its new store pipeline. the company expects to dispose of or sublet these pipeline locations over varying periods. the company
also closed 15 underperforming u.s.stores in the second quarter of fiscal 2008, and the company expects to dispose of or sublet those locations over varying periods.  also in fiscal 2008, the company announced that it would exit its expo, thd design center, yardbirds and hd bath businesses (the exited businesses) in order to focus on its core the home depot
stores. the company closed the exited businesses in the first quarter of fiscal 2009 and expects to dispose of or sublet those locations over varying periods. these steps impacted approximately 5,000 associates in those locations, their support
functions and their distribution centers.  finally, in january 2009 the company restructured its support functions to better align the
companys cost structure. these actions impacted approximately 2,000 associates.  the company recognized $146 million and
$951million in total pretax charges for fiscal 2009 and 2008, respectively, related to these actions (collectively, the rationalization charges). the significant components of the total expected charges and charges incurred to date
are as follows (amounts in millions):
totalexpectedcharges
fiscal2008charges
fiscal2009charges
estimatedremainingcharges
asset impairments
$
$
$
$
lease obligation costs, net
severance
other
total
$
1,097
$
$
$
inventory markdown costs reflected in other are included in cost of
sales in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings, and costs related to asset impairments, lease obligations, severance and other miscellaneous costs are included in sg&a expenses. asset impairment charges, including contractual
costs to complete certain assets, were determined based on fair market value using market data for each individual property. lease obligation costs represent the present value of contractually obligated rental payments offset by estimated sublet
income, including estimates of the time required to sublease the locations. the payments related to the leased locations therefore are not generally incremental uses of cash.  activity related to rationalization charges for fiscal 2009 and 2008 was as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal2008charges
cashuses
non-cashuses
accruedbalancefebruary1,2009
fiscal2009charges
cashuses
non-cashuses
accruedbalancejanuary31,2010
asset impairments
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
lease obligation costs, net
severance
other
total
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
table of contents
3.
change in accounting principle  during
fiscal 2008, the company implemented a new enterprise resource planning (erp) system, including a new inventory system, for its retail operations in canada. along with this implementation, the company changed its method of accounting for
merchandise inventories for its retail operations in canada from the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market, as determined by the retail inventory method, to the lower of cost or market using a weighted-average cost method. as of the end of
fiscal 2008, the implementation of the new inventory system and related conversion to the weighted-average cost method for canadian retail operations was complete.  the new erp system allows the company to utilize the weighted-average cost method, which the company believes will result in greater precision in the costing of inventories and a better matching of cost
of sales with revenue generated. the effect of the change on the merchandise inventories and retained earnings balances was not material. prior to the inventory system conversion, the company could not determine the impact of the change to the
weighted-average cost method, and therefore, could not retroactively apply the change to periods prior to fiscal 2008.
4.
disposition and acquisitions  on
august30, 2007, the company closed the sale of hd supply. the company received $8.3billion of net proceeds for the sale of hd supply and recognized a $4million loss, net of tax, in fiscal 2007. settlement of working capital matters
arising from the sale of hd supply resulted in earnings from discontinued operations of $41 million, net of tax, in fiscal 2009 and a loss from discontinued operations of $52 million, net of tax, in fiscal 2008.  in connection with the sale, the company purchased a 12.5% equity interest in the newly formed hd supply for $325million. in fiscal 2008, the company
determined its 12.5% equity interest in hd supply was impaired and recorded a $163million charge to write-down the investment. in fiscal 2009, the company determined its equity interest in hd supply was further impaired and recorded an
additional charge of $163 million to write-down the remaining investment. these charges are included in interest and other, net, in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings.  also in connection with the sale, the company guaranteed a $1.0billion senior secured amortizing term loan (guaranteed loan) of hd supply. the fair value of the guarantee, which was
determined to be approximately $16million, is recorded as a liability of the company and included in other long-term liabilities. the company is responsible for up to $1.0billion and any unpaid interest in the event of nonpayment by hd
supply. the guaranteed loan is collateralized by certain assets of hd supply. the original expiration date of the guarantee was august 30, 2012. on march 19, 2010, the company amended the expiration date and extended it to april 1, 2014.
in accordance with fasb asc 360-10, the company reclassified the results of hd supply as discontinued operations in its consolidated statements of
earnings for all periods presented.  the following table presents net sales and earnings of hd supply through august30, 2007 and the
gains and losses on disposition which have been classified as discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of earnings for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january31,2010
february1,2009
february3,2008
net sales
$
$
$
7,391
earnings before provision for income taxes
$
$
$
provision for income taxes
(102
)
gain (loss) from discontinued operations, net
(52
)
(4
)
earnings (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
$
$
(52
)
$
table of contents
the company made no acquisitions during fiscal 2009 and 2008. the aggregate purchase price for acquisitions
in fiscal 2007 was $25million. the company recorded goodwill related to the hd supply businesses of $20million for fiscal 2007 and recorded no goodwill related to its retail businesses for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007.
5.
debt  the company has commercial paper
programs that allow for borrowings up to $3.25billion. all of the companys short-term borrowings in fiscal 2009 and 2008 were under these commercial paper programs. in connection with the commercial paper programs, the company has a
back-up credit facility with a consortium of banks for borrowings up to $3.25billion. the credit facility expires in december 2010 and contains various restrictive covenants. at january31, 2010, the company was in compliance with all of
the covenants, and they are not expected to impact the companys liquidity or capital resources.  short-term debt under the commercial
paper programs was as follows (dollars in millions):
january31,2010
february1,2009
balance outstanding at fiscal year-end
$
$
maximum amount outstanding at any month-end
$
$
1,771
average daily short-term borrowings
$
$
weighted average interest rate
1.1
%
3.4
%
the companys long-term debt at the end of fiscal 2009 and 2008 consisted of the following (amounts in millions):
january31,2010
february1,2009
3.75%senior notes; due september15, 2009; interest payable semi-annually on march15 and
september15
$
$999
floating rate senior notes; due december16, 2009; interest payable on march16, june16, september16 and
december16
4.625%senior notes; due august15, 2010; interest payable semi-annually on february15 and
august15
5.20%senior notes; due march1, 2011; interest payable semi-annually on march1 and
september1
1,000
1,000
5.25%senior notes; due december16, 2013; interest payable semi-annually on june16 and
december16
1,258
1,245
5.40%senior notes; due march1, 2016; interest payable semi-annually on march1 and
september1
3,040
3,047
5.875%senior notes; due december16, 2036; interest payable semi-annually on june16 and
december16
2,960
2,959
capital lease obligations; payable in varying installments through january31, 2055
other
total debt
9,682
11,434
less current installments
1,020
1,767
long-term debt, excluding current installments
$
8,662
$
9,667
at january31, 2010, the company had outstanding interest rate swaps, accounted for as fair value hedges, that expire on
december16, 2013 with a notional amount of $1.25billion that swap fixed rate interest on the companys $1.25billion 5.25% senior notes for variable interest equal to libor plus 259 basis points. at january31, 2010, the
approximate fair value of these agreements was an asset of $12million, which is the estimated amount the company would have received to settle the agreements.
table of contents
in november 2009, the company entered into a forward starting interest rate swap agreement with a notional
amount of $500 million, accounted for as a cash flow hedge, to hedge interest rate fluctuations in anticipation of issuing long-term debt to refinance debt maturing in fiscal 2010. at january31, 2010, the approximate fair value of this
agreement was an asset of $3 million, which is the estimated amount the company would have received to settle the agreement.  during fiscal
2008 and 2007, the company entered into interest rate swaps, accounted for as fair value hedges, with notional amounts of $3.0billion, that swapped fixed rate interest on the companys $3.0billion 5.40%senior notes for
variable rate interest equal to libor plus 60 to 149basis points. in fiscal 2008, the company received $56million to settle these swaps, which is being amortized to reduce netinterest expense over the remaining term of the debt.
the senior notes may be redeemed by the company at any time, in whole or in part, at a redemption price plus accrued interest up to the
redemption date. the redemption price is equal to the greater of (1)100% of the principal amount of the senior notes to be redeemed, or (2)the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest to
maturity.  additionally, if a change in control triggering event occurs, as defined by the terms of the 5.25%senior notes and the 5.875%
senior notes issuance (together the december 2006 issuance), holders of the december 2006 issuance have the right to require the company to redeem those notes at 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes plus accrued interest
up to the redemption date.  the company is generally not limited under the indenture governing the senior notes in its ability to incur
additional indebtedness or required to maintain financial ratios or specified levels of net worth or liquidity. however, the indenture governing the senior notes contains various restrictive covenants, none of which is expected to impact the
companys liquidity or capital resources.  at january31, 2010, the company had outstanding cross currency swap agreements with a
notional amount of $900 million, accounted for as cash flow hedges, to hedge foreign currency fluctuations on certain intercompany debt. at january31, 2010, the approximate fair value of these agreements was a liability of $4 million, which is
the estimated amount the company would have paid to settle the agreements.  interest expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of
earnings is net of interest capitalized of $4million, $20million and $46million in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. maturities of long-term debt are $1.0billion for fiscal 2010, $1.0billion for fiscal 2011,
$30million for fiscal 2012, $1.3billion for fiscal 2013, $33million for fiscal 2014 and $6.3billion thereafter.
table of contents
6.
income taxes   the components of earnings
from continuing operations before provision for income taxes for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 were as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january31,2010
february1,2009
february3,2008
united states
$
3,586
$
3,136
$
5,905
foreign
total
$
3,982
$
3,590
$
6,620
the provision for income taxes consisted of the following (amounts in
millions):
fiscal year ended
january31,2010
february1,2009
february3,2008
current:
federal
$
1,157
$
1,283
$
2,055
state
foreign
1,536
1,566
2,650
deferred:
federal
(121
)
(209
)
(242
)
state
(24
)
(56
)
foreign
(29
)
(23
)
(15
)
(174
)
(288
)
(240
)
total
$
1,362
$
1,278
$
2,410
the companys combined federal, state and foreign effective tax rates for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, net of offsets
generated by federal, state and foreign tax benefits, were approximately 34.2%, 35.6% and 36.4%, respectively.  the reconciliation of the
provision for income taxes at the federal statutory rate of 35% to the actual tax expense for the applicable fiscal years was as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january31,2010
february1,2009
february3,2008
income taxes at federal statutory rate
$
1,394
$
1,257
$
2,317
state income taxes, net of federal income tax benefit
other, net
(136
)
(71
)
(103
)
total
$
1,362
$
1,278
$
2,410
table of contents
the tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to significant portions of the deferred tax assets
and deferred tax liabilities as of january31, 2010 and february1, 2009, were as follows (amounts in millions):
january31,2010
february1,2009
current:
deferred tax assets:
property and equipment
$
$
accrued self-insurance liabilities
other accrued liabilities
deferred compensation
current deferred tax assets
deferred tax liabilities:
accelerated inventory deduction
(114
)
(114
)
other
(114
)
(118
)
current deferred tax liabilities
(228
)
(232
)
current deferred tax assets, net
noncurrent:
deferred tax assets:
accrued self-insurance liabilities
state income taxes
capital loss carryover
net operating losses
foreign tax credit carry forward
other
valuation allowance
(15
)
(12
)
noncurrent deferred tax assets
deferred tax liabilities:
property and equipment
(1,178
)
(1,068
)
goodwill and other intangibles
(88
)
(78
)
noncurrent deferred tax liabilities
(1,266
)
(1,146
)
noncurrent deferred tax liabilities, net
(304
)
(365
)
net deferred tax assets (liabilities)
$
$
current deferred tax assets and current deferred tax liabilities are netted by tax jurisdiction and noncurrent deferred tax
assets and noncurrent deferred tax liabilities are netted by tax jurisdiction, and are included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets as follows (amounts in millions):
january31,2010
february1,2009
other current assets
$
$
other assets
other accrued expenses
(6
)
(5
)
deferred income taxes
(319
)
(369
)
net deferred tax assets (liabilities)
$
$
table of contents
the company believes that the realization of the deferred tax assets is more likely than not, based upon the
expectation that it will generate the necessary taxable income in future periods, and except for certain net operating losses discussed below, no valuation reserves have been provided.  at january31, 2010, the company had state and foreign net operating loss carryforwards available to reduce future taxable income, expiring at various dates from 2010 to 2028. management has
concluded that it is more likely than not that the tax benefits related to the net operating losses will be realized. however, certain foreign net operating losses are in jurisdictions where the expiration period is too short to be assured of
utilization. therefore, a valuation allowance has been provided to reduce the deferred tax asset related to net operating losses to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. total valuation allowances at january31, 2010 and
february1, 2009 were $15million and $12million, respectively.  as a result of its sale of hd supply, the company incurred a
tax loss, resulting in a net capital loss carryover of approximately $244million as of january31, 2010. a portion of the net capital loss carryover will expire if not used by 2013 and the remaining portion will expire in 2014. however,
the company has concluded that it is more likely than not that the tax benefits related to the capital loss carryover will be realized based on its ability to generate adequate capital gain income during the carryover period. therefore, no valuation
allowance has been provided.  the company has not provided for u.s.deferred income taxes on approximately $456million of
undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries because of its intention to indefinitely reinvest these earnings outside the u.s.the determination of the amount of the unrecognized deferred u.s.income tax liability related to the
undistributed earnings is not practicable; however, unrecognized foreign income tax credits would be available to reduce a portion of this liability.  on january29, 2007, the company adopted the provisions of fasb asc 740-10 related to uncertainty in income taxes. this guidance requires application of a more likely than not threshold to the recognition and derecognition
of tax positions. it further requires that a change in judgment related to prior years tax positions be recognized in the quarter of such change. this adoption reduced the companys retained earnings at january29, 2007 by $111
million. a reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits for continuing operations is as follows (amounts in millions):
january31,2010
february1,2009
unrecognized tax benefits balance at beginning of fiscal year
$
$
additions based on tax positions related to the current year
additions for tax positions of prior years
reductions for tax positions of prior years
(28
)
(142
)
reductions due to settlements
(94
)
(65
)
reductions due to lapse of statute of limitations
(2
)
(4
)
unrecognized tax benefits balance at end of fiscal year
$
$
the gross amount of unrecognized tax benefits as of january31, 2010 includes $386 million of net unrecognized tax
benefits that, if recognized, would affect the annual effective income tax rate.  the accrual for interest and penalties associated with
uncertain tax positions increased by approximately $41million in fiscal 2009, decreased by $19 million in fiscal 2008 and increased by $32 million in fiscal 2007. total accrued interest and penalties as of january31, 2010 and
february1, 2009 are $138million and $109million, respectively. interest and penalties are included in net interest expense and operating expenses, respectively.  the companys income tax returns are routinely examined by domestic and foreign tax authorities. the companys u.s. federal income tax returns for fiscal years 2005, 2006 and 2007 are currently
under audit by the irs. fiscal year 2006 is currently under audit by the canadian tax authorities. there are also ongoing u.s.
table of contents
state and local and other foreign audits covering tax years 2002 to 2008. at this time, the company does not expect the results from any income tax audit to have a material impact on the
companys financial statements.  the company believes that certain adjustments under examination in certain states will be agreed upon
within the next twelve months. the company has classified approximately $23million of the reserve for unrecognized tax benefits as a short-term liability in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. final settlement of these audit issues
may result in payments that are more or less than these amounts, but the company does not anticipate the resolution of these matters will result in a material change to its consolidated financial position or results of operations.
7.
employee stock plans  the home depot,
inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan (2005 plan) and the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan (1997 plan and collectively with the 2005 plan, the plans) provide that incentive and non-qualified
stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted shares, performance shares, performance units and deferred shares may be issued to selected associates, officers and directors of the company. under the 2005 plan, the maximum number of shares of
the companys common stock authorized for issuance is 255million shares, with any award other than a stock option reducing the number of shares available for issuance by 2.11shares. as of january31, 2010, there were
188million shares available for future grants under the 2005 plan. no additional equity awards may be issued from the 1997 plan after the adoption of the 2005 plan on may26, 2005.  under the terms of the plans, incentive stock options and non-qualified stock options must have an exercise price at or above the fair market value of the
companys stock on the date of the grant. typically, incentive stock options and non-qualified stock options vest at the rate of 25%per year commencing on the first or second anniversary date of the grant and expire on the tenth
anniversary date of the grant. certain of the non-qualified stock options also include performance options which vest on the later of the first anniversary date of the grant and the date the closing price of the companys common stock has been
25% greater than the exercise price of the options for 30 consecutive trading days. additionally, certain stock options may become non-forfeitable upon age 60, provided the associate has had five years of continuous service. the company recognized
$19million, $47million and $61million of stock-based compensation expense in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively, related to stock options.  restrictions on the restricted stock issued under the plans generally lapse according to one of the following schedules: (1)the restrictions on the restricted stock lapse over various periods up to
five years, (2)the restrictions on 25% of the restricted stock lapse upon the third and sixth anniversaries of the date of issuance with the remaining 50% of the restricted stock lapsing upon the associates attainment of age62, or
(3)the restrictions on 25% of the restricted stock lapse upon the third and sixth anniversaries of the date of issuance with the remaining 50% of the restricted stock lapsing upon the earlier of the associates attainment of age60
or the tenth anniversary date. the company has also granted performance shares under the plans, the payout of which is dependent on either (1)the companys total shareholder return percentile ranking compared to the performance of
individual companies included in the s&p 500 index at the end of the three-year performance cycle, or (2)the companys performance against target average return on invested capital and operating profit over a three-year performance
cycle. additionally, certain awards may become non-forfeitable upon the attainment of age60, provided the associate has had five years of continuous service. the fair value of the restricted stock and performance shares is expensed over the
period during which the restrictions lapse. the company recorded stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock and performance shares of $158million, $109million and $122million in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively.  in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, there were an aggregate of 666thousand, 641thousand and 593thousand deferred
shares, respectively, granted under the plans. for associates, each deferred share entitles the individual to one share of common stock to be received up to five years after the grant date of the deferred shares, subject to certain deferral rights
of the associate. additionally, certain awards may become non-forfeitable upon age 60, provided the associate has had five years of continuous service. the company recorded stock-based
table of contents
compensation expense related to deferred shares of $14million, $9million and $10million in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.  as of january31, 2010, there were 2.5million non-qualified stock options outstanding under non-qualified stock option plans that are not part of
the plans.  the company maintains two employee stock purchase plans (espps) (u.s.and non-u.s.plans). the plan for
u.s.associates is a tax-qualified plan under section423 of the internal revenue code. the non-u.s.plan is not a section423 plan. as of january31, 2010, there were 13million shares available under the plan for u.s
associates and 20million shares available under the non-u.s.plan. the purchase price of shares under the espps is equal to 85% of the stocks fair market value on the last day of the purchase period, which is a six-month period
ending on december31 and june30 of each year. during fiscal 2009, there were 3million shares purchased under the espps at an average price of $22.34. under the outstanding espps as of january31, 2010, employees have
contributed $7million to purchase shares at 85% of the stocks fair market value on the last day (june30, 2010)of the purchase period. the company recognized $10million, $11million and $14million of
stock-based compensation expense in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively, related to the espps.  in total, the company recorded stock-based
compensation expense, including the expense of stock options, espps, restricted stock, performance shares and deferred shares, of $201million, $176million and $207million, in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.  the following table summarizes stock options outstanding at january31, 2010,february1, 2009 and february3, 2008, and changes during
the fiscal years ended on these dates (shares in thousands):
numberofshares
weightedaverageexerciseprice
outstanding at january28, 2007
66,141
$
38.20
granted
2,926
37.80
exercised
(6,859
)
28.50
canceled
(9,843
)
40.68
outstanding at february3, 2008
52,365
$
38.98
granted
5,226
26.09
exercised
(777
)
22.55
canceled
(4,800
)
39.14
outstanding at february1, 2009
52,014
$
37.91
granted
4,174
23.29
exercised
(374
)
24.50
canceled
(6,505
)
37.65
outstanding at january31, 2010
49,309
$
36.81
the total intrinsic value of stock options exercised was
$1million, $4million and $63million in fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. as of january31, 2010, there were approximately 49million stock options outstanding with a weighted average remaining life of four years
and an intrinsic value of $39million. as of january31, 2010, there were approximately 39million stock options exercisable with a weighted average exercise price of $39.37, a weighted average remaining life of three years, and an
intrinsic value of $11 million. as of january31, 2010, there were approximately 47million stock options vested or expected to ultimately vest. as of january31, 2010, there was $42million of unamortized stock-based
compensation expense related to stock options which is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of twoyears.
table of contents
the following table summarizes restricted stock and performance shares outstanding at january31, 2010
(shares in thousands):
numberofshares
weightedaverage grantdatefairvalue
outstanding at january28, 2007
10,130
$
39.20
granted
7,091
39.10
restrictions lapsed
(2,662
)
39.01
canceled
(2,844
)
39.37
outstanding at february3, 2008
11,715
$
39.14
granted
7,938
27.14
restrictions lapsed
(1,251
)
34.37
canceled
(2,115
)
34.86
outstanding at february1, 2009
16,287
$
34.22
granted
8,257
23.41
restrictions lapsed
(1,686
)
34.65
canceled
(2,195
)
31.84
outstanding at january31, 2010
20,663
$
30.11
as of january31, 2010, there was $332million of
unamortized stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock and performance shares which is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of threeyears. the total fair value of restricted stock and performance shares
vesting during fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $41million, $33million and $103million, respectively.
8.
leases  the company leases certain retail
locations, office space, warehouse and distribution space, equipment and vehicles. while most of the leases are operating leases, certain locations and equipment are leased under capital leases. as leases expire, it can be expected that, in the
normal course of business, certain leases will be renewed or replaced.  certain lease agreements include escalating rents over the lease terms.
the company expenses rent on a straight-line basis over the lease term which commences on the date the company has the right to control the property. the cumulative expense recognized on a straight-line basis in excess of the cumulative payments is
included in other accrued expenses and other long-term liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.  total rent expense, net of
minor sublease income for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $823million, $846million and $824million, respectively. certain store leases also provide for contingent rent payments based on percentages of sales in excess of specified
minimums. contingent rent expense for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 was approximately $4million, $5million and $6million, respectively. real estate taxes, insurance, maintenance and operating expenses applicable to the leased property
are obligations of the company under the lease agreements.
table of contents
the approximate future minimum lease payments under capital and all other leases at january31, 2010
were as follows (in millions):
fiscal year
capitalleases
operatingleases
$
$
thereafter through 2097
5,258
1,242
$
8,536
less imputed interest
net present value of capital lease obligations
less current installments
long-term capital lease obligations, excluding current installments
$
short-term and long-term obligations for capital leases are included in the accompanying consolidated balance
sheets in current installments of long-term debt and long-term debt, respectively. the assets under capital leases recorded in property and equipment, net of amortization, totaled $299million and $309million at january31, 2010 and
february1, 2009, respectively.
9.
employee benefit plans  the company
maintains active defined contribution retirement plans for its employees (the benefit plans). all associates satisfying certain service requirements are eligible to participate in the benefit plans. the company makes cash contributions
each payroll period up to specified percentages of associates contributions as approved by the board of directors.  the company also
maintains a restoration plan to provide certain associates deferred compensation that they would have received under the benefit plans as a matching contribution if not for the maximum compensation limits under the internal revenue code. the company
funds the restoration plan through contributions made to a grantor trust, which are then used to purchase shares of the companys common stock in the open market.  the companys contributions to the benefit plans and the restoration plan were $161million, $158million and $152million for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. at
january31, 2010, the benefit plans and the restoration plan held a total of 18million shares of the companys common stock in trust for plan participants.
10.
basic and diluted weighted average common shares  the reconciliation of basic to diluted weighted average common shares for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 is as follows (amounts in millions):
fiscal year ended
january31,2010
february1,2009
february3,2008
weighted average common shares
1,683
1,682
1,849
effect of potentially dilutive securities:
stock plans
diluted weighted average common shares
1,692
1,686
1,856
table of contents
stock plans include shares granted under the companys employee stock plans as described in note7
to the consolidated financial statements. options to purchase 48million, 52million and 43million shares of common stock at january31, 2010,february1, 2009 and february3, 2008, respectively, were excluded
from the computation of diluted earnings per share because their effect would have been anti-dilutive.
11.
fair value measurements  the fair value
of an asset is considered to be the price at which the asset could be sold in an orderly transaction between unrelated knowledgeable and willing parties. a liabilitys fair value is defined as the amount that would be paid to transfer the
liability to a new obligor, not the amount that would be paid to settle the liability with the creditor. assets and liabilities recorded at fair value are measured using a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in
measuring fair value. these tiers include:
level1
observable inputs that reflect quoted prices in active markets
level2
inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable
level3
unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring the company to develop its own assumptions assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis  the assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of january31, 2010 are as follows (in millions):
fairvalueatreportingdateusing
level1
level2
level3
available-for-sale securities
$
$
$
derivative agreements - assets
derivative agreements - liabilities
(4
)
total
$
$
$
the companys available-for-sale securities are discussed further
under the caption short-term investments in note1. the companys derivative agreements are discussed further in note5.  assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis  the assets and liabilities that are measured at fair
value on a nonrecurring basis as of january31, 2010 are as follows (in millions):
fairvaluelevel 3
fiscal2009gains(losses)
hd supply investment
$
$
(163
)
store rationalization - lease obligation costs, net
(191
)
(84
)
total
$
(191
)
$
(247
)
during fiscal 2009, the company impaired the remaining value of its investment in hd supply using fair value measurements
with unobservable inputs (level 3), as further discussed in note 4. additionally, lease obligation costs included in the companys rationalization charges were measured on a nonrecurring basis using fair value measurements with unobservable
inputs (level 3), as further discussed in note 2.  long-lived assets and goodwill and other intangible assets were also analyzed for impairment
on a nonrecurring basis using fair value measurements with unobservable inputs (level 3). the company did not record any impairment charges related to goodwill and other intangible assets in fiscal 2009 as further discussed in note 1
table of contents
under the caption goodwill and other intangible assets. impairment charges related to long-lived assets in fiscal 2009 were not material, as further discussed in note 1 under the
caption impairment of long-lived assets.  the aggregate fair value of the companys senior notes, based on quoted market
prices (level 1), was $9.5 billion at january31, 2010 compared to a carrying value of $9.3 billion.
12.
commitments and contingencies  at
january31, 2010, the company was contingently liable for approximately $434million under outstanding letters of credit and open accounts issued for certain business transactions, including insurance programs, trade contracts and
construction contracts. the companys letters of credit are primarily performance-based and are not based on changes in variable components, a liability or an equity security of the other party.  on january27, 2010, the superior court of the county of los angeles in california approved the companys settlement with the plaintiffs in five
lawsuits containing multiple class-action allegations that the company failed to provide meal breaks. the complaints were filed by current and former hourly associates from the first quarter of 2004 through the fourth quarter of 2008. the
disposition of this matter is now complete. as previously disclosed, the company established a reserve for this settlement in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008. the settlement did not have a material effect on the companys consolidated
financial condition or results of operations.
13.
quarterly financial data (unaudited)  the
following is a summary of the quarterly consolidated results of operations from continuing operations for the fiscal years ended january31, 2010 and february1, 2009 (dollars in millions, except per share data):
net sales
grossprofit
earnings(loss)fromcontinuingoperations
basicearningspershare fromcontinuingoperations
dilutedearningspershare fromcontinuingoperations
fiscal year ended january 31, 2010:
first quarter
$
16,175
$
5,450
$
$
0.31
$
0.30
second quarter
19,071
6,388
1,116
0.66
0.66
third quarter
16,361
5,561
0.41
0.41
fourth quarter
14,569
5,013
0.18
0.18
fiscal year
$
66,176
$
22,412
$
2,620
$
1.56
$
1.55
fiscal year ended february 1, 2009:
first quarter
$
17,907
$
6,072
$
$
0.21
$
0.21
second quarter
20,990
6,964
1,202
0.72
0.71
third quarter
17,784
5,994
0.45
0.45
fourth quarter
14,607
4,960
(2
)
0.00
0.00
fiscal year
$
71,288
$
23,990
$
2,312
$
1.37
$
1.37
note: the quarterly data may not sum to fiscal year totals.
table of contents
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure.  not applicable.
item9a.
controls and procedures.  disclosure
controls and procedures  the company maintains disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rule13a-15(e) under the exchange
act) that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the companys exchange act reports is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the secs rules and forms, and that such
information is accumulated and communicated to the companys management, including its chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.  the companys management, with the participation of the companys chief executive officer and chief financial officer, has evaluated the
effectiveness of the companys disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period covered by this report. based on that evaluation, the chief executive officer and the chief financial officer have concluded that, as of the end of
the period covered by this report, the companys disclosure controls and procedures were effective.  internal control over financial
reporting  a report of the companys management on the companys internal control over financial reporting (as such term is
defined in rule 13a-15(f) under the exchange act) and a report of kpmg llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, on the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting are incorporated by reference to
item8, financial statements and supplementary data of this report.  there have not been any changes in the companys
internal control over financial reporting during the fiscal quarter ended january31, 2010 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys internal control over financial reporting.
item9b.
other information.  not applicable.
table of contents
partiii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance.  information required by this item, other than the information regarding the executive officers of the company set forth below, is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled election of
directors and director biographies, board of directors information, general and audit committee report in the companys proxy statement for the 2010 annual meeting of shareholders (the proxy
statement).  executive officers of the company are appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the board of directors. the current
executive officers of the company are as follows:  francis s. blake, age60, has been chairman and chief executive officer since january
2007. from march 2002 through january 2007, he served as the companys executive vice presidentbusiness development and corporate operations.  timothy m. crow, age54, has been executive vice presidenthuman resources since february 2007. from march 2005 through february 2007, he served as senior vice
presidenthuman resources, organization, talent and performance systems and he served as vice presidenthuman resources, performance systems from may 2002 through march 2005. mr.crow previously served as
senior vice presidenthuman resources of k-mart corporation, a mass merchandising company, from may 1999 through may 2002.  marvin r. ellison, age45, has been executive vice presidentu.s.stores since august 2008. from january 2006 through august 2008, he served as presidentnorthern division. from august2005
through january 2006, he served as senior vice presidentlogistics and from october 2004 through august 2005 he served as vice presidentlogistics. from june 2002 through october 2004, he served as vice
presidentloss prevention. from 1987 until june 2002, mr.ellison held various management and executive level positions with target corporation, a general merchandise retailer. his final position with target was director,
assets protection.  craig a. menear, age52, has been executive vice presidentmerchandising since april 2007. from
august 2003 through april 2007, he served as senior vice presidentmerchandising. from 1997 through august 2003, mr.menear served in various management and vice president level positions in the companys merchandising
department, including merchandising vice president of hardware, merchandising vice president of the southwest division, and divisional merchandise manager of the southwest division.  ricardo e. saldvar, age57, has been presidentthe home depot mexico since march 2006. from august 2001 through march 2006, he served as region
presidentmexico. from 1985 to august 2001, mr.saldivar held various management and executive level positions with grupo alfa, a mexican conglomerate. his final position with grupo alfa was president and chief executive
officer of total home.  carol b. tom, age53, has been chief financial officer since may 2001 and executive
vicepresidentcorporate services since january 2007. prior thereto, ms.tom served as senior vice presidentfinance and accounting/treasurer from february 2000 through may 2001 and as vice president and
treasurer from 1995 through february 2000. from 1992 until 1995, when she joined the company, ms.tom was vice president and treasurer of riverwood international corporation, a provider of paperboard packaging. ms.tom
serves as a director of united parcel service, inc. and the federal reserve bank of atlanta.  jack a. vanwoerkom, age56, has been
executive vice president, general counsel and corporate secretary since june 2007. prior thereto, mr.vanwoerkom served as executive vice president, general counsel and secretary of staples, inc., an office products company, from march 2003
through may 2007 and as senior vice president, general counsel and secretary of staples, inc. from march 1999 until march 2003. mr.vanwoerkom serves as a director of wright express corporation.
table of contents
annette m. verschuren, age53, has been president, the home depot canada since march 1996. she also
served as president, the home depot asia from september 2006 to january 2010 and as president, expo design center from april 2003 through october 2005. ms.verschuren serves as a director of liberty mutual holding company inc.
item11.
executive compensation.  the information
required by this item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled executive compensation, compensation discussion& analysis, compensation committee report and director compensation
in the companys proxy statement.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.  the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled beneficial ownership of common stock and
executive compensation in the companys proxy statement.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence.  the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled board of directors information and general in the companys proxy statement.
item14.
principal accounting fees and services.  the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled independent registered public accounting firms fees in the companys proxy statement.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules.  (a)(1)financial statements  the following financial statements are
set forth in item8 hereof:
managements responsibility for financial statements and managements report on internal control over financial reporting;and
reports of independent registered public accounting firm.
consolidated statements of earnings for the fiscal years ended january31, 2010,february1, 2009 and february3, 2008;
consolidated balance sheets as of january31, 2010 and february1, 2009;
consolidated statements of stockholders equity and comprehensive income for the fiscal years ended january31, 2010,february1, 2009 and
february3, 2008;
consolidated statements of cash flows for the fiscal years ended january31, 2010,february1, 2009 and february3, 2008;
notes to consolidated financial statements;
(2)
financial statement schedules  all schedules are omitted as the required information is inapplicable or the information is presented in the consolidated financial statements or related notes.
(b)
exhibits  exhibits marked
with an asterisk (*)are incorporated by reference to exhibits or appendices previously filed with the securities and exchange commission, as indicated by the references in brackets. all other exhibits are filed or furnished herewith, except as
otherwise noted. our current, quarterly and annual reports are filed with the securities and exchange commission under file no.1-8207. our registration statements have the file numbers noted wherever such statements are identified in the
following list of exhibits.
*2.1
purchase and sale agreement, dated as of june19, 2007, by and between the home depot, inc., thd holdings, llc, home depot international, inc., homer tlc, inc. and pro
acquisition corporation. [form 8-k filed on june20, 2007, exhibit 2.1]
*2.2
letter agreement, dated august 14, 2007, by and between the home depot, inc., thd holdings, llc, home depot international, inc., homer tlc, inc. and pro acquisition corporation.
[form 8-k filed on august 15, 2007, exhibit 2.1]
*2.3
amendment, dated august 27, 2007, by and between the home depot, inc., thd holdings, llc, home depot international, inc., homer tlc, inc. and pro acquisition corporation. [form
10-q for the fiscal quarter ended july 29, 2007, exhibit 2.3]
*3.1
amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the home depot, inc. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august 4, 2002, exhibit 3.1]
*3.2
certificate of amendment to amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the home depot, inc. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended may 3, 2009, exhibit
3.2]
*3.3
by-laws of the home depot, inc. (amended and restated effective august 20, 2009) [form 8-k filed on august 26, 2009, exhibit 3.1]
*4.1
indenture, dated as of september 16, 2004, between the home depot, inc. and the bank of newyork. [form 8-k filed september 17, 2004, exhibit
4.1]
table of contents
*4.2
indenture, dated as of may4, 2005, between the home depot, inc. and the bank of new york trust company, n.a., as trustee. [form s-3 (file no. 333-124699) filed may6,
2005, exhibit4.1]
*4.3
form of 3.75%senior note due september 15, 2009. [form 8-k filed on september 17, 2004, exhibit 4.2]
*4.4
form of 4.625%senior note due august 15, 2010. [form 10-k for the fiscal year ended january 29, 2006, exhibit 4.6]
*4.5
form of 5.20%senior note due march 1, 2011. [form 8-k filed march 23, 2006, exhibit 4.1]
*4.6
form of 5.40%senior note due march 1, 2016. [form 8-k filed march 23, 2006, exhibit 4.2]
*4.7
form of floating rate senior note due december 16, 2009. [form 8-k filed december 19, 2006, exhibit 4.1]
*4.8
form of 5.250%senior note due december16, 2013. [form 8-k filed december19, 2006, exhibit4.2]
*4.9
form of 5.875%senior note due december 16, 2036. [form 8-k filed december 19, 2006, exhibit4.3]
*10.1
the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended august 4, 2002, exhibit 10.1]
*10.2
the home depot executive life insurance, death benefit only plan. [form 10-k for the fiscal year ended february 2, 2003, exhibit 10.39]
*10.3
the home depot deferred compensation plan for officers (as amended and restated effective january 1, 2008). [form 8-k filed on august 20, 2007, exhibit 10.1]
10.4
amendment no. 1 to the home depot deferred compensation plan for officers (as amended and restated effective january 1, 2008).
*10.5
the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on may 27, 2005, exhibit 10.8]
10.6
amendment no. 1 to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan and the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan.
*10.7
the home depot futurebuilder restoration plan. [form 8-k filed on august 20, 2007, exhibit10.10]
*10.8
the home depot, inc. non-employee directors deferred stock compensation plan. [form 8-k filed on august 20, 2007, exhibit 10.3]
*10.9
the home depot, inc. management incentive plan (effective february 2, 2008). [form 8-k filed on may 28, 2008, exhibit 10.1]
*10.10
the home depot, inc. amended and restated employee stock purchase plan, as amended and restated effective july 1, 2008. [form s-8 (file no. 333-151849) filed june 23, 2008,
exhibit10.1]
*10.11
form of executive officer restricted stock award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october 31, 2004,
exhibit 10.1]
table of contents
*10.12
form of restricted stock award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march3, 2008, exhibit 10.2]
*10.13
form of u.s. restricted stock award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.1]
*10.14
form of executive officer nonqualified stock option award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october 31,
2004, exhibit10.2]
*10.15
form of nonqualified stock option pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.6]
*10.16
form of executive officer nonqualified stock option award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.4]
*10.17
form of outside director nonqualified stock option award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended october 31,
2004, exhibit10.3]
*10.18
form of nonqualified stock option (non-employee directors) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit
10.5]
*10.19
form of non-employee director nonqualified stock option award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 13, 2009, exhibit
10.5]
*10.20
form of deferred share award (non-employee director) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit
10.2]
*10.21
form of canada deferred share award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.2]
*10.22
form of mexico deferred share award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.3]
*10.23
form of performance vested option award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.9]
*10.24
non-qualified stock option and deferred stock unit plan and agreement dated as of december4, 2000. [form 10-k for the fiscal year ended january 28, 2001, exhibit 10.20]
*10.25
form of performance share award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march27, 2007, exhibit 10.7]
*10.26
form of performance share award (mexico) pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.8]
*10.27
form of ltip performance unit award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 27, 2007, exhibit 10.10]
*10.28
form of performance share award pursuant to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan. [form 8-k filed on march 13, 2009, exhibit 10.6]
*10.29
separation agreement between the company and robert nardelli effective as of january 2, 2007. [form 10-k for the fiscal year ended january 28, 2007, exhibit
10.37]
*10.30
deferred payment trust dated as of january 12, 2007. [form 10-k for the fiscal year ended january 28, 2007, exhibit 10.38]
table of contents
*10.31
employment arrangement between frank blake and the home depot, inc., dated january23, 2007. [form 8-k/a filed on january24, 2007, exhibit 10.1]
*10.32
employment arrangement between carol b. tom and the home depot, inc., dated january 22, 2007. [form 8- k/a filed on january 24, 2007, exhibit 10.2]
*10.33
employment arrangement between craig a. menear and the home depot, inc., dated april 25, 2007. [form 10-k for the fiscal year ended february 3, 2008, exhibit
10.47]
*10.34
non-competition agreement between annette m. verschuren and the home depot, inc., dated may10, 2006. [form 10-k for the fiscal year ended february 3, 2008, exhibit
10.49]
10.35
employment arrangement between marvin r. ellison and the home depot, inc., dated august27, 2008.
*10.36
participation agreement dated as of october 22, 1998 among the home depot, inc. as guarantor; home depot u.s.a., inc. as lessee; hd real estate funding corp. ii as facility lender;
credit suisse leasing 92a l.p. as lessor; the bank of new york as indenture trustee; and credit suisse first boston corporation and invemed associates, inc. as initial purchasers. [form 10-k for the fiscal year ended january 31, 1999, exhibit
10.10]
*10.37
master modification agreement dated as of april 20, 1998 among the home depot, inc. as guarantor; home depot u.s.a., inc., as lessee and construction agent; hd real estate funding
corp., as facility lender; credit suisse leasing 92a l.p. as lessor; the lenders named on the schedule thereto as lenders; and credit suisse first boston corporation as agent bank. [form10-k for the fiscal year ended january 31, 1999,
exhibit 10.13]
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
*18
preferability letter of independent registered public accounting firm. [form 10-q for the fiscal quarter ended november 2, 2008, exhibit 18.1]
list of subsidiaries of the company.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
31.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
32.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to 18u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to 18u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
the following financial information from the annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2010, formatted in xbrl (extensible business reporting language) and
furnished electronically herewith: (i)the consolidated statements of earnings; (ii)the consolidated balance sheets; (iii)the consolidated statements of cash flows; (iv)the consolidated statements of comprehensive income; and
(v)the notes to the consolidated financial statements, tagged as blocks of text.
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to this form pursuant to item15(a) of this report.
table of contents
signatures  pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report
to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the home depot, inc. (registrant)
by:
/s/francis s.
blake
(francis s. blake, chairman& ceo)
date: march22, 2010 pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/francis s. blake (francis s. blake)
chairman& chief executive officer (principal executive officer)
march22, 2010
/s/carol b. tom (carol b. tom)
chief financial officer and executive vicepresident corporate services (principal financialofficer and principal accounting officer)
march22, 2010
/s/f. duane ackerman (f. duane ackerman)
director
march17, 2010
/s/david h. batchelder (david h. batchelder)
director
march22, 2010
/s/ari bousbib (ari bousbib)
director
march24, 2010
/s/gregory d. brenneman (gregory d. brenneman)
director
march24, 2010
/s/albert p. carey (albert p. carey)
director
march24, 2010
/s/armando codina (armando codina)
director
march19, 2010
/s/bonnie g. hill (bonnie g. hill)
director
march19, 2010
/s/karen l. katen (karen l. katen)
director
march24, 2010
table of contents
index of attached exhibits
10.4
amendment no. 1 to the home depot deferred compensation plan for officers (as amended and restated effective january1, 2008).
10.6
amendment no. 1 to the home depot, inc. 2005 omnibus stock incentive plan and the home depot, inc. 1997 omnibus stock incentive plan.
10.35
employment arrangement between marvin r. ellison and the home depot, inc., dated august 27, 2008.
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
list of subsidiaries of the company.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to rule13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
31.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to rule13a-14(a) promulgated under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended.
32.1
certification of chief executive officer, pursuant to 18u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
certification of chief financial officer, pursuant to 18u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
the following financial information from the annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2010, formatted in xbrl (extensible business reporting language) and
furnished electronically herewith: (i)the consolidated statements of earnings; (ii)the consolidated balance sheets; (iii)the consolidated statements of cash flows; (iv)the consolidated statements of comprehensive income; and
(v)the notes to the consolidated financial statements, tagged as blocks of text.
table of contents
10-year summary of financial and operating results  the home depot, inc. and subsidiaries
amounts in millions, except where noted
10-yearcompoundannualgrowth rate
2007(1)
statement of earnings data(2)
net sales
5.6
%
$
66,176
$
71,288
$
77,349
net sales increase (decrease) (%)
(7.2
)
(7.8
)
(2.1
)
earnings before provision for income taxes
0.5
3,982
3,590
6,620
net earnings
1.2
2,620
2,312
4,210
net earnings increase (decrease) (%)
13.3
(45.1
)
(20.1
)
diluted earnings per share ($)
4.5
1.55
1.37
2.27
diluted earnings per share increase (decrease) (%)
13.1
(39.6
)
(11.0
)
diluted weighted average number of common shares
(3.2
)
1,692
1,686
1,856
gross margin% of sales
33.9
33.7
33.6
total operating expenses% of sales
26.6
27.5
24.3
interest and other, net% of sales
1.2
1.1
0.8
earnings before provision for income taxes% of sales
6.0
5.0
8.6
net earnings% of sales
4.0
3.2
5.4
balance sheet data and financial ratios(3)
total assets
9.1
%
$
40,877
$
41,164
$
44,324
working capital
2.6
3,537
2,209
1,968
merchandise inventories
6.4
10,188
10,673
11,731
net property and equipment
9.6
25,550
26,234
27,476
long-term debt
27.7
8,662
9,667
11,383
stockholders equity
4.6
19,393
17,777
17,714
book value per share ($)
7.9
11.42
10.48
10.48
long-term debt-to-equity (%)
44.7
54.4
64.3
total debt-to-equity (%)
49.9
64.3
75.8
current ratio
1.34:1
1.20:1
1.15:1
inventory turnover(2)
4.1x
4.0x
4.2x
return on invested capital (%)(2)
10.7
9.5
13.9
statement of cash flows data
depreciation and amortization
14.6
%
$
1,806
$
1,902
$
1,906
capital expenditures
(9.5
)
1,847
3,558
payments for businesses acquired, net
(100.0
)
cash dividends per share ($)
23.3
0.900
0.900
0.900
store data
number of stores
9.2
%
2,244
2,274
2,234
square footage at fiscal year-end
8.9
(decrease) increase in square footage (%)
(1.3
)
1.3
4.9
average square footage per store (in thousands)
(0.3
)
store sales and other data
comparable store sales increase (decrease) (%)(4)(5)
(6.6
)
(8.7
)
(6.7
)
weighted average weekly sales per operating store (in thousands)
(4.3
)%
$
$
$
weighted average sales per square foot ($)
(4.1
)
number of customer transactions
4.8
1,274
1,272
1,336
average ticket ($)
0.8
51.76
55.61
57.48
number of associates at fiscal year-end(3)
4.6
317,000
322,000
331,000
(1)
fiscal years 2007 and 2001 include 53weeks; all other fiscal years reported include 52weeks.
(2)
fiscal years 2003 through 2009 include continuing operations only. the discontinued operations in fiscal years prior to 2003 were not material. see note 4 to the
consolidated financial statements included in item8, financial statements and supplementary data.
(3)
amounts for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 include continuing operations only. all amounts in other fiscal years reported include discontinued operations. see note
4 to the consolidated financial statements included in item8, financial statements and supplementary data.
f-1
table of contents
amounts in millions, except where noted
2001(1)
statement of earnings data(2)
net sales
$
79,022
$
77,019
$
71,100
$
63,660
$
58,247
$
53,553
$
45,738
net sales increase (decrease) (%)
2.6
8.3
11.7
9.3
8.8
17.1
19.0
earnings before provision for income taxes
8,502
8,967
7,790
6,762
5,872
4,957
4,217
net earnings
5,266
5,641
4,922
4,253
3,664
3,044
2,581
net earnings increase (decrease) (%)
(6.6
)
14.6
15.7
16.1
20.4
17.9
11.3
diluted earnings per share ($)
2.55
2.63
2.22
1.86
1.56
1.29
1.10
diluted earnings per share increase (decrease) (%)
(3.0
)
18.5
19.4
19.2
20.9
17.3
10.0
diluted weighted average number of common shares
2,062
2,147
2,216
2,289
2,344
2,353
2,352
gross margin% of sales
33.6
33.7
33.4
31.7
31.1
30.2
29.9
total operating expenses% of sales
22.4
21.9
22.4
21.1
21.1
20.9
20.7
interest and other, net% of sales
0.5
0.1
(0.1
)
earnings before provision for income taxes% of sales
10.8
11.6
11.0
10.6
10.1
9.3
9.2
net earnings% of sales
6.7
7.3
6.9
6.7
6.3
5.7
5.6
balance sheet data and financial ratios(3)
total assets
$
52,263
$
44,405
$
39,020
$
34,437
$
30,011
$
26,394
$
21,385
working capital
5,069
2,563
3,818
3,774
3,882
3,860
3,392
merchandise inventories
12,822
11,401
10,076
9,076
8,338
6,725
6,556
net property and equipment
26,605
24,901
22,726
20,063
17,168
15,375
13,068
long-term debt
11,643
2,672
2,148
1,321
1,250
1,545
stockholders equity
25,030
26,909
24,158
22,407
19,802
18,082
15,004
book value per share ($)
12.71
12.67
11.06
9.93
8.38
7.71
6.46
long-term debt-to-equity (%)
46.5
9.9
8.9
3.8
6.7
6.9
10.3
total debt-to-equity (%)
46.6
15.2
8.9
6.1
6.7
6.9
10.3
current ratio
1.39:1
1.20:1
1.37:1
1.40:1
1.48:1
1.59:1
1.77:1
inventory turnover(2)
4.5x
4.7x
4.9x
5.0x
5.3x
5.4x
5.1x
return on invested capital (%)(2)
16.8
20.4
19.9
19.2
18.8
18.3
19.6
statement of cash flows data
depreciation and amortization
$
1,886
$
1,579
$
1,319
$
1,076
$
$
$
capital expenditures
3,542
3,881
3,948
3,508
2,749
3,393
3,574
payments for businesses acquired, net
4,268
2,546
cash dividends per share ($)
0.675
0.400
0.325
0.26
0.21
0.17
0.16
store data
number of stores
2,147
2,042
1,890
1,707
1,532
1,333
1,134
square footage at fiscal year-end
(decrease) increase in square footage (%)
4.2
7.0
9.8
10.2
14.1
18.5
22.6
average square footage per store (in thousands)
store sales and other data
comparable store sales increase (decrease) (%)(4)(5)
(2.8
)
3.1
5.1
3.7
(0.5
)
weighted average weekly sales per operating store (in thousands)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
weighted average sales per square foot ($)
number of customer transactions
1,330
1,330
1,295
1,246
1,161
1,091
average ticket ($)
58.90
57.98
54.89
51.15
49.43
48.64
48.65
number of associates at fiscal year-end(3)
364,400
344,800
323,100
298,800
280,900
256,300
227,300
(4)
includes net sales at locations open greater than 12months, including relocated and remodeled stores. stores become comparable on the monday following their
365th day of operation. comparable store sales is intended only as supplemental information and is not a substitute for net sales or net earnings presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
(5)
comparable store sales in fiscal years prior to 2002 were reported to the nearest percent.
f-2
