10-k
d10k.htm
for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005
for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005
united states  securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549    form 10-k
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934   for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005,   or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934   commission file number 1-6991.
wal-mart stores, inc.  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
71-0415188
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(irs employer identification no.)
702 s.w. 8th street bentonville, arkansas
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants
telephone number, including area code: (479) 273-4000   securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, par value $0.10 per share
new york stock exchange pacific stock exchange
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act: none    indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed
by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for at least the
past 90 days.yesxno   indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item
405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form
10-k.x   indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act).yesxno   as of july 31, 2004, the aggregate market value of the voting common stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the
registrant, based on the closing price of those shares on the new york stock exchange on july 31, 2004, was $133,475,003,872. for the purposes of this disclosure only, the registrant has assumed that its directors, executive officers and beneficial
owners of 5% or more of the registrants common stock are the affiliates of the registrant.   the registrant had 4,233,002,095 shares of common stock outstanding as of march 21, 2005.
documents incorporated by reference   portions of our annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005, are incorporated by reference into
parts i and ii of this annual report on form 10-k (this form 10-k). portions of our definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders to be held on june 3, 2005, are incorporated by reference into parts ii and iii of this
form 10-k. those materials are included as exhibits to this form 10-k.   cautionary statement regarding forward-looking statements and information   this annual report on form 10-k, the other reports, statements, and information that we have previously filed or that we may subsequently file with the
securities and exchange commission and public announcements that we have previously made or may subsequently make include, may include, incorporate by reference or may incorporate by reference certain statements that may be deemed to be
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995. the forward-looking statements included or incorporated by reference in this form 10-k and those reports, statements, information and
announcements address activities, events or developments that wal-mart stores, inc. (together with its subsidiaries hereinafter referred to as we, wal-mart or the company) expects or anticipates will or may occur
in the future, including the amount and nature of future capital expenditures, opening of additional stores and clubs in the united states, opening of additional units in the other countries in which we operate, conversion of discount stores into
supercenters, anticipated levels of change in comparative store sales from one period to another period, expansion and other development trends of retail industry, our business strategy, our financing strategy, expansion and growth of our business,
changes in our operations, including the mix of products sold, our liquidity and ability to access the capital markets, our anticipated earnings per share for certain periods, and other similar matters. although we believe the expectations expressed
in the forward-looking statements included in this form 10-k and those reports, statements, information and announcements are based or will be based on reasonable assumptions within the bounds of our knowledge of our business, a number of factors
could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements, whether oral or written, made by us or on our behalf. many of these factors have previously been identified in filings or statements made by
us or on our behalf.   our business operations are subject to
factors outside our control. any one, or a combination, of these factors could materially affect our financial performance, business strategy, plans, goals and objectives. these factors include: the cost of goods, labor costs, the cost of fuel and
electricity, the cost of healthcare, competitive pressures, inflation, accident-related costs, consumer buying patterns and debt levels, weather patterns, currency exchange fluctuations, trade restrictions, changes in tariff and freight rates,
changes in tax law, the outcome of legal proceedings to which we are a party, unemployment levels, interest rate fluctuations, changes in employment legislation and other capital market, economic and geo-political conditions. the foregoing list of
factors that may affect our performance is not exclusive. other factors and unanticipated events could adversely affect our business operations and financial performance. forward-looking statements that we make or that are made by others on our
behalf are based on a knowledge of our business and the environment in which we operate, but because of the factors described and listed above, actual results may differ materially from those contemplated in the forward-looking statements.
consequently, this cautionary statement qualifies all of the forward-looking statements we make herein and that are incorporated by reference herein. we cannot assure the reader that the results or developments anticipated by us will be realized or,
even if substantially realized, that those results or developments will result in the expected consequences for us or affect us, our business or our operations in the way we expect. we caution readers not to place undue reliance on these
forward-looking statements, which speak only as of their dates. we assume no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements.   our business operations, financial condition and results of operations are subject to certain risks. for further information, see the caption risk
factors under item 1. business.
wal-mart stores, inc.  annual report on form 10-k  for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005   part i    item 1. business   general   wal-mart stores, inc. (wal-mart or the company) operates retail stores in various formats around the world. wal-mart is committed
to growing by improving the standard of living for our customers throughout the world. we earn the trust of our customers every day by providing a broad assortment of quality merchandise and services at everyday low prices (edlp) while
fostering a culture that rewards and embraces mutual respect, integrity and diversity. edlp is our pricing philosophy under which we price items at a low price every day so that our customers trust that our prices will not change erratically under
frequent promotional activity. our fiscal year ends on january 31. during the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005, we had net sales of $285.2 billion.   our wal-mart stores segment is the largest segment of our business, accounting for 67.3% of our fiscal 2005 sales. this segment consists of three
different retail formats, all of which operate in the united states, including:
discount stores, which average approximately 100,000 square feet in size and offer a wide assortment of general merchandise and a limited variety of food products;
supercenters, which average approximately 187,000 square feet in size and offer a wide assortment of general merchandise and a full-line supermarket; and
neighborhood markets, which average approximately 43,000 square feet in size and offer a full-line supermarket and a limited assortment of general merchandise.
our sams club segment consists of
membership warehouse clubs which operate in the united states and accounts for 13.0% of our fiscal 2005 sales. our focus for sams club is to provide exceptional value on brand-name merchandise at members only prices for both
business and personal use. our sams clubs average approximately 128,000 square feet in size.   our international segment consists of retail operations in eight countries and puerto rico. this segment generated 19.7% of our fiscal 2005 sales. the
international segment includes several different formats of retail stores and restaurants, including discount stores, supercenters and sams clubs that operate outside the united states. additionally, we own an unconsolidated minority interest
of approximately 37% of the seiyu, ltd. (seiyu), a retailer in japan.   we maintain our principal offices at 702 s.w. 8th street, bentonville, arkansas 72716.   the development of our company   although wal-mart was incorporated in delaware in october 1969, the businesses conducted by our founders began in 1945 when sam m. walton opened a
franchise ben franklin variety store in newport, arkansas. in 1946, his brother, james l. walton, opened a similar store in versailles, missouri. until 1962, our founders business was devoted entirely to the operation of variety stores. in
that year, the first wal-mart discount city, which was a discount store, was opened. in fiscal 1984, we opened our first three sams clubs, and in fiscal 1988, we opened our first supercenter. in fiscal 1999, we opened our first neighborhood
market.   in fiscal 1992, we began our first international
initiative when we entered into a joint venture in mexico, in which we had a 50% interest along with cifra s.a. de c.v. (cifra). in fiscal 1998, we acquired the controlling interest in cifra, and in february 2000, cifra officially
changed its name to wal-mart de mexico, s.a. de c.v. since fiscal 1992, our international presence has continued to expand and at january 31, 2005, we had international operations in argentina, brazil, canada, germany, mexico, puerto rico, south
korea and the united kingdom. we also operate through joint ventures in china and own a minority interest in seiyu.   at january 31, 2005, we operated in the united states 1,353 discount stores, 1,713 supercenters, 551 sams clubs and 85 neighborhood markets.
internationally, at january 31, 2005, the company operated units in argentina (11), brazil (149), canada (262), germany (91), south korea (16), mexico (679), puerto rico (54) and the united kingdom (282). we also operated 43 stores through joint
ventures in china at january 31, 2005. additionally, seiyu then operated 403 stores throughout japan.
our growth, measured both by our net sales and net income, occurs in large measure as a result of our
domestic and international expansion programs along with comparative store sales increases. we consider comparative store sales to be sales at stores that were open as of february 1st of the prior fiscal year and which have not been expanded or
relocated since that date. comparative store sales are also referred to as same-store sales by others within the retail industry. the method of calculating comparative store sales varies across the retail industry. as a result, our
calculation of comparative store sales is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.   the following tables provide summary information concerning the additions of units and square footage for discount stores, supercenters, neighborhood
markets and sams clubs in the united states, and international units in each of our fiscal years from 2001 through 2005.   wal-mart stores segment store count  fiscal years ended january 31, 2001 through 2005   store count (1)
wal-mart discount stores
wal-mart supercenters
fiscal year
opened
closed
conversions(2)
total
opened(2)
total
balance forward
1,801
1,736
1,647
1,066
1,568
1,258
1,478
1,471
1,353
1,713
neighborhood markets
totalwal-martsegment
fiscal year
opened
total
opened(3)
closed
ending balance
balance forward
2,529
2,643
2,744
2,875
3,013
3,151
(1)
totals and ending balances are as of january 31, of the years shown.
(2)
includes conversions and relocations of discount stores to supercenters.
(3)
total opened, net of conversions and relocations of discount stores to supercenters.
wal-mart stores segment net square footage growth  fiscal years ended january 31, 2001 through 2005   net square footage (in thousands) (1)
wal-mart discount stores
wal-mart supercenters
fiscal year
netreductions(2)
total
netadditions(3)
total
balance forward
170,786
130,713
(5,411
)
165,375
31,885
162,598
(7,689
)
157,686
34,844
197,442
(5,773
)
151,913
37,169
234,611
(6,848
)
145,065
40,456
275,067
(9,584
)
135,481
44,989
320,056
neighborhood markets
total wal-mart segment
fiscal year
netadditions
total
netadditions
total
balance forward
301,819
27,052
328,871
1,418
27,675
356,546
2,161
32,139
388,685
2,778
34,225
422,910
3,621
36,248
459,158
(1)
totals are as of january 31, of the years shown.
(2)
includes the square footage of new discount stores opened, net of discount stores closed, converted or expanded into supercenters or relocated into supercenters.
(3)
includes conversions and relocations of discount stores to supercenters.
sams club segment club count  and net square footage growth  fiscal years ended january 31, 2001 through
club count (1)
netsquarefootage(inthousands) (1)
fiscal year
opened
closed
total
net additions
total
balance forward
56,227
1,774
58,001
3,778
61,779
3,968
65,747
2,397
68,144
2,533
70,677
(1)
totals are as of january 31, of the years shown.
international segment unit count  fiscal years ended january 31, 2001 through 2005   store count (1)
argentina
brazil
canada
fiscal year
wal-martsupercenters
wal-martsupercenters
samsclubs
other(2)
total
wal-martstores
samsclubs
total
china
germany
south korea
fiscal year
wal-martsupercenters
samsclubs
neighborhoodmarket
total
supercenters
wal-martsupercenters
mexico
puerto rico
fiscal year
wal-martsupercenters
samsclubs
other(3)
total
wal-martstores
wal-martsupercenters
samsclubs
amigostores
total
united kingdom
storecount
fiscal year
asdastores
asda supercenters
other
total
grandtotal
1,054
1,154
1,272
1,355
1,587
(1)
totals are as of january 31, of the years shown.
(2)
includes 118 units acquired from bompreo s.a. supermercados do nordeste in february 2004.
(3)
at january 31, 2005, includes 162 bodegas (combination discount and grocery stores), 50 suburbias (specialty department stores), 48 superamas (traditional supermarkets) and 269 vips
(restaurants) compared to 140 bodegas, 52 suburbias, 44 superamas and 251 vips at january 31, 2004. excludes vips franchises for all years presented.
international segment net square footage growth  fiscal years ended january 31, 2001 through 2005   net square footage (in thousands) (1)
argentina
brazil
canada
fiscal year
net reductions
total
net additions(2)
total
net additions
total
balance forward
2,341
2,216
19,460
(166
)
2,175
3,035
1,020
20,480
2,175
3,143
2,488
22,968
2,175
3,143
1,774
24,742
2,175
3,370
2,469
27,211
2,175
8,023
11,393
2,742
29,953
china
germany
south korea
fiscal year
netadditions
total
netadditions /(reductions)
total
netadditions
total
balance forward
9,295
1,649
(93
)
9,202
1,266
2,915
4,217
13,419
1,698
1,110
4,025
(157
)
13,262
1,194
2,892
1,688
5,713
13,268
2,909
1,837
7,550
(118
)
13,150
3,104
mexico
puerto rico
united kingdom
grand total
fiscal year
net additions
total
net additions
total
net additions
total
net additions
total
balance forward
19,719
1,749
18,825
75,042
2,310
22,029
1,784
19,278
5,438
80,480
6,904
28,933
2,104
20,220
17,095
97,575
3,173
32,106
1,078
3,182
20,941
8,893
106,468
3,228
35,334
3,478
1,026
21,967
8,957
115,425
3,799
39,133
3,596
1,361
23,328
17,957
133,382
(1)
totals are as of january 31, of the years shown.
(2)
includes 7,581 square feet for the 118 units acquired from bompreo s.a. supermercados do nordeste in february 2004.   much of our growth internationally in recent years has resulted from our
acquisition of existing operations in various countries. during may 2002, the company acquired its initial 6.1% stake in seiyu, a japanese retail chain, for approximately $51 million. in december 2002, the company acquired 192.8 million additional
shares in seiyu for approximately $432 million through the exercise of the first in the series of warrants previously granted to us. following this exercise and our purchase of 29.3 million additional seiyu shares in other seiyu securities
offerings, our ownership percentage in seiyu increased to approximately 37%. through a series of warrants exercisable through 2007, we can contribute approximately 235 billion, or $2.3 billion at a january 31, 2005 exchange rate of 103.68 yen
per dollar, for additional shares of seiyu stock. if the next tranche of warrants is exercised in december 2005, the company will own more than 50% of seiyu. if all the warrants are exercised, we will own approximately 70% of the stock of seiyu by
the end of december 2007.   in december 2002, the company
completed its purchase of supermercados amigo, inc. (amigo), a supermarket chain located in puerto rico with 37 supermarkets at the time of the acquisition. six of the supermarkets were subsequently sold.   in february 2004, the company completed its purchase of bompreo s.a.
supermercados do nordeste (bompreo), a supermarket chain in northern brazil with 118 hypermarkets, supermarkets and mini-markets.
we have provided additional information regarding the accounting treatment of the acquisitions discussed
above in note 6 to the consolidated financial statements which appear in our annual report to shareholders and are incorporated by reference herein and have been included as an exhibit to this annual report.   our industry segments   our retail operations serve our customers primarily through three segments. we identify those segments based on management
responsibility within the united states and in total for international units. the wal-mart stores segment includes our discount stores, supercenters and neighborhood markets in the united states as well as walmart.com. the sams club segment
includes the warehouse membership clubs in the united states as well as samsclub.com. the international segment consists of our operations in argentina, brazil, canada, china, germany, mexico, puerto rico, south korea and the united kingdom. our
share of the results of our unconsolidated 37% minority interest in the japanese retailer, seiyu, is not included in the international segment. you will find information concerning the financial results of our operating segments and the total assets
of each of those segments in note 11 to the consolidated financial statements and in managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition. we have incorporated our consolidated financial statements as of january
31, 2005 and for the year then ended, the notes to the consolidated financial statements, and managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition by reference herein to our annual report to shareholders, which
is included as an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.   wal-mart
stores operating segment   the wal-mart stores segment had
net sales of $191.8 billion, $174.2 billion and $157.1 billion for the fiscal years ended january 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. during the most recent fiscal year, no single discount store, supercenter or neighborhood market location
accounted for as much as 1% of total company sales or net income.   general we operate wal-mart discount stores in all 50 states, supercenters in 45 states and neighborhood markets in 14 states. our discount stores range in size from 30,000 square feet to 220,000 square feet, with the average
size of a discount store being approximately 100,000 square feet. supercenters range in size from 100,000 square feet to 261,000 square feet, with the average size of a supercenter being approximately 187,000 square feet. neighborhood markets range
in size from 38,000 square feet to 55,000 square feet, with the average size being approximately 43,000 square feet. customers can also access a broad assortment of merchandise and services on-line at www.walmart.com.   merchandise wal-mart discount stores and the general
merchandise area of supercenters carry apparel for women, girls, men, boys and infants, domestics, fabrics and notions, stationery and books, shoes, housewares, hardware, electronics, home furnishings, small appliances, automotive accessories,
horticulture and accessories, sporting goods, toys, pet food and pet accessories, cameras and supplies, health and beauty aids, pharmaceuticals, jewelry and optical and provide photo processing services. in addition, our stores offer an assortment
of grocery merchandise. the grocery assortment in our supercenters consists of a full line of grocery items including meat, produce, deli, bakery, dairy, frozen foods and dry grocery. most of our discount stores carry a limited assortment of dry
grocery merchandise while a number of our larger discount stores in some markets carry a broader assortment of grocery items, including perishable items. neighborhood markets are generally organized into departments such as: dry grocery, meat,
produce, deli, bakery, dairy, frozen foods, pharmaceuticals, photo processing, health and beauty aids, household chemicals, paper goods, general merchandise and pet supplies.   nationally advertised merchandise accounts for a significant portion of sales in the wal-mart stores segment. we also market
lines of merchandise under our private-label store brands including sams choice, one source, great value, everstart, everactive, ol roy, puritan,
equate, no boundaries, george, athletic works and kid connection. the company also markets lines of merchandise under licensed brands, some of which include faded glory,
general electric, disney, catalina, mcdonalds, mary-kate and ashley and starter.
during the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005, sales in discount stores and supercenters (which are
subject to seasonal variance) by product category were as follows:
category
percentageof sales
grocery, candy and tobacco
%
hardgoods
%
softgoods and domestics
%
pharmaceuticals
%
electronics
%
health and beauty aids
%
sporting goods and toys
%
stationery and books
%
photo processing
%
jewelry
%
shoes
%
%
operations hours of operation for nearly all supercenters and an increasing number of discount stores and neighborhood markets are 24 hours each day. hours of operation for the remaining discount stores and neighborhood
markets vary by location, but are generally 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., seven days a week. the retail stores in our wal-mart stores segment maintain uniform prices, except where lower prices are necessary to meet local competition. sales are primarily
on a cash-and-carry basis with the objective of maximizing sales volume and inventory turnover while minimizing expenses; however, we also accept personal checks, credit cards and pin-based debit cards at all discount store, supercenter and
neighborhood market locations.   seasonal aspects of
operations the wal-mart stores operating segments business is seasonal to a certain extent. generally, its highest volume of sales occurs in our fourth fiscal quarter, which includes the holiday season, and the lowest volume occurs
during our first fiscal quarter.   competition our
discount stores compete with other discount, department, drug, variety and specialty stores and supermarkets, many of which are national chains. our supercenters compete with other supercenter-type stores, discount stores, supermarkets and specialty
stores, many of which are national or regional chains. we also compete with other retailers for new store sites. as of january 31, 2005, the wal-mart stores segment ranked first, based on net sales, among all retail department store chains
and among all discount department store chains.   our ability to
offer value and service to our customers largely determines our competitive position within the retail industry. we employ many programs designed to meet the competitive pressures within our industry. these programs include the following:
everyday low price (edlp)  our pricing philosophy under which we price items at a low price every day so that our customers trust that our prices will not change
erratically under frequent promotional activity;
rollbacks  our commitment to continually pass internal and external cost savings on to the customer;
store within a store  a program to provide accountability to assistant managers and department managers as to merchandise planning and overall department performance; and
store of the community  a program to ensure that merchandise assortment fits the demographic needs of the local community.   in addition to these programs, we believe our broad assortment of merchandise that provides
one-stop shopping, our high in-stock levels that provide confidence to our customers that we will have what they need, and our long operating hours that allow customers to shop at their convenience provide us with an additional competitive
advantage.   distribution during fiscal 2005,
approximately 81% of the wal-mart stores segments purchases of merchandise were shipped from wal-marts 99 distribution centers, of which 37 are general merchandise distribution centers, 34 are grocery distribution centers, seven are
clothing distribution centers and 16 are specialty distribution centers. the balance of merchandise purchased was shipped directly to stores from suppliers. in addition to serving the wal-mart stores segment, some of our grocery distribution centers
also serve our sams club segment for perishable items. the specialty distribution centers ship merchandise such as jewelry, tires, optical, product returns, and pharmaceuticals. additionally, the company operates four import distribution
centers and one distribution center for online orders placed via walmart.com. the 99 distribution centers are located throughout the continental united
states. eleven distribution centers are located in texas, nine in arkansas; eight in georgia; seven in california; five
in indiana; four in each of florida, new york and ohio; three in each of alabama, missouri, north carolina, pennsylvania and virginia; two each in arizona, illinois, kentucky, louisiana, mississippi, south carolina, tennessee, utah and wisconsin;
and one each in colorado, delaware, iowa, kansas, maryland, michigan, nebraska, new hampshire, new jersey, new mexico, nevada, oklahoma, oregon and washington. general merchandise is transported to stores primarily through our private truck fleet.
however, we contract with common carriers to transport the majority of our perishable and dry grocery merchandise.   sams club operating segment   the sams club segment had net sales of $37.1 billion, $34.5 billion and $31.7 billion for the fiscal years ended january 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively. during the most recent fiscal year, no single club location accounted for as much as 1% of total company sales or net income.   general we operate sams clubs in 48 states. facility sizes for sams clubs generally range between 70,000 and 190,000 square
feet, with the average sams club facility being approximately 128,000 square feet. sams club provides to its members a broad assortment of merchandise and services on-line at www.samsclub.com.   merchandise sams club offers bulk displays of brand name
merchandise, including hardgoods, some softgoods, institutional-size grocery items, and selected private-label items under the members mark, bakers & chefs and sams club brands. generally, each
sams club also carries software, electronics, jewelry, sporting goods, toys, tires, stationery and books. most clubs have fresh departments, which include bakery, meat, produce, floral and sams cafe. additionally, a significant number of
our clubs offer photo processing, pharmaceuticals, optical departments and gasoline stations.   during the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005, sales in the sams club segment, which are subject to seasonal variance, by product category were as follows:
category
percentageof sales
food
%
sundries
%
hardgoods
%
service businesses
%
softgoods
%
%
operations operating hours for sams clubs are monday through friday from 10:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m., saturday from 9:30 a.m. to 8:30 p.m. and sunday from 11:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. additionally, all club locations offer a gold
key program that permits business members to shop before the regular opening hours monday through saturday, starting at 7:00 a.m.   sams clubs are membership only, cash-and-carry operations. limited credit facilities are available, including the sams direct
commercial finance program and business revolving credit available to qualifying business members. also, we make a personal credit program available to qualifying club members and accept the discover card in all clubs. credit
extended to members under these programs is without recourse to the company. typical club members include business owners and operators. individuals who are not business owners can become advantage members by paying a membership fee. in
fiscal 2005, business members paid an annual membership fee of $30 for the primary membership card with a spouse card available at no additional cost. in addition, business members can add up to eight business associates for $30 each. the annual
membership fee for an individual advantage member is $35 for the primary membership card with a spouse card available at no additional cost. the sams club plus membership program offers additional benefits and value on services.
the annual membership fee for a plus member is $100.   seasonal aspects of operations the sams club operating segments business is seasonal to a certain extent. generally, its highest volume of sales occurs in our fourth fiscal quarter, which includes the holiday
season, and the lowest volume occurs during our first fiscal quarter.   competition sams clubs compete with other warehouse clubs, as well as with discount retailers, retail and wholesale grocers and general merchandise wholesalers and distributors. we also compete with other retailers for
desirable new club sites. our ability to offer low prices and quality merchandise to meet the needs of small business members determines our competitive position in the warehouse club industry.   distribution during fiscal 2005, approximately 62% of the
sams club purchases were shipped from the sams club segments dedicated distribution facilities and some of our grocery distribution centers for perishable items. suppliers shipped the balance of the sams club purchases
directly to sams club locations. the principal focus of our sams clubs distribution operations is on crossdocking product, while stored inventory is minimized. crossdocking is a distribution process under which
shipments are directly transferred from inbound to outbound trailers without storage in between. shipments typically
spend less than 24 hours in a crossdock facility, sometimes less than an hour. a combination of seven company-owned and operated distribution facilities and twelve third-party owned and operated facilities constitute the overall distribution
structure for the sams club segment. two of the company-owned and operated facilities are located in texas with single facilities located in arizona, arkansas, colorado, minnesota and indiana. the third-party owned and operated facilities are
in california, florida, georgia, illinois, maryland, michigan, missouri, new hampshire, north carolina, ohio, pennsylvania and washington. sams club uses a combination of our private truck fleet as well as common carriers to transport our
non-perishable merchandise from distribution centers to our clubs. we contract with common carriers to transport our perishable grocery merchandise from distribution centers to our clubs.   international operating segment   our international segment is comprised of our operations through wholly-owned subsidiaries in argentina, canada, germany, puerto rico, south korea, and
the united kingdom, our operations through majority-owned subsidiaries in brazil and mexico and our operations through joint ventures in china. wal-marts portion of the results of our unconsolidated 37% minority interest in japanese retailer,
seiyu, is included in the other segment. the international segments net sales for the fiscal years ended january 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, were $56.3 billion, $47.6 billion and $40.8 billion, respectively. during the most recent fiscal year, no
single unit accounted for as much as 1% of total company sales or net income.   general operating formats vary by country, and include discount stores in canada and puerto rico; supercenters in argentina, brazil, china, germany, south korea, mexico, puerto rico and the united
kingdom; sams clubs in brazil, canada, china, mexico, and puerto rico; superamas (traditional supermarket), bodegas (combination discount and grocery store), suburbias (specialty department store) and vips (restaurant) in mexico; todo dias
(combination discount and grocery store) and balaios (discount food and general merchandise store) in brazil; neighborhood markets (traditional supermarkets) in china; asda stores (combination grocery and apparel store) and george stores (apparel
store) in the united kingdom; and amigo supermarkets in puerto rico.   merchandise the merchandising strategy for the international operating segment is similar to that of our operations in the united states in terms of the breadth and scope of merchandise offered for sale. while brand name
merchandise accounts for a majority of sales, several store brands not found in the united states have been developed to serve customers in the different markets in which the international segment operates. in addition, steps have been taken to
develop relationships with local suppliers in each country to ensure reliable sources of quality merchandise.   operations the hours of operation for operating units in the international segment vary by country and by individual markets within
countries, depending upon local and national ordinances governing hours of operation. while sales are primarily on a cash-and-carry basis, credit cards or other consumer finance programs exist in certain markets to facilitate the purchase of goods
by the customer.   seasonal aspects of operations
the international operating segments business is seasonal to a certain extent. generally, the highest volume of sales occurs in our fourth fiscal quarter. the seasonality of the business varies by country due to different national and
religious holidays, festivals and customs, as well as different climatic conditions.   competition the international operating segment competes with a variety of local, national and international chains in the supermarket, discount, department, drug, variety, specialty and wholesale
sectors of the retail market in each of the countries in which we operate and, in mexico, with local, national and international restaurant chains. our ability to offer our customers low prices on quality merchandise that offers exceptional value in
the international operating segment determines, to a large extent, our competitive position. in our international units, our ability to effectively operate the food departments has a major impact on the segments competitive position in the
markets where we operate.   distribution the
international operating segment operates export consolidation facilities in california, florida, pennsylvania and texas in support of product flow to its mexican, canadian, asian, and latin american markets. we operate a total of 58 distribution
facilities that are located in argentina, brazil, canada, china, germany, mexico, puerto rico and the united kingdom. through these facilities, we process and distribute both imported and domestic product to the operating units. during fiscal 2005,
approximately 76% of the international operating segments purchases flowed through these distribution facilities. suppliers ship the balance of the international operating segments purchases directly to our stores in the various
countries in which we operate. a combination of company-owned and operated distribution facilities and third-party facilities makes up the overall distribution structure for the international operating segment.
employees (associates)   as of january 31, 2005, the company employed approximately 1.7 million associates worldwide, with approximately 1.3 million
associates in the united states and approximately 410,000 associates in foreign countries. in the united states, the company offers a broad range of company paid benefits to our associates, including a profit sharing and 401(k) plan, store discount
cards, bonuses based on company performance, discounted stock purchase program and life insurance. the company also offers health care benefits to eligible full-time and part-time associates. after the first year, the companys medical plan has
no lifetime maximum for most expenses.   in our operations
outside the united states, the company provides a variety of associate benefits which vary based on customary local practices and statutory requirements.   risk factors   the risks described below could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. these risks are not the only
ones that we face. our business operations could also be affected by additional factors that are not presently known to us or that we currently consider to be immaterial to our operations.   general economic and other conditions, both domestically and
internationally, may adversely affect our financial performance.   general economic conditions may adversely affect our financial performance. higher interest rates, higher fuel and other energy costs, higher labor and healthcare costs, unfavorable foreign exchange rates and economic
factors that adversely affect consumer demand for the merchandise we offer, change the mix of products sold to one with a lower average gross margin, result in increased cost of sales, slower inventory turnover and greater markdowns on inventory
could adversely affect the financial performance of our wal-mart stores and sams clubs operations in the united states. high levels of unemployment, inflation, changes in tax and other laws, currency devaluations and other adverse developments
in the economies of the other countries in which we operate may adversely affect consumer demand for our merchandise in those countries, adversely affect our gross margins, cost of sales, inventory turnover and markdowns or otherwise adversely
affect our operations and operating results in those countries.   we may face impediments to our expansion in the united states, including conversions of discount stores into supercenters.   the growth in the net sales and operating net income of our wal-mart stores segment and our sams club segment depends to a substantial degree on our
expansion programs. our expansion strategy depends upon our ability to execute our retail concepts successfully in new markets within the united states and upon our ability to increase the number of stores in markets in which we currently have
operations. our ability to open additional discount stores, supercenters, neighborhood markets and sams clubs and to convert discount stores into supercenters depends in large measure upon our ability to locate, hire and retain qualified
personnel and to acquire new store sites on acceptable terms. local land use and other regulations restricting the construction of buildings of the type in which we operate our various formats may affect our ability to open new stores and clubs, to
convert discount stores into supercenters or to relocate or expand existing units. increased real estate, construction and development costs could limit our growth opportunities and our ability to convert our discount stores into supercenters. if we
are unable to open new discount stores, supercenters, neighborhood markets or sams clubs or continue to convert discount stores into supercenters, our financial performance could be adversely affected. in addition, if consumers in the markets
into which we expand are not receptive to our retail concepts, our financial performance could be adversely affected.   impediments to the expansion of our international operations could adversely affect our financial performance.   our business strategy for our international segment includes expansion by
selective acquisitions and strategic alliances that add new stores and markets to our existing international business, as well as by opening of new units in the countries in which we are currently operating. as in the united states, our ability to
open new stores in our current markets depends in large measure upon our ability to locate, hire and retain qualified personnel and our ability to acquire new store sites on acceptable terms. local laws can affect our ability to acquire attractive
pre-existing buildings in which to locate units or sites on which to build new units. in addition, access to local suppliers of certain types of goods may limit our ability to add new units in certain markets. if we do not effectively execute our
expansion plans for our international segment, our financial performance could be adversely affected.   we can give no assurance that we will continue to identify suitable acquisition candidates at acceptable prices or be successful in consummating the
acquisition of any such candidate. in addition, while we believe we will be ultimately able to integrate successfully any newly acquired operations into our existing operations, no certainty exists that future acquisitions or alliances will be
successfully integrated into our operations or can be successfully integrated in a reasonable time. our failure to identify appropriate candidates for acquisition or alliance or to integrate effectively future acquisitions and alliances into our
existing operations could adversely affect our financial performance.
failure to attract and retain qualified associates and other labor issues could adversely affect
our financial performance.   our ability to continue to
expand our operations in the united states and abroad depends on our ability to attract and retain a large and growing number of qualified associates. our ability to meet our labor needs generally while controlling our associate wage and related
labor costs is subject to numerous external factors, including the availability of a sufficient number of qualified persons in the work force, unemployment levels, prevailing wage rates, changing demographics, health and other insurance costs and
changes in employment legislation. if we are unable to locate, to attract or to retain qualified personnel or if our costs of labor or related costs increase significantly, our financial performance could be affected adversely.   we face strong competition from other retailers and wholesale club
operators.   the retail business is highly competitive.
each of our business segments competes for customers, employees, store sites, products, services and other important aspects of its business with many other local, regional and national retailers, both in the united states and in the foreign
countries in which we have operations. our wal-mart stores segment competes with retailers operating discount, department, drug, variety and specialty stores, supermarkets, supercenter-type stores, hypermarts, as well as internet-based retailers and
catalog businesses. our sams club segment competes with other wholesale club operators. internationally, we compete with retailers who operate department, drug, variety and specialty stores, supermarket, supercenter-type stores, hypermarts,
wholesale clubs, internet-based retailers and catalog businesses. such retailers and wholesale club operators compete in a variety of ways, including merchandise selection, services offered to customers, location and price. our ability to offer
value and service to our customers through various programs, including edlp, rollbacks, store within a store and store of the community, have allowed us to successfully compete against our competitors in most instances. where necessary to compete
effectively with competitors who price merchandise at points lower than the prices we set under our edlp philosophy, we will lower our prices on goods sold. our ability to respond effectively to competitive pressures and changes in the retail
markets could affect our financial performance. see item 1. business. below for additional discussion of our competitive situation.   certain segments of the retail industry are currently undergoing some consolidation, which could result in increased competition and significantly alter
the dynamics of the retail marketplace. such consolidation may result in competitors with greater financial resources, better access to merchandise, greater market penetration and other improvements in their competitive positions. such business
combinations could result in the provision of a wider variety of products and services at competitive prices by such consolidated companies, which could adversely affect our financial performance.   risks associated with the vendors from whom our products are sourced
could adversely affect our financial performance.   the
products we sell are sourced from a wide variety of domestic and international vendors. global sourcing of many of the products we sell is an important factor in our financial performance. all of our vendors must comply with applicable laws,
including labor and environmental laws, and otherwise be certified as meeting our required vendor standards of conduct. our ability to find qualified vendors who meet our standards, and access products in a timely and efficient manner is a
significant challenge, especially with respect to goods sourced outside the united states. political instability, the financial instability of suppliers, suppliers failure to meet our vendor standards, merchandise quality issues, trade
restrictions, tariffs, currency exchange rates, transport capacity and costs, inflation and other factors relating to foreign trade are beyond our control. these and other issues affecting our vendors could adversely affect our financial
performance.   our international operations subject us to
risks associated with the legislative, judicial, accounting, regulatory, political and economic conditions specific to the countries or regions in which we operate.   we currently conduct operations in argentina, brazil, canada, germany, mexico, puerto rico, south korea and the united
kingdom, as well as through joint venture agreements in china. we also own a minority interest in seiyu, a retailer in japan. during fiscal 2005, our international operations generated 19.7% of our net sales. our future operating results in these
countries or in other countries or regions throughout the world could be negatively affected by a variety of factors, most of which are beyond our control. these factors include political conditions, economic conditions, legal and regulatory
constraints, currency regulations and other matters in any of the countries or regions in which we currently operate or intend to operate in the future. in addition, foreign currency exchange rates and fluctuations may have an impact on our future
costs or on future cash flows from our international operations, which could adversely affect our financial performance. other factors which may impact our international operations include foreign trade, monetary and fiscal policies, laws,
regulations and other activities of foreign governments, agencies and similar organizations, and risks associated with having major facilities located in countries which have historically been less stable than the united states. additional risks
inherent in our international operations generally include, among others, the costs and difficulties of
managing international operations, adverse tax consequences and greater difficulty in enforcing intellectual property
rights. the various risks inherent in doing business in the united states generally also exist when doing business outside of the united states, and may be exaggerated by the difficulty of doing business in numerous sovereign jurisdictions due to
differences in culture, laws and regulations.   we are
subject to certain legal proceedings that may affect our financial condition and results of operation.   we are involved in a number of legal proceedings, which include consumer, employment, tort and other litigation. certain of these lawsuits, if decided
adversely to us or settled by us, may result in liability material to the companys financial condition or results of operations. we are currently a defendant in numerous cases containing class-action allegations in which the plaintiffs have
brought claims under federal and state wage and hour laws. in addition, we are a defendant in dukes v. wal-mart stores, inc., a class-action lawsuit brought on behalf of all past and present female employees in all of our retail stores and
wholesale clubs in the united states. the class as certified currently includes approximately 1.6 million present and former female associates. the plaintiffs in this case allege we have engaged in a pattern and practice of discriminating against
women in promotions, pay, training and job assignments and seek, among other things, injunctive relief, front pay, back pay, punitive damages, and attorneys fees. the u.s. district court hearing this case has issued an order granting in part
and denying in part the plaintiffs motion for class certification. we discuss this case and other litigation to which we are party in greater detail below under the caption item 3. legal proceedings and in note 8 to our
consolidated financial statements, which is incorporated by reference in this form 10-k.   our website and availability of sec reports and other information   our corporate website is located at www.walmartstores.com. we make copies of our annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current
reports on form 8-k and any amendment to those reports filed with or furnished to the sec available to investors on or through our website free of charge as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file them with or furnish them to the
sec. our sec filings can be found on the investor relations page of our website, the address of which is: http://investor.walmartstores.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=112761&p=irol-sec. our senior financial officer code of ethics and our statement
of ethics can be located in the corporate governance section of the investor relations webpage at http://investor.walmartstores.com. these documents, as well as our sec filings are available in print to any shareholder who requests a copy
from our investor relations department.   item 2. properties
the number and location of united states and
international wal-mart discount stores, supercenters and sams clubs and other formats is incorporated by reference to the table under the caption fiscal 2005 end-of-year store count included in our annual report to shareholders for
the year ended january 31, 2005, which information we have included as an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.   united states as of january 31, 2005, in the united states, we owned 2,303 of the properties on which discount stores, neighborhood markets
and supercenters were located and 407 of the properties on which our sams clubs were located. in some cases, we own the land associated with leased buildings in which our discount stores, neighborhood markets, supercenters and sams clubs
are located. in the united states, we either lease the remaining buildings in which our present stores and clubs are located from a commercial property developer, lease them pursuant to sale/leaseback arrangements or lease them from a local
governmental entity in connection with industrial revenue bond financing arrangements. all store leases provide for fixed annual rentals and, in many cases, the leases provide for additional rent based on sales volume.   we use independent contractors to construct our buildings.   as of january 31, 2005, we operated 99 wal-mart distribution facilities. we
lease 15 of the distribution facilities under industrial development bond and other financing arrangements that provide us with the option to purchase those facilities at the end of the lease term for nominal amounts. we own seven sams club
distribution facilities.   we own the office facilities in
bentonville, arkansas that serve as our home office. we lease an office facility in brisbane, california that serves as the home office for walmart.com   international we operate our international segment stores and restaurants in a combination of owned and leased properties in each country in
which our international segment operates. as of january 31, 2005, we owned 9 properties in argentina, 80 properties in brazil, 80 properties in canada, 1 property in china, 19 properties in germany, 16 properties in south korea, 344 properties in
mexico, 10 properties in puerto rico and 180 properties in the united kingdom in which the operating units are located, with the remaining units in each country being leased. we utilize both owned and leased properties for office facilities in each
country in which we are conducting business. our international operations are supported by 58 distribution facilities as of january 31, 2005. of these 58 distribution facilities, we owned 32 and leased 10. third parties owned and operated the
remaining 16 distribution facilities.
item 3. legal proceedings   i. supplemental information: we discuss certain legal proceedings pending against us in part ii of this annual report
on form 10-k under the caption item 8. financial statements and supplementary data, in note 8 to our financial statements, which is captioned litigation, and refer you to that discussion for important information concerning
those legal proceedings, including the basis for such actions and, where known, the relief sought. we provide the following additional information concerning those legal proceedings which sets forth the name of the lawsuit, the court in which the
lawsuit is pending and the date on which the petition commencing the lawsuit was filed. in each lawsuits name, the letters wm refer to wal-mart stores, inc.   wage and hour off the clock class actions: adcox v. wm, us dist. ct. (usdc), southern
dist. of tx, 11/9/04; armijo v. wm, 1st judicial dist. ct., rio arriba county, nm, 9/18/00; bailey v.
wm, marion county superior ct. in, 8/17/00; barnett v. wm, superior ct. of wa, king county, 9/10/01; basco v. wm, usdc, eastern dist. of la, 9/5/00; braun v. wm, 1st judicial dist. ct. dakota county mn, 9/12/01; braun v. wm, ct. of common pleas, philadelphia county, pa, 3/20/02; brown v. wm, 14th judicial circuit ct., rock island, il, 6/20/01; carr v. wm, superior ct. of fulton county, ga, 8/14/01; culver v.
wm, usdc, dist. of co, 12/10/1996; carter v. wm, ct. of common pleas, colleton county, sc, 7/31/02; gamble v. wm, supreme ct. of the state of ny, county of albany, 12/7/01; gross v. wm, circuit ct., laurel county, ky,
9/29/04; hale v. wm, circuit ct., jackson county, mo, 8/15/01; hall v. wm, 8th judicial dist. ct.,
clark county, nv, 9/9/99; harrison v. wm, superior ct. of forsyth county, nc, 11/29/00; holcomb v. wm, state ct. of chatham county, ga, 3/28/00; hummel v. wm, common pleas ct. of philadelphia county, pa, 8/30/04; iliadis v.
wm, superior ct. of nj, middlesex county, 5/30/02; kuhlmann (in re: wal-mart employee litigation) v. wm, circuit ct., milwaukee county, wi, 8/30/01; lerma v. wm, dist. ct., cleveland county, ok, 8/31/01; lopez v. wm,
23rd judicial dist. ct. of brazoria county, tx, 6/23/00; mendoza v. wm, superior ct. of ca, ventura county,
3/2/04; michell v. wm, usdc, eastern dist. of tx, marshall div., 9/13/02; montgomery v. wm, usdc, southern dist. of ms, 12/30/02; mussman v. wm, ia dist. ct., clinton county, 6/5/01; nagy v. wm, circuit ct. of boyd
county, ky, 8/29/01; newland v. wm, superior ct. of ca, alameda county, ca, 01/14/05; osuna v. wm, superior ct. of az, pima county, 11/30/01; pickett v. wm, circuit court, shelby county, tn, 10/22/03; pittman v. wm,
circuit ct. for prince georges county, md, 7/31/02; robinson v. wm, circuit ct., holmes county, ms, 12/30/02; sago v. wm, circuit ct., holmes county, ms, 12/31/02; romero v. wm, superior ct. of ca, monterey county,
03/25/04; salvas v. wm, superior ct., middlesex county, ma, 8/21/01; sarda v. wm, circuit ct., washington county, fl, 9/21/01; savaglio v. wm, superior ct. of ca, alameda county, 2/6/01; scott v. wm, circuit ct. of
saginaw county, mi, 9/26/01; smith v. wm, circuit ct., holmes county, ms, 12/31/02; thiebes v. wm, usdc, dist. of or, 6/30/98; willey v. wm, dist. ct. of wyandotte county, ks, 9/21/01; williams v. wm, superior ct. of ca,
alameda county, 3/23/04; wilson v. wm, common pleas ct. of butler county, oh, 10/27/03; winters v. wm, circuit ct., holmes county, ms, 5/28/02.   california labor code cases: cruz v. wm, superior ct. of ca, los angeles county, 10/24/03; fries v. sams and wm, superior ct.
of ca, los angeles county, 06/28/04.   exempt status
cases: fox v. wm, usdc, middle dist. of tn, 01/27/05; ramsey v. wm, usdc, western dist. of mi, northern div., 12/23/02; comer v. wm, western dist. of mi, northern div., 2/27/04; highland v. wm, usdc, dist. of nm,
06/24/04; sepulveda v. wm, superior ct. of ca, los angeles county, ca, 1/14/04.   dukes v. wm: dukes v. wm, usdc, northern dist. of ca, san francisco div., 6/19/01.   coli litigation: mayo v. hartford life ins. co., usdc, southern dist. of tx, houston div., 6/28/01; waller v. aig life ins. co.,
usdc, northern dist. of tx, fort worth div., 7/3/01; miller v. wm, usdc, southern dist. of tx, houston div., 10/22/02; lewis v. wm, usdc, northern dist. of ok, 12/18/02.   mauldin v. wm: mauldin v. wm, usdc, northern dist. of ga, atlanta div., 10/16/01.   eeoc (smith) v. wm: eeoc (smith) v. wm, usdc, eastern
dist. of ky, london div., 8/31/01.   ii. environmental
matters: item 103 of sec regulation s-k requires disclosure of certain environmental matters. the following matters are disclosed in accordance with that requirement:   during fiscal 2001, the state of connecticut filed suit against the company in the superior court for the judicial district
of hartford alleging various violations of state environmental laws and alleging that the company failed to obtain the appropriate permits or failed to maintain required records relating to storm water management practices at 12 stores. in december
2003, the state filed an amended complaint alleging that the company also had discharged wastewater associated with vehicle maintenance activities and photo processing activities without proper permits. the suit seeks to ensure the companys
compliance with the general permits applicable to those activities.
the united states environmental protection agency (epa) and the states of tennessee and utah
have alleged that the company and some of its construction contractors have violated the epas stormwater regulations at specified sites around the country. on july 31, 2003, the company served the epa with a notice of dispute as required by a
national consent decree entered into between the company and the epa in august 2001. serving the notice of dispute initiated an informal dispute resolution process in accordance with the terms of the consent decree. the company has settled these
allegations without admitting any wrongdoing or violations of the regulations by agreeing to pay a $3.1 million civil penalty and entering into a new consent decree. the parties are awaiting entry by the court of the final consent decree.
in august 2003, the company was served with a grand jury
subpoena in connection with an investigation by the office of district attorney of harris county, texas, seeking information related to the waste disposal activities of one of the companys photo processing labs. the company is cooperating with
the investigation.   iii. immigration matter: on march 18, 2005, the u.s.
attorneys office for the middle district of pennsylvania announced the conclusion and settlement, on a civil basis, of its grand jury investigation into the companys potential violations of federal immigration laws involving certain
third-party contractors that provided floor cleaning services to certain wal-mart stores, and those contractors alleged employment of undocumented workers. as part of the civil settlement, the company has agreed to cooperate with the
governments ongoing investigation; to pay $11 million to support future law enforcement activities by the bureau of immigration and customs enforcement; to provide training to store managers on relevant immigration laws and regulations; and to
put controls in place to ensure that third-party contractors are taking reasonable steps to comply with immigration laws.   on november 10, 2003, a civil action was filed against the company in the united states district court for the district of new jersey, captioned
zavala, et al. v. wal-mart corporation, et al., case no. 03-cv-5309. this complaint asserts claims under the fair labor standards act (flsa), the racketeer influenced corrupt organizations act, and various statutory causes of
action and common law torts arising from the companys relationship with certain third-party contractors responsible for providing floor cleaning services in its stores. in december 2004, the district court conditionally certified the
plaintiffs wage claims for notice purposes under the flsa. any potential liability on the part of the company cannot be determined at this time.   item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders   no matters were submitted to a vote of the companys security holders during the last quarter of the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005.
part ii    item 5. market for the registrants common equity, related shareholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities   certain
information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the number of shareholders of record under the caption 11-year financial summary, and all the information under the captions market price of common
stock, listingsstock symbol: wmt and dividends per common share included in the annual report to shareholders for the year ended january 31, 2005. such information is included in an exhibit to this annual report
on form 10-k.   information about our equity compensation plans
is incorporated by reference to all information under the caption equity compensation plan information included in the companys definitive proxy statement for its annual meeting of shareholders to be held on friday, june 3, 2005
(the proxy statement).   in september 2004, our
board of directors approved a new $10.0 billion share repurchase program, separate from and replacing the previous $7.0 billion program approved in january 2004. shares purchased under our share repurchase programs are constructively retired and
returned to unissued status. there is no expiration date for or other restriction limiting the period during which we can make our share repurchases under the current program. the current program will expire if and when we have repurchased an
aggregate of $10.0 billion of shares pursuant to the program.
the following table sets forth information on the companys common stock repurchase program activity
based on trade date for the quarter ended january 31, 2005 (amounts in thousands, except per share amounts):
period
totalnumberof sharesrepurchased(1)
averagepricepaidper share
totalnumberofsharespurchasedaspart of publiclyannouncedprograms
maximumdollarvalueofshares that may yet bepurchased under the programs
november 1, 2004 through november 30, 2004
$
53.26
$
9,785,470
december 1, 2004 through december 31, 2004
2,330
$
52.68
2,330
$
9,662,728
january 1, 2005 through january 31, 2005
$
53.15
$
9,662,728
total fourth quarter
2,855
$
52.78
2,850
$
9,662,728
(1)
includes a nominal amount of shares repurchased from associates to satisfy the exercise price and tax withholding of certain stock option exercises.   item 6. selected financial data   the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to all
information under the caption 11-year financial summary included in the annual report to shareholders for the year ended january 31, 2005. such information is included in an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.   item 7. managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and
financial condition   the information required by this
item is incorporated by reference to all information under the caption managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition included in the annual report to shareholders for the year ended january
31, 2005. such information is included in an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.   item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk   the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to all information under the sub-caption market risk of the caption
managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition included in the annual report to shareholders for the year ended january 31, 2005. such information is included in an exhibit to this annual
report on form 10-k.   item 8. financial statements and supplementary
data   the information required by this item is
incorporated by reference to all information under the captions consolidated statements of income, consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of shareholders equity, consolidated statements
of cash flows, notes to consolidated financial statements and report of independent auditors included in the annual report to shareholders for the year ended january 31, 2005. such information is included in an exhibit
to this annual report on form 10-k.   item 9. changes in and disagreements
with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure   none.   item 9a. controls and procedures   evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures   the company maintains a system of disclosure controls and procedures that
are designed to provide reasonable assurance that information, which is required to be timely disclosed, is accumulated and communicated to management in a timely fashion. an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of
wal-marts disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rule 13a-15(e) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (the exchange act))(disclosure controls) was performed as of the end of the period covered by
this report. this evaluation was performed under the supervision and with the participation of the companys management, including the companys chief executive officer and chief financial officer. based upon that evaluation, the
companys chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that these disclosure controls are effective to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by the company in the reports that it files or
submits under the exchange act is accumulated and communicated to the companys management, including its chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure and are
effective to provide reasonable assurance that such information is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified by the secs rules and forms.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting   managements report on internal control over financial reporting and
the attestation report of ernst & young llp, the companys independent registered public accounting firm, on managements assessment of internal control over financial reporting are included in our annual report to shareholders for the
year ended january 31, 2005 and are incorporated in this item 9a by reference. our annual report to shareholders is included as an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.   changes in internal control over financial reporting   there has been no change in the companys internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fiscal
quarter ended january 31, 2005 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys internal control over financial reporting.   part iii    item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant   information required by this item with respect to the companys directors and compliance by the companys directors, executive officers and
certain beneficial owners of the companys common stock with section 16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934 is incorporated by reference to all information under the captions entitled nominees for election to the board of
directors and section 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance from our proxy statement.   executive officers of the registrant   the following chart names each of the executive officers of the company, each of whom is elected by and serves at the pleasure of the board of directors.
the business experience shown for each officer has been his principal occupation for at least the past five years.
name
business experience
currentpositionheldsince
age
michaelt.duke
executive vice president and president and chief executive officer of the wal-mart stores division. from july 2000 to april 2003, he served as executive vice president of administration. from
march 2000 to july 2000, he served as executive vice president of logistics. from july 1995 to march 2000, he served as senior vice president of logistics. prior to july 1995, he served as senior vice president of distribution.
davidd.glass
chairman, executive committee of the board. prior to january 2000, he served as president and chief executive officer of the company.
charlesm.holley,jr.
senior vice president and controller. from march 1999 to january 2003, he served as senior vice president, finance and chief financial officer of wal-mart international. from october 1996 to
march 1999 he served as vice president and chief financial officer of wal-mart international.
thomas d. hyde
executive vice president and corporate secretary. from july 2001 to june 2002, he served as executive vice president and senior general counsel. prior to july 2001, he served as senior vice
president and general counsel of raytheon company since 1992.
lawrencev.jackson
executive vice president, people division. before joining wal-mart, he served as president and chief operating officer of dollar general corporation since september 2003. prior to dollar
general corporation, he was senior vice president of supply operations for safeway inc.
john b. menzer
executive vice president and president and chief executive officer of wal-mart international. prior to june 1999, he served as executive vice president and chief financial officer of the
company.
thomasm.schoewe
executive vice president and chief financial officer. from february 1997 to january 2000, he served as senior vice president and chief financial officer of black & decker corporation.
prior to february 1997, he served as vice president and chief financial officer of black & decker corporation.
h. lee scott, jr.
president and chief executive officer. from january 1999 to january 2000, he served as vice chairman and chief operating officer of the company. from january 1998 to january 1999, he served
as executive vice president and president and chief executive officer of the wal-mart stores division. prior to january 1998, he served as executive vice president  merchandising of the company.
b. kevin turner
executive vice president and president and chief executive officer of the sams club division. from september 2001 to august 2002, he served as executive vice president and chief
information officer of the information systems division. from march 2000 to september 2001, he served as senior vice president and chief information officer of the information systems division.
s. robson walton
chairman of the board.
additional information
regarding our board and committee governing documents, our audit committee, our director nomination process, and our codes of ethics for senior financial officers and other associates required by this item is incorporated by reference to all
information under the caption entitled corporate governance included in our proxy statement.   item 11. executive compensation   the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to all information under the caption entitled compensation of directors, compensation, nominating and governance committee report on
executive compensation, summary compensation, option grants in last fiscal year, long-term incentive plan-awards in fiscal 2005, termination of employment arrangements and aggregated option
exercises in last fiscal year and fiscal year end option values included in our proxy statement.   item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management   the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to all information under the caption entitled stock ownership, subcaptions
holdings of major shareholders and holdings of officers and directors included in our proxy statement. in addition, please refer to part ii, item 5 of this annual report on form 10-k for information relating to equity
compensation.   item 13. certain relationships and related
transactions   the information required by this item is
incorporated by reference to all information under the caption related-party transactions included in our proxy statement.   item 14. principal accountant fees and services   the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to all information under the caption ratification of independent
accountants included in our proxy statement.
part iv   item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules   (a) (1) and (2) consolidated financial statements   the financial statements listed in the following table which are included in our annual report to shareholders, are
incorporated by reference herein or filed as part of this annual report on form 10-k. the financial statements can be located at exhibit 13 filed herewith.
annual report to shareholders(page)
covered by report of independent registered public accounting firm:
consolidated statements of income for each of the three years in the period ended january 31, 2005
consolidated balance sheets at january 31, 2005 and 2004
consolidated statements of shareholders equity for each of the three years in the period ended january 31, 2005
consolidated statements of cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended january 31, 2005
notes to consolidated financial statements, except note 12
not covered by report of independent registered public accounting firm:
note 12quarterly financial data (unaudited)
all schedules have been omitted
because the required information is not present or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the financial statements, including the notes thereto.
(3)
exhibits   the following documents are filed as exhibits to this form 10-k:
(a)
restated certificate of incorporation of the company is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3(a) from the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the year ended january 31,
1989, the certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of incorporation is incorporated herein by reference to registration statement on form s-8 (file number 33-43315) and the certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of
incorporation is incorporated hereby by reference to the current report on form 8-k dated june 27, 1999.
(b)
amended and restated bylaws of the company-are incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated march 8, 2005.
(a)
form of indenture dated as of june 1, 1985, between the company and bank of new york, trustee, (formerly boatmens trust company and centerre trust company) is incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 4(c) to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 2-97917).
(b)
form of indenture dated as of august 1, 1985, between the company and bank of new york, trustee, (formerly boatmens trust company and centerre trust company) is incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 4(c) to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 2-99162).
(c)
form of amended and restated indenture, mortgage and deed of trust, assignment of rents and security agreement dated as of december 1, 1986, among the first national bank of boston and james
e. mogavero, owner trustees, rewal corporation i, estate for years holder, rewal corporation ii, remainderman, the company and the first national bank of chicago and r.d. manella, indenture trustees, is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit
4(b) to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 33-11394).
4(d)
form of indenture dated as of july 15, 1990, between the company and harris trust and savings bank, trustee, is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4(b) to registration statement on
form s-3 (file number 33-35710).
4(e)
indenture dated as of april 1, 1991, between the company and the first national bank of chicago, trustee, is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4(a) to registration statement on form
s-3 (file number 33-51344).
4(f)
first supplemental indenture dated as of september 9, 1992, to the indenture dated as of april 1, 1991, between the company and the first national bank of chicago, trustee, is incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit 4(b) to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 33-51344).
4(g)
indenture dated as of july 5, 2001, between the company and bank one trust company, na, is incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to registration statement on form s-3 (file number
333-64740).
4(h)
indenture dated as of december 11, 2002, between the company and bank one trust company, na, is incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.5 to registration statement on form s-3 (file number
333-101847).
+10(a)
form of individual deferred compensation agreements is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(b)from the annual report on form 10-k of the company, as amended, for the fiscal year
ended january 31, 1986. this document is located in the securities and exchange commissions public reference room in washington, d.c. in the securities and exchange commissions file no. 1-6991.
+10(b)
wal-mart stores, inc. stock option plan of 1984 is incorporated herein by reference to registration statement on form s-8 (file number 2-94358).
+10(c)
1991 amendment to the wal-mart stores, inc. stock option plan of 1984 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(h) from the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the year
ended january 31, 1992. this document is located in the securities and exchange commissions public reference room in washington, d.c. in the securities and exchange commissions file no. 1-6991.
+10(d)
1993 amendment to the wal-mart stores, inc. stock option plan of 1984 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(i) from the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the year
ended january 31, 1993. this document is located in the securities and exchange commissions public reference room in washington, d.c. in the securities and exchange commissions file no. 1-6991.
+10(e)
wal-mart stores, inc. stock option plan of 1994 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4(c) to registration statement on form s-8 (file number 33-55325).
+10(f)
wal-mart stores, inc. director compensation plan is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4(d) to registration statement on form s-8 (file number 333-24259).
+10(g)
wal-mart stores, inc. officer deferred compensation plan as amended and restated effective march 31, 2003 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(g) from the annual report on form
10-k of the company for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2004, filed on april 9, 2004.
+10(h)
wal-mart stores, inc. restricted stock plan is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(j) from the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the fiscal year ended january 31,
1997.
+10(i)
1996 amendment to the wal-mart stores, inc. stock option plan of 1994 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(j) from the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the fiscal
year ended january 31, 1998.
+10(j)
1997 amendment to the wal-mart stores, inc. stock option plan of 1994 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(k) from the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the fiscal
year ended january 31, 1998.
+10(k)
wal-mart stores, inc. stock incentive plan of 1998 as amended through january 15, 2004 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(k) to the annual report on form 10-k of the company
for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2004, filed on april 9, 2004.
+10(l)
wal-mart stores, inc. management incentive plan of 1998 as amended and restated effective february 1, 2003 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(l) to the annual report on form 10-k
of the company for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2004, filed on april 9, 2004.
+*10(m)
the rules of the asda sharesave plan 2000, as amended june 4, 2004.
+*10(n)
the asda colleague share ownership plan 1999, as amended june 4, 2004.
+10(o)
retirement agreement, dated january 22, 2005 between the company and thomas m. coughlin is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated
january 25, 2005.
+*10(p)
notice of non qualified stock option grant, as amended january 3, 2005.
+*10(q)
notification of restricted stock award and terms and conditions of award, as amended january 3, 2005.
+*10(r)
notification of stock value equivalent award and terms and conditions of award.
+10(s)
form of post -termination agreement and covenant not to compete with attached schedule of executive officers who have executed a post-termination agreement and covenant not to compete,
together with summary of material differences from form of agreement filed is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(o) from amendment no. 1 to the annual report on form10-k of the company for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2004, filed
august 26, 2004.
+*10(t)
wal-mart stores, inc. 2004 associate stock purchase plan, as amended and restated effective as of february 1, 2004.
*12
statement re computation of ratios.
*13
the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ending january 31, 2005. all information incorporated by reference in items 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 7a, 8 and 9a of this annual report on form
10-k from the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005 is filed with the commission. the balance of this information in the annual report to shareholders will be furnished to the commission in accordance with item
601(13) of regulation s-k.
*21
list of the companys subsidiaries.
*23
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
*31
chief executive officer and chief financial officer section 302 certifications.
**32
chief executive officer and chief financial officer section 906 certifications.
*
filed herewith as an exhibit.
**
furnished herewith as an exhibit.
+
management contracts and compensatory plans and arrangements required to be filed as exhibits pursuant to item 15(b) of this report.
signatures   pursuant to the requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.   wal-mart stores, inc.
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ h. lee scott, jr.
h. lee scott, jr. president and chief executive officer
pursuant to the
requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated:
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ h. lee scott, jr.
h. lee scott, jr. president, chief executive officer and director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ s. robson walton
s. robson walton chairman of the board and
director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ david d. glass
david d. glass chairman, executive
committee of the board and director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ thomas m. schoewe
thomas m. schoewe executive vice president
and chief financial officer (principal financial
officer)
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ charles m. holley, jr.
charles m. holley, jr. senior vice president and
controller (principal accounting officer)
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ james w. breyer
james w. breyer director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ m. michele burns
m. michele burns director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ douglas n. daft
douglas n. daft director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ roland a. hernandez
roland a. hernandez director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ john d. opie
john d. opie director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ j. paul reason
j. paul reason director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ jack c. shewmaker
jack c. shewmaker director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ jose h. villarreal
jose h. villarreal director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ john t. walton
john t. walton director
date: march 31, 2005
by
/s/ christopher j. williams
christopher j. williams director
