10-k
d10k.htm
form 10-k (1/31/2007)
form 10-k (1/31/2007)
united states  securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549   form 10-k
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934  for the fiscal year ended january31, 2007,  or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934   commission file number 1-6991.
wal-mart stores, inc.  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
71-0415188
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(irs employer identification no.)
702 s.w. 8th street bentonville, arkansas
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (479)273-4000  securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which
registered(1)
common stock, par value $0.10 per share
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act: none   indicate by check mark if the
registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act. yesxno indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the exchangeact.yesnox  indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and
(2)has been subject to such filing requirements for at least the past 90 days.yesxno indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
item405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to
this form 10-k. indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated filer in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.
large accelerated filerxaccelerated filernon-accelerated filer indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell
company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act).yesnox  as of july31, 2006, the aggregate market value of the voting common stock of the registrant held by
non-affiliates of the registrant, based on the closing sale price of those shares on the new york stock exchange reported on july31, 2006, was $108,716,199,532. for the purposes of this disclosure only, the registrant has assumed that its
directors, executive officers and beneficial owners of 5% or more of the registrants common stock are the affiliates of the registrant.  the registrant had 4,124,451,341 shares of common stock outstanding as of march 16, 2007.  documents incorporated by reference
document
parts into which incorporated
portions of annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended january31, 2007 (annual report to shareholders) included as an exhibit to this form 10-k
parts i and ii
portions of proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders to be held june1, 2007 (proxy statement)
part iii
(1)
the registrant voluntarily withdrew its listing of shares of its common stock from nyse arca, inc., effective december, 19, 2006, to eliminate duplicative administrative
requirements inherent with dual listings as a result of the nyse group, inc.s recent merger with archipelago holdings, the parent company of nyse arca, inc.
cautionary statement regarding forward-looking statements and information  this annual report on form 10-k, the other reports, statements, and information that wal-mart stores, inc. (together with its subsidiaries hereinafter
referred to as we, wal-mart or the company) have previously filed or that we may subsequently file with the securities and exchange commission (sec) and public announcements that we have previously
made or may subsequently make include, may include, incorporate by reference or may incorporate by reference certain statements that may be deemed to be forward-looking statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995 and are intended to enjoy the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements provided by that act. the forward-looking statements included or incorporated by reference in this form 10-k and that are or may be
included or incorporated by reference in those reports, statements, information and announcements address activities, events or developments that we expect or anticipate will or may occur in the future, including or relating, but not limited to, the
amount and nature of future capital expenditures, opening of additional stores and clubs in the united states, opening of additional units in the other countries in which we operate, conversion of discount stores into supercenters, remodeling of or
special projects at existing units, anticipated levels of change in comparable store sales from one period to another period, expansion and other development trends of the retail industry, our ability to integrate newly acquired operations into our
existing operations, our business strategy, our financing strategy, expansion and growth of our business, our capital expenditures, changes in our operations, including the mix of products sold, our liquidity and ability to access the capital
markets, our anticipated earnings per share for certain periods, our expected comparable store sales for certain periods and other similar matters. forward-looking statements are often identified by the use of words or phrases such as
anticipate, believe, could occur, could result, estimate, expect, forecast, plan, will be, and will continue. although we believe
the expectations expressed in the forward-looking statements included in this form 10-k and those reports, statements, information and announcements are based or will be based on reasonable assumptions within the bounds of our knowledge of our
business, a number of factors could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements, whether oral or written, made by us or on our behalf. many of these factors have previously been
identified in filings or statements made by us or on our behalf.  our business operations are subject to factors outside our control. any
one, or a combination, of these factors could materially affect our financial performance, business operations, business strategy, plans, goals and objectives. these factors include, but are not limited to: the cost of goods, information security
costs, labor costs, the cost of fuel and electricity, the cost of healthcare benefits, insurance costs, the cost of construction materials, competitive pressures, inflation, accident-related costs, consumer buying patterns and debt levels, weather
patterns, catastrophic events, transport of goods from foreign suppliers, currency exchange fluctuations, trade restrictions, changes in tariff and freight rates, adoption of or changes in tax and other laws and regulations that affect our business,
the outcome of legal proceedings to which we are a party, unemployment levels, interest rate fluctuations, changes in employment legislation and other capital market, economic and geo-political conditions and events. moreover, we typically earn a
disproportionate part of annual operating income in the fourth quarter as a result of the seasonal buying patterns. those buying patterns are difficult to forecast with certainty. the foregoing list of factors that may affect our performance is not
exclusive. other factors and unanticipated events could adversely affect our business operations and financial performance. readers are urged to consider all of these risks, uncertainties and other factors carefully in evaluating the forward-looking
statements. forward-looking statements that we make or that are made by others on our behalf are based on a knowledge of our business and the environment in which we operate, but because of the factors described and listed above, as well as other
factors, or as a result of changes in facts, assumptions not being realized or other circumstances, actual results may differ materially from those contemplated in the forward-looking statements. consequently, this cautionary statement qualifies all
of the forward-looking statements we make herein and that are incorporated by reference herein. we cannot assure the reader that the results or developments expected or anticipated by us will be realized or, even if substantially realized, that
those results or developments will result in the expected consequences for us or affect us, our business or our operations in the way we expect. we caution readers not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements, which speak only as
of their dates. we undertake no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances except to the extent required by applicable law.  for further information regarding certain risks applicable to our business operations, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, see
item 1a. risk factors.
wal-mart stores, inc.  annual report on form 10-k  for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2007  part i
item1.
business  general  wal-mart stores, inc. (wal-mart, the company or we) operates retail stores in various formats around the world and is
committed to saving people money so they can live better. we earn the trust of our customers every day by providing a broad assortment of quality merchandise and services at every day low prices (edlp) while fostering a culture that
rewards and embraces mutual respect, integrity and diversity. edlp is our pricing philosophy under which we price items at a low price every day so that our customers trust that our prices will not change erratically under frequent promotional
activity. our fiscal year ends on january31. during the fiscal year ended january31, 2007, we had net sales of $345.0 billion.  our wal-mart stores segment is the largest segment of our business, accounting for 65.6% of our fiscal 2007 net sales. this segment consists of three different traditional retail formats, all of which operate in the united states, and
wal-marts online retail format, walmart.com. our traditional wal-mart stores retail formats include:
supercenters, which average approximately 187,000 square feet in size and offer a wide assortment of general merchandise and a full-line supermarket;
discount stores, which average approximately 107,000 square feet in size and offer a wide assortment of general merchandise and a limited variety of food products;
and
neighborhood markets, which average approximately 42,000 square feet in size and offer a full-line supermarket and a limited assortment of general merchandise.
our sams club segment consists of membership warehouse clubs, which operate in the united states, and the
segments online retail format, samsclub.com. sams club accounted for 12.1% of our fiscal 2007 net sales. our focus for sams club is to provide exceptional value on brand-name merchandise at members only prices for both
business and personal use. our sams clubs average approximately 132,000 square feet in size.  at january31, 2007, our
international segment consisted of retail operations in 12 countries and puerto rico. this segment generated 22.3% of our fiscal 2007 net sales. the international segment includes several different formats of retail stores and restaurants, including
discount stores, supercenters and sams clubs that operate outside the united states.  we maintain our principal offices at 702 s.w.
8th street, bentonville, arkansas 72716, usa.
the development of our company  although wal-mart was incorporated in delaware in october 1969, the businesses conducted by our founders began in 1945 when sam m. walton opened a franchise ben franklin variety store in newport, arkansas. in 1946,
his brother, james l. walton, opened a similar store in versailles, missouri. until 1962, our founders business was devoted entirely to the operation of variety stores. in that year, the first wal-mart discount city, which was a discount
store, opened. in fiscal 1984, we opened our first three sams clubs, and in fiscal 1988, we opened our first supercenter. in fiscal 1999, we opened our first neighborhood market.  in fiscal 1992, we began our first international initiative when we entered into a joint venture in mexico, in which we owned a 50% interest along with
cifra s.a. de c.v. (cifra). in fiscal 1998, we acquired the controlling interest in cifra, and in february 2000, cifra officially changed its name to wal-mart de mexico, s.a. de c.v. since fiscal 1992, our international presence has
continued to expand, and at january31, 2007, we had international operations in argentina, brazil, canada, costa rica, el salvador, guatemala, honduras, japan, mexico, nicaragua, puerto rico, and the united kingdom. we also operate through
joint ventures in china.  at january31, 2007, we operated 1,075 discount stores, 2,256 supercenters, 579 sams clubs and 112
neighborhood markets in the united states. internationally, at the end of fiscal year 2007, the company operated units in argentina (13), brazil (299), canada (289), costa rica (137), el salvador (63), guatemala (132), honduras (41), japan (392),
mexico (889), nicaragua (40), puerto rico (54), and the united kingdom (335). we also operated 73 stores through joint ventures in china at january31, 2007. in october 2006, we disposed of our south korean and german operations.  the following tables provide summary information regarding the numbers, additions and square footage of our discount stores, supercenters, neighborhood
markets and sams clubs in the united states, and the numbers and square footage of our units in our international markets for each of our fiscal years from fiscal 2003 through fiscal 2007.  wal-mart stores segment  store count
and square footage (1)  fiscal years ended january 31, 2003 through 2007
wal-mart discount stores
wal-mart supercenters
fiscal year
opened
closed
conversions(2)
total
square footage
opened(2)
total
squarefootage
balance forward
1,647
157,686
1,066
197,442
1,568
151,913
1,258
234,611
1,478
145,065
1,471
275,067
1,353
135,481
1,713
320,056
1,209
123,607
1,980
370,711
1,075
114,507
2,256
421,211
neighborhood markets
total wal-mart stores segment
fiscal year
opened
total
squarefootage
opened(3)
closed
total
squarefootage
balance forward
1,418
2,744
356,546
2,161
2,875
388,685
2,778
3,013
422,910
3,621
3,151
459,158
4,218
3,289
498,536
4,672
3,443
540,390
(1)
amounts are as of january31, of the years shown. square footage is reported in thousands.
(2)
includes conversions and relocations of discount stores to supercenters.
(3)
total opened, net of conversions and relocations of discount stores to supercenters.
sams club segment  club count and square footage  fiscal years ended january 31, 2003 through
2007(1)
fiscal year
opened
closed
total
squarefootage
balance forward
61,779
65,747
68,144
70,677
73,391
76,270
(1)
amounts are as of january31, of the years shown. square footage is reported in thousands.  the number of discount stores, supercenters, neighborhood markets and sams clubs located in each state in the united states at january31, 2007 is disclosed in our annual report to shareholders under the
caption fiscal 2007 end-of-year store count and is incorporated herein by reference. portions of such annual report to shareholders are included as an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.
international segment  unit count and square footage (1)  fiscal years ended january 31, 2003 through 2007
argentina
brazil(2)
canada
unitcount
squarefootage
unitcount
squarefootage
unitcount
squarefootage
balance forward
2,175
3,143
22,968
2,175
3,143
24,742
2,175
3,370
27,211
2,175
11,393
29,953
2,175
23,225
31,730
2,427
23,789
33,591
china
central america
japan(3)
unitcount
squarefootage
unitcount
squarefootage
unitcount
squarefootage
balance forward
2,915
4,025
5,713
7,550
10,261
28,618
13,583
7,128
28,780
mexico
puerto rico
united kingdom
unitcount
squarefootage
unitcount
squarefootage
unitcount
squarefootage
balance forward
28,933
2,104
20,220
32,106
3,182
20,941
35,334
3,478
21,967
39,133
3,596
23,328
44,655
3,774
25,532
50,401
3,829
26,800
totalinternationalsegment
unitcount(4)
squarefootage
balance forward
1,050
82,458
1,163
90,314
1,248
99,248
1,480
117,128
2,181
169,970
2,757
190,328
(1)
unit counts are as of december31, of the years shown for all countries except canada and puerto rico, which are as of january31. square footage is reported in thousands.
(2)
brazil includes 118 units acquired from bompreo s.a. supermercados do nordeste in february 2004 and 139 units acquired from sonae distribuio brasil s.a. in
december 2005.
(3)
excludes 45 wakana units, which are take-out restaurants generally less than 1,000 square feet in size.
(4)
further information regarding our international operating formats by market can be found under the caption international segment below.
our industry segments  our retail operations serve our customers primarily through three segments. we identify those segments based on management responsibility within the united states and in total for international units. the wal-mart
stores segment includes our supercenters, discount stores and neighborhood markets in the united states as well as walmart.com. the sams club segment includes the warehouse membership clubs in the united states as well as samsclub.com. the
international segment consists of our operations in argentina, brazil, canada, china, costa rica, el salvador, guatemala, honduras, japan, mexico, nicaragua, puerto rico and the united kingdom. you will find information concerning the financial
results of our operating segments in the united states and internationally and the total and long-lived assets of each of those segments in note 11 to the consolidated financial statements and in managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations. we have incorporated by reference herein our consolidated financial statements as of january31, 2007, and for the year then ended, the notes to the consolidated financial statements, and
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations that are contained in our annual report to shareholders, portions of which are included as an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.  wal-mart stores segment  the wal-mart stores segment
had net sales of $226.3 billion, $209.9 billion and $191.8 billion for the fiscal years ended january31, 2007, 2006, and 2005, respectively. during the most recent fiscal year, no single supercenter, discount store or neighborhood market
location accounted for as much as 1% of total company net sales or net income.  general. the wal-mart stores segment operates
retail stores in all 50 states, with discount stores in 47 states, supercenters in 47 states and neighborhood markets in 15 states. our discount stores range in size from 30,000 square feet to 224,000 square feet, with an average size of
approximately 107,000 square feet. supercenters range in size from 98,000 square feet to 246,000 square feet, with an average size of approximately 187,000 square feet. neighborhood markets range in size from 38,000 square feet to 55,000 square
feet, with an average size of approximately 42,000 square feet. customers also can access a broad assortment of merchandise and services online at www.walmart.com.  merchandise. wal-mart discount stores and the general merchandise area of supercenters carry apparel for women, girls, men, boys and infants, domestics, fabrics and notions, stationery and books, shoes,
housewares, hardware, electronics, home furnishings, small appliances, automotive accessories, horticulture and accessories, sporting goods, toys, pet food and pet accessories, cellular phones and cellular service plan contracts, cameras and
supplies, health and beauty aids, pharmaceuticals, jewelry and optical and provide photo processing services. in addition, our stores offer an assortment of grocery merchandise. the wal-mart stores segment also offers financial services and
products, including money order sales, wire transfers, check cashing and bill payment. the grocery assortment in our supercenters consists of a full line of grocery items including meat, produce, deli, bakery, dairy, frozen foods, floral and dry
grocery. most of our discount stores carry a limited assortment of dry grocery merchandise, while a number of our larger discount stores in some markets carry a broader assortment of grocery items, including perishable items. neighborhood markets
are generally organized into departments such as: dry grocery, meat, produce, deli, bakery, dairy, frozen foods, floral, pharmaceuticals, photo processing, health and beauty aids, household chemicals, paper goods, general merchandise and pet
supplies.  nationally advertised merchandise represents a significant portion of sales in the wal-mart stores segment. we also market lines
of merchandise under our private-label store brands including sams choice, great value, everstart, ol roy, puritan, equate, no boundaries,
george, athletic works, durabrand, ilo, hometrends, mainstays, metro 7, parents choice, ozark trail, relion, white
stag and kid connection. the company also markets lines of merchandise under licensed brands, some of which include general electric, disney, mcdonalds, mary-kate and ashley,
and starter.
sales in discount stores and supercenters, by product category were as follows during the fiscal year
ended:
category
january31,2007
january31,2006
grocery, candy and tobacco
%
%
hardgoods
%
%
softgoods and domestics
%
%
electronics
%
%
pharmaceuticals
%
%
health and beauty aids
%
%
sporting goods and toys
%
%
stationery and books
%
%
photo processing
%
%
jewelry
%
%
shoes
%
%
%
%
operations. hours of operation for nearly all supercenters and an increasing number
of discount stores and neighborhood markets are 24 hours each day. hours of operation for the remaining supercenters, discount stores and neighborhood markets vary by location, but are generally 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 or 11:00 p.m., seven days a week.
the retail stores in our wal-mart stores segment generally maintain uniform prices, except where lower prices are necessary to meet local competition. we accept a variety of payment methods including credit cards and a private-label store credit
card through a third-party provider. in addition, our pharmacy departments accept payments for prescription drugs through our customers health benefit plans.  seasonal aspects of operations. the wal-mart stores segments business is seasonal to a certain extent. generally, its highest volume of sales occurs in the fourth fiscal quarter, which includes the
holiday season, and the lowest volume occurs during the first fiscal quarter.  competition. our discount stores compete with
other discount, department, drug, variety and specialty stores and supermarkets, many of which are national or regional chains. our supercenters compete with other supercenter-type stores, hypermarts, discount stores, supermarkets, department, drug,
variety and specialty stores, many of which are national or regional chains. we also compete with internet-based retailers and catalog business and with other retailers for new store sites.  our ability to develop the right locations and offer value and service to our customers largely determines our competitive position within the retail
industry. we employ many programs designed to meet competitive pressures within our industry. these programs include the following:
every day low prices (edlp)  our pricing philosophy under which we price items at a low price every day so that our customers trust that our
prices will not change erratically under frequent promotional activity;
rollbacks  our commitment to pass continually internal and external cost savings on to the customer by lowering prices on selected goods;
store within a store  a program to provide accountability to assistant managers and department managers as to merchandise planning and overall department
performance; and
store of the community  a program to ensure that the merchandise assortment in a particular store fits the demographic needs of the local community in which
that store is located.  in addition to these programs, we believe our broad assortment of merchandise that provides
one-stop shopping, our in-stock levels that provide confidence to our customers that we will have what they need, and our long operating hours that allow customers to shop at their convenience provide us with additional competitive advantages.
distribution. during fiscal 2007, approximately 80% of the wal-mart stores segments purchases of merchandise were
shipped from 121 distribution centers. the balance of merchandise purchased was shipped directly to stores from suppliers. wal-mart owns and operates 40 general merchandise distribution centers, 38 grocery distribution centers, seven apparel and
shoes distribution centers, 12 professional services and specialty distribution centers, two import distribution centers and three distribution centers that
support walmart.com. additionally, third-party operators are used in 19 distribution centers of which two are grocery distribution centers, five are specialty distribution centers, four are import distribution centers and eight support walmart.com.
the professional services distribution centers ship merchandise such as jewelry, tires, optical, product returns, and pharmaceuticals. general merchandise is transported to stores primarily through our private truck fleet. however, we contract with
common carriers to transport the majority of our perishable and dry grocery merchandise.  the 121 distribution centers are located
throughout the continental united states. fourteen distribution centers are located in texas; eleven in arkansas; nine in california; eight in georgia; six in indiana; five in each of florida, illinois, new york, and pennsylvania; four in each of
ohio and virginia; three in each of alabama, kentucky, missouri, north carolina, tennessee, and utah; two in each of arizona, louisiana, mississippi, nevada, oklahoma, south carolina, and wisconsin; and one each in colorado, delaware, iowa, kansas,
maryland, maine, michigan, nebraska, new hampshire, new jersey, new mexico, oregon and washington.  in addition to servicing the wal-mart
stores segment, some of our wal-mart distribution centers also service our sams club segment for perishable items, jewelry, tires and product returns.  sams club segment  the sams club segment had net sales of $41.6 billion, $39.8 billion and $37.1 billion for the
fiscal years ended january31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. during the most recent fiscal year, no single club location accounted for as much as 1% of total company net sales or net income.  general. we operate sams clubs in 48 states. facility sizes for sams clubs generally range between 72,000 and 190,000 square
feet, with the average sams club facility being approximately 132,000 square feet. sams club also provides its members with a broad assortment of merchandise and services online at www.samsclub.com.  merchandise. sams club offers bulk displays of brand name merchandise, including hardgoods, some softgoods, institutional-size
grocery items, and selected private-label items under the members mark, bakers& chefs and sams club brands. generally, each sams club also carries software, electronics, jewelry,
exercise equipment, outdoor goods, tires, office supplies and books. most clubs have fresh departments, which include bakery, meat, produce, floral and sams cafe. additionally, a significant number of our clubs offer photo processing,
pharmaceuticals, optical departments and gasoline stations.  sales in the sams club segment, which are subject to seasonal variance,
by product category were as follows during the fiscal year ended:
category
january31,2007
january31,2006
sundries
%
%
food
%
%
hardgoods
%
%
service businesses
%
%
softgoods
%
%
%
%
operations. operating hours for sams clubs are monday through friday from
10:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m., saturday from 9:30 a.m. to 8:30 p.m. and sunday from 11:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. additionally, all club locations offer a gold key program that permits business members to shop before the regular operating hours monday through
saturday, starting at 7:00 a.m.  sams clubs are membership-only operations. a variety of payment methods are accepted at our clubs,
including mastercard beginning in fiscal 2007. additionally, sams club markets private label and discover accounts that are without recourse to the company. members include both small business owners and individual consumers. individuals who
are not business owners can become advantage members. the annual membership fee for an individual advantage member is $40 for the primary membership card, with a spouse card available at no additional cost. the annual membership fee for business
members is $35 for the primary membership card, with a spouse/household card available at no additional cost. in addition, business members can add up to eight business associates (add-ons) to their business account for $35 each. businesses can also
purchase advantage memberships for their employees under a group membership program. group rates are $30 per group advantage membership when purchasing 50 - 999 memberships and $25 per group advantage membership when purchasing 1,000 or more
memberships. sam's club plus is a premium membership program that offers additional benefits
and services. the annual fee for a primary plus member (business or advantage) is $100. in addition, business plus primary members can add up to 16 business
associates (add-ons) to their business membership for $35 each.  seasonal aspects of operations. the sams club
segments business is seasonal to a certain extent. generally, its highest volume of sales occurs in the fourth fiscal quarter, which includes the holiday season, and the lowest volume occurs during the first fiscal quarter.  competition. sams club competes with other warehouse clubs, as well as with discount retailers, retail and wholesale grocers, general
merchandise wholesalers and distributors, internet-based retailers and catalog businesses. we compete with other retailers for desirable new club sites. our ability to offer low prices and quality merchandise to meet the needs of small business
members largely determines our competitive position in the warehouse club industry.  distribution. during fiscal 2007,
approximately 65% of the sams club non-fuel purchases were shipped from the sams club segments dedicated distribution facilities and some of the wal-mart stores segments distribution centers for perishable items, jewelry,
tires and product returns. suppliers shipped the balance of the sams club purchases directly to sams club locations. the principal focus of our sams clubs distribution operations is on crossdocking product, while stored
inventory is minimized. crossdocking is a distribution process under which shipments are directly transferred from inbound to outbound trailers without extra storage. shipments typically spend less than 24 hours in a crossdock facility, sometimes
less than an hour. a combination of seven company-owned and operated distribution facilities, 13 third-party owned and operated facilities, and two third-party owned and operated import distribution centers constitute the overall distribution
structure for the sams club segment. to support the samsclub.com business, sams club uses one third-party owned and operated distribution center in texas. two of the company-owned and operated facilities are located in texas with single
facilities located in arizona, arkansas, colorado, indiana and minnesota. of the third-party owned and operated facilities, two are in california and one is in each of florida, georgia, illinois, maryland, michigan, missouri, new hampshire, north
carolina, ohio, pennsylvania and washington. the third-party operated import facilities are located in california and south carolina. sams club uses a combination of our private truck fleet as well as common carriers to transport
non-perishable merchandise from distribution centers to clubs. we contract with common carriers to transport perishable grocery merchandise from distribution centers to clubs.  international segment  our international segment is comprised of our operations through wholly-owned
subsidiaries in argentina, brazil, canada, puerto rico, and the united kingdom, our operations through majority-owned subsidiaries in central america, japan and mexico and our operations through joint ventures in china.  the international segments net sales from continuing operations for the fiscal years ended january31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, were $77.1
billion, $59.2 billion and $52.5 billion, respectively. during the most recent fiscal year, no single unit accounted for as much as 1% of total company net sales or net income.  general.  at january31,
2007, our international operating formats varied by market and included:
argentina - 13 supercenters
brazil - 26 supercenters, 19 sams clubs, 66 hypermarkets (hiper bompreo, big), 157 supermarkets (bompreo, mercadorama, nacional), 11
cash-n-carry stores (maxxi alacado), 15 combination discount and grocery stores (todo dia), 3 general merchandise stores (magazine) and 2 discount stores (mini bompreo)
canada - 7 supercenters, 276 discount stores and 6 sams clubs
china - 68 supercenters, 2 neighborhood markets and 3 sams clubs
costa rica - 4 hypermarkets (hiper mas), 23 supermarkets (ms por menos), 8 warehouse stores (maxi bodega) and 102 discount stores (pali)
el salvador - 2 hypermarkets (hiper paiz), 32 supermarkets (la despensa de don juan) and 29 discount stores (despensa familiar)
guatemala - 6 hypermarkets (hiper paiz), 28 supermarkets (paiz), 8 warehouse stores (maxi bodega), 2 membership clubs (club co) and 88 discount stores (despensa
familiar)
honduras - 1 hypermarket (hiper paiz), 6 supermarkets (paiz), 5 warehouse stores (maxi bodega) and 29 discount stores (despensa familiar)
japan - 97 hypermarkets (livin, seiyu), 293 supermarkets (seiyu, sunny) and 2 general merchandise stores (seiyu)
mexico - 118 supercenters, 77 sams clubs, 100 supermarkets (superama, mi bodega), 219 combination discount and grocery stores (bodega), 61 department stores
(suburbia), 312 restaurants and 2 discount stores (mi bodega express)
nicaragua - 5 supermarkets (la unin) and 35 discount stores (pali)
puerto rico - 6 supercenters, 8 discount stores, 9 sams clubs and 31 supermarkets (amigo)
united kingdom - 23 supercenters (asda), 291 supermarkets (asda), 7 general merchandise stores (asda living), 12 apparel stores (george) and 2 discount stores (asda
essentials)
merchandise. the merchandising strategy for the international segment is similar to that
of our operations in the united states in terms of the breadth and scope of merchandise offered for sale. while brand name merchandise accounts for a majority of sales, several store brands not found in the united states have been developed to serve
customers in the different markets in which the international segment operates. in addition, steps have been taken to develop relationships with local suppliers in each country to ensure reliable sources of quality merchandise.  operations. the hours of operation for operating units in the international segment vary by country and by individual markets within
countries, depending upon local and national ordinances governing hours of operation. while sales are primarily on a cash-and-carry basis, credit cards or other consumer finance programs exist in certain markets to facilitate the purchase of goods
by the customer.  seasonal aspects of operations. the international segments business is seasonal to a certain extent.
generally, the highest volume of sales occurs in the fourth fiscal quarter. the seasonality of the business varies by country due to different national and religious holidays, festivals and customs, as well as different climatic conditions.
competition. the international segment competes with a variety of local, national and international chains in the
supermarket, discount, department, drug, variety, specialty stores, supercenter-type stores, hypermarts, wholesale clubs, internet-based retailers and catalog businesses in each of the countries in which we operate and, in mexico, with local,
national and international restaurant chains. our ability to offer our customers low prices on quality merchandise that offers exceptional value in the international segment determines, to a large extent, our competitive position. in our
international units, our ability to effectively operate the food departments has a major impact on the segments competitive position in the markets where we operate.  distribution. we utilize a total of 126 distribution facilities located in argentina, brazil, canada, china, costa rica, el salvador,
guatemala, honduras, japan, mexico, nicaragua, puerto rico and the united kingdom. through these facilities, we process and distribute both imported and domestic product to the operating units of the international segment. during fiscal 2007,
approximately 78% of the international segments purchases flowed through these distribution facilities. suppliers ship the balance of the international segments purchases directly to our stores in the various countries in which we
operate. a combination of company-owned and operated distribution facilities and third-party facilities makes up the overall distribution structure for the international segment. the international segment operates export consolidation facilities in
california, florida and texas in support of product flow to our mexican, asian, and central and south american markets. additionally, a wal-mart stores segment distribution center in pennsylvania exports products to our operations in canada.
employees  as of january31,
2007, the company employed approximately 1.9million employees (associates) worldwide, with approximately 1.36million associates in the united states and approximately 550,000 associates in foreign countries. like almost all
retailers, the company has a large number of part-time, hourly employees and experiences significant turnover in employees each year. in the united states, the company offers a broad range of company-paid benefits to our associates, including a
profit sharing and 401(k) plan, store discount cards, bonuses based on company performance, discounted stock purchase program and life insurance. the company also offers health care benefits to eligible full-time and part-time associates. after the
first year, the companys medical plan has no lifetime maximum for most expenses.  in our operations outside the united states, the
company provides a variety of associate benefits that vary based on customary local practices and statutory requirements.  our website and availability
of sec reports and other information  our corporate website is located at www.walmartstores.com. we file with or furnish to the
sec annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k and any amendment to those reports, proxy statements and annual reports to shareholders, and, from time to time, other documents. the reports and other
documents filed with or furnished to the sec are available to investors on or through our corporate website free of charge as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file them with or furnish them to the sec. in addition, the public
may read and copy any of the materials we file with the sec at the secs public reference room at 100 f street, ne, washington dc 20549. the public may obtain information on the operation of the public reference room by calling the sec at
1-800-sec-0330. the sec maintains an internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers, such as the company, that file electronically with the sec. the address of that website is
http://www.sec.gov. our sec filings, our senior financial officer code of ethics and our statement of ethics can be found
on the investor relations page of our website at www.walmartstores.com/investors. these documents, as well as our sec filings, are available in print
to any shareholder who requests a copy by writing or calling our investor relations department, which is located at our principal offices.  a description of any substantive amendment or waiver of wal-marts code of ethics for the ceo and senior financial officers will be disclosed on the investor relations page of our website at www.walmartstores.com under the
corporate governance section. any such description will be located on our website for a period of 12 months following the amendment or waiver.  information regarding certain financial measures relating to our operating segments and the net sales from our operations in the united states and outside of the united states and our long-lived assets located in and outside the united
states are included in our annual report to shareholders under the caption management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and in note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included therein,
which information is incorporated herein by reference. portions of our annual report to shareholders are included as an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.
item1a.
risk factors  the risks described below
could materially and adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. these risks are not the only risks that we face. our business operations could also be affected by additional factors that are not
presently known to us or that we currently consider to be immaterial to our operations.  general economic factors, both domestically and
internationally, may adversely affect our financial performance.  general economic conditions, globally or in one or more of the
markets we serve, may adversely affect our financial performance. in the united states, higher interest rates, higher fuel and other energy costs, inflation, higher levels of unemployment, higher consumer debt levels, higher tax rates and other
changes in tax laws, and other economic factors could adversely affect consumer demand for the products and services we sell through our wal-mart stores segment and sams club segment, change the mix of products we sell to one with a lower
average gross margin and result in slower inventory turnover and greater markdowns on inventory. higher interest rates, higher fuel and other energy costs, transportation costs, inflation, higher costs of labor, insurance and healthcare, foreign
exchange rates fluctuations, higher tax rates and other changes in tax laws, changes in other laws and regulations and other economic factors in the united states increase our cost of sales and operating, selling, general and administrative
expenses, and otherwise adversely affect the operations and operating results of our wal-mart stores segment and sams club segment. high levels of unemployment, inflation, changes in tax and other laws, currency devaluations and other adverse
developments in the economies of the other countries in which we operate may adversely affect consumer demand for our merchandise in those countries, adversely affect our gross margins, cost of sales, inventory turnover and markdowns or otherwise
adversely affect our operations and operating results in our international segment.  we may face impediments to our expansion in the
united states, including conversions of discount stores into supercenters, which may adversely affect our financial performance.  our
expansion strategy depends upon our ability to execute our retail concepts successfully in new markets within the united states and upon our ability to increase the number of stores in markets in which we currently have operations. our ability to
open additional supercenters, discount stores, neighborhood markets and sams clubs and to convert existing discount stores into supercenters depends in large measure upon our ability to locate, hire and retain qualified personnel and to
acquire new store sites on acceptable terms. local land use and other regulations restricting the construction of buildings of the type in which we operate our various formats, as well as local community action opposed to the location of specific
stores at specific sites and the adoption of certain local laws restricting our operations, may affect our ability to open new stores and clubs, to convert discount stores into supercenters or to relocate or expand existing units in certain cities
and states. increased real estate, construction and development costs could limit our growth opportunities and our ability to convert our discount stores into supercenters. if we are unable to open new supercenters, discount stores, neighborhood
markets or sams clubs or continue to convert discount stores into supercenters, our financial performance, such as net sales and operating income growth, could be adversely affected. in addition, if consumers in the markets into which we
expand are not receptive to our retail concepts, our financial performance could be adversely affected.
impediments to the expansion of our international operations could adversely affect our financial
performance.  our business strategy for our international segment includes expansion by selective acquisitions and strategic alliances
that add new stores and markets to our existing international business, as well as opening new units in the countries in which we have existing operations. in the countries in which we have existing operations, new units may be opened in the formats
already existing in those countries or may be opened in newly introduced formats, such as supercenters or sams clubs, not previously operated in those markets. as in the united states, our ability to open new stores or to expand or relocate
existing stores in a market served by our international segment depends in large measure upon our ability to locate, hire and retain qualified personnel and our ability to acquire new store sites on acceptable terms. local laws can affect our
ability to acquire attractive pre-existing buildings in which to locate units or sites on which to build new units or to expand existing units. in addition, access to local suppliers of certain types of goods may limit our ability to add new units
or to expand product selections in existing units in certain markets. moreover, cultural differences in some markets into which we expand or into which we introduce new retail concepts may result in the consumers in those markets not being as
receptive to our retail concepts as we anticipate those consumers will be. if we do not effectively execute our expansion plans for our international segment, our financial performance could be adversely affected.  we may be unable to continue to identify suitable acquisition candidates at acceptable prices and may not be successful in completing the acquisition of
any such candidate identified. although we ultimately believe we will be able to successfully integrate any newly acquired operations into our existing operations, no certainty exists that future acquisitions or alliances will be successfully
integrated into our operations or can be successfully integrated in a reasonable time. our failure to identify appropriate candidates for acquisition or alliance or to integrate effectively future acquisitions and alliances into our existing
operations could adversely affect the growth of our international segment and our future financial performance.  failure to attract and
retain qualified associates and other labor issues could adversely affect our financial performance.  our ability to continue to expand
our operations in the united states and abroad depends on our ability to attract and retain a large and growing number of qualified associates. our ability to meet our labor needs, including our ability to find qualified personnel to fill positions
that become vacant at our existing stores, clubs and distribution centers, while controlling our associate wage and related labor costs, is generally subject to numerous external factors, including the availability of a sufficient number of
qualified persons in the work force of the markets in which we are located, unemployment levels within those markets, prevailing wage rates, changing demographics, health and other insurance costs and changes in employment legislation. if we are
unable to locate, to attract or to retain qualified personnel or if our costs of labor or related costs increase significantly, our financial performance could be affected adversely.  we face strong competition from other retailers and wholesale club operators, which could adversely affect our financial performance.
the retail business is highly competitive. each of our business segments competes for customers, employees, store sites, products and services and in
other important aspects of its business with many other local, regional and national retailers, both in the united states and in the foreign countries in which we have operations. our wal-mart stores segment competes with retailers operating
discount, department, drug, variety and specialty stores, supermarkets, supercenter-type stores and hypermarts, as well as internet-based retailers and catalog businesses. our sams club segment competes with other wholesale club operators, as
well as discount retailers, retail and wholesale grocers and general merchandise wholesalers and distributors, as well as internet-based retailers, wholesalers and catalog businesses. internationally, we compete with retailers who operate
department, drug, variety and specialty stores, supermarkets, supercenter-type stores, hypermarts, wholesale clubs, internet-based retailers and catalog businesses. such retailers and wholesale club operators compete in a variety of ways, including
merchandise selection and availability, services offered to customers, location, store hours, in-store amenities and price. our ability to offer value and service to our customers through various programs, including edlp, rollbacks, store within a
store and store of the community, have allowed us to compete successfully against our competitors in most instances. where necessary to compete effectively with competitors who price merchandise at points lower than the prices we set under our edlp
philosophy, we will lower our prices on goods for sale. our ability to respond effectively to competitive pressures and changes in the retail markets could adversely affect our financial performance. see item 1. business. above for
additional discussion of our competitive situation in our various operating segments.  although the retail industry as a whole is highly
fragmented, certain segments of the retail industry are currently undergoing some consolidation, which could result in increased competition and significantly alter the dynamics of the retail marketplace. such consolidation may result in competitors
with greatly improved financial resources, improved access to
merchandise, greater market penetration than they previously enjoyed and other improvements in their competitive positions. such business combinations could
result in the provision of a wider variety of products and services at competitive prices by such consolidated companies, which could adversely affect our financial performance.  risks associated with the suppliers from whom our products are sourced could adversely affect our financial performance.  the products we sell are sourced from a wide variety of domestic and international suppliers. global sourcing of many of the products we sell is an
important factor in our financial performance. all of our suppliers must comply with applicable laws, including labor and environmental laws, and otherwise be certified as meeting our required supplier standards of conduct. our ability to find
qualified suppliers who meet our standards, and to access products in a timely and efficient manner is a significant challenge, especially with respect to suppliers located and goods sourced outside the united states. political and economic
instability in the countries in which foreign suppliers are located, the financial instability of suppliers, suppliers failure to meet our supplier standards, labor problems experienced by our suppliers, the availability of raw materials to
suppliers, merchandise quality issues, currency exchange rates, transport availability and cost, inflation, and other factors relating to the suppliers and the countries in which they are located are beyond our control. in addition, the united
states foreign trade policies, tariffs and other impositions on imported goods, trade sanctions imposed on certain countries, the limitation on the importation of certain types of goods or of goods containing certain materials from other
countries and other factors relating to foreign trade are beyond our control. these and other factors affecting our suppliers and our access to products could adversely affect our financial performance.  our international operations subject us to risks associated with the legislative, judicial, accounting, regulatory, political and economic conditions
specific to the countries or regions in which we operate, which could adversely affect our financial performance.  we currently conduct
operations in argentina, brazil, canada, costa rica, el salvador, guatemala, honduras, japan, mexico, nicaragua, puerto rico and the united kingdom, as well as through joint venture agreements in china. during fiscal 2007, our international
operations generated 22.3% of our net sales. as a result of recent acquisitions of operations in foreign countries, we expect that our international operations could account for a larger portion of our net sales in future years despite the recent
dispositions of our operations in germany and south korea. our future operating results in these countries or in other countries or regions throughout the world could be negatively affected by a variety of factors, most of which are beyond our
control. these factors include political conditions, economic conditions, legal and regulatory constraints, currency regulations, and other matters in any of the countries or regions in which we operate, now or in the future. in addition, foreign
currency exchange rates and fluctuations may have an impact on our future costs or on future cash flows from our international operations, and could adversely affect our financial performance. moreover, the economies of some of the countries in
which we have operations have in the past suffered from high rates of inflation and currency devaluations, which, if they occurred again, could adversely affect our financial performance. other factors which may impact our international operations
include foreign trade, monetary and fiscal policies both of the united states and of other countries, laws, regulations and other activities of foreign governments, agencies and similar organizations, and risks associated with having major
facilities located in countries which have historically been less stable than the united states. additional risks inherent in our international operations generally include, among others, the costs and difficulties of managing international
operations, adverse tax consequences and greater difficulty in enforcing intellectual property rights in countries other than the united states. the various risks inherent in doing business in the united states generally also exist when doing
business outside of the united states, and may be exaggerated by the difficulty of doing business in numerous sovereign jurisdictions due to differences in culture, laws and regulations.  natural disasters and geo-political events costs could adversely affect our financial performance.  the occurrence of one or more natural disasters, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, and geo-political events, such as civil unrest in a country in which
we operate or in which our suppliers are located or terrorist attacks disrupting transportation and utility systems, both internationally and domestically, could adversely affect our operations and financial performance. such events could result in
physical damage to one or more of our properties, the closure of one or more stores, clubs and distribution centers, the lack of an adequate work force in a market, the temporary or long-term disruption in the supply of products from some local and
overseas suppliers, the disruption in the transport of goods from overseas, delay in the delivery of goods to our distribution centers or stores within a country in which we are operating and the reduction in the availability of products in our
stores. these factors could otherwise disrupt and adversely affect our operations and financial performance.
the significant property damage experienced by the company and others resulting from the hurricanes in
fiscal year 2006 resulted in substantial increases in property insurance premiums and limitations in coverage offered by the property insurance markets to us and others. the insurance coverage offered to the company for named windstorms, such as
hurricanes and tropical storms, was substantially more limited and carried higher premiums. as a result the company has chosen to be primarily self-insured for losses that may result from named windstorms.  named windstorm activity was minimal in fiscal 2007, and the company did not incur any significant losses this past hurricane season.  we are subject to certain legal proceedings that may adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity.  we are involved in a number of legal proceedings, which include consumer, employment, tort and other litigation. certain of these lawsuits, if decided
adversely to us or settled by us, may result in liability material to our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. we are currently a defendant in numerous cases containing class-action allegations in which the plaintiffs have
brought claims under federal and state wage and hour laws. in addition, we are a defendant in dukes v. wal-mart stores, inc., a class-action lawsuit brought on behalf of all past and present female employees in all of our retail stores and
wholesale clubs in the united states. the class as certified in dukes currently includes approximately 1.6million present and former female associates. the plaintiffs in this case allege that we have engaged in a pattern and practice of
discriminating against women in promotions, pay, training and job assignments and seek, among other things, injunctive relief, front pay, back pay, punitive damages and attorneys fees. the u.s. district court hearing this case has issued an
order granting in part and denying in part the plaintiffs motion for class certification, which we have appealed. recently, a divided three-judge panel of the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit upheld the district
courts ruling, and we are now asking that the ruling be reconsidered by a larger panel of that court of appeals. we discuss these cases and other litigation to which we are party in greater detail below under the caption item 3. legal
proceedings and in note 8 to our consolidated financial statements, which are part of our annual report to shareholders which is incorporated by reference in this annual report on form 10-k and is included as an exhibit to this annual report
on form 10-k.  if we do not maintain the security of customer-related information, we could damage our reputation with customers, incur
substantial additional costs and become subject to litigation.  as do most retailers, we receive certain personal information about our
customers. in addition, our online operations at www.walmart.com and www.samsclub.com depend upon the secure transmission of confidential information over public networks, including information permitting cashless payments. a compromise of our
security systems that results in customer personal information being obtained by unauthorized persons could adversely affect our reputation with our customers and others, as well as our operations, results of operations, financial condition and
liquidity, and could result in litigation against us or the imposition of penalties. in addition, a security breach could require that we expend significant additional resources related to our information security systems and could result in a
disruption of our operations, particularly our online sales operations.
item1b.
unresolved staff comments  none.
item2.
properties   the number and location of
united states and international wal-mart discount stores, supercenters and sams clubs and other formats are incorporated by reference to the table under the caption fiscal 2007 end-of-year store count included in our annual report
to shareholders, which information we have included as an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.  united states. as of
january31, 2007, in the united states, we owned 2,819 of the buildings in which discount stores, neighborhood markets and supercenters operated and 457 of the buildings in which our sams clubs operated. land on which our stores are
located is either owned or leased by the company. in the united states, we lease the remaining buildings in which our stores and clubs operate from either commercial property developers pursuant to sale/leaseback
arrangements or from local governmental entities in connection with industrial revenue bond financing arrangements. all store leases provide for fixed annual
rentals and, in some cases, the leases provide for additional rent based on sales volume.  we use independent contractors to construct our
buildings.  for details on our distribution centers, see the caption distribution provided for each of our segments under
item 1. business.  we own office facilities in bentonville, arkansas that serve as our home office and lease office facilities
throughout the united states for our walmart.com operations and field management.  international. we operate our
international segment stores and restaurants in a combination of owned and leased properties in each country in which our international segment operates. as of january31, 2007, we owned 11 properties in argentina, 117 properties in brazil, 112
properties in canada, 38 properties in costa rica, two properties in el salvador, 13 properties in guatemala, five properties in honduras, 55 properties in japan, 398 properties in mexico, 13 properties in nicaragua, 10 properties in puerto rico and
218 properties in the united kingdom in which operating units are located, with the remaining units in each such country and the properties in which the operating units are located in china being leased on terms that vary from property to property.
we utilize both owned and leased properties for office facilities in each country in which we are conducting business. our international operations are supported by 126 distribution facilities as of january31, 2007. of these 126 distribution
facilities, we owned 37 and leased 36. third parties owned and operated the remaining 53 distribution facilities.
item3.
legal proceedings   i. supplemental information: we
discuss certain legal proceedings pending against us in note 8 to our consolidated financial statements, which is captioned litigation, and refer you to that discussion for important information concerning those legal proceedings,
including the basis for such actions and, where known, the relief sought. our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto are included in our annual report to shareholders. portions of our annual report to shareholders are an exhibit to
this annual report on form 10-k, and are incorporated herein by reference. we provide the following additional information concerning those legal proceedings which sets forth the name of the lawsuit, the court in which the lawsuit is pending and the
date on which the petition commencing the lawsuit was filed. in each lawsuit's name, the letters wm refer to wal-mart stores, inc.  wage and hour off the clock class actions: adcox v. wm, us dist. ct. (usdc), southern dist. of tx, 11/9/04; alix (f/k/a gamble) v. wm, supreme ct. of the state of ny, county of albany,
12/7/01; armijo v. wm, 1st judicial dist. ct., rio arriba county, nm, 9/18/00; bailey v. wm, marion county superior ct. in, 8/17/00; ballard v. wm, superior ct. of ca, los angeles, county, 5/17/06; barnett v. wm, superior
ct. of wa, king county, 9/10/01; basco v. wm, usdc, eastern dist. of la, 9/5/00; blackstock v. wm, state ct. of chatham county, ga, 4/27/06; braun v. wm, 1st judicial dist. ct. dakota county mn, 9/12/01; braun/hummel v.
wm, ct. of common pleas, philadelphia county, pa, 3/20/02 / 8/30/04; brogan v. wm, superior ct. of nh, strafford county, 2/17/05; brown v. wm, 14th judicial circuit ct., rock island, il, 6/20/01; campbell v. wm, usdc, dist.
of nv, 9/20/06; carter v. wm, ct. of common pleas, colleton county, sc, 7/31/02; cole v. wm, usdc, dist. of mt, central div., 1/13/06; curless v. wm, usdc, dist. of wy, 10/26/05; deas v. wm, usdc, eastern dist. of va,
4/3/06; evans v. wm, usdc, dist. of sc, 01/9/07; foster v. wm, usdc, n. dist. of ca, 11/27/06; gilles v. wm, usdc, southern dist. of in, 3/31/06; green v. wm, usdc, s. dist. of fl, 11/6/06; grey v. wm, usdc, dist.
of ks, 7/14/06; gross v. wm, circuit ct., laurel county, ky, 9/29/04; hale v. wm, circuit ct., jackson county, mo, 8/15/01; hall v. wm, usdc, dist. of nv, 8/12/05; henderson v. wm, usdc, dist. of nv, 12/6/06; hiebert
v. wm, superior ct. of wa, pierce county, 7/24/06; holcomb v. wm, state ct. of chatham county, ga, 3/28/00; husidic v. wm, usdc, southern dist. of ia, 9/14/06; iliadis v. wm, superior ct. of nj, middlesex county, 5/30/02;
jackson v. wm, superior ct. of de, new castle county, 4/4/05; jackson v. wm, usdc, dist. of id, 2/3/06; kraemer v. wm, usdc, dist. of nd, 11/15/06; kuhlmann v. wm, circuit ct., milwaukee county, wi, 8/30/01; lerma v.
wm, dist. ct., cleveland county, ok, 8/31/01; lopez v. wm, 23rd judicial dist. ct. of brazoria county, tx, 6/23/00; luce v. wm, circuit ct., brown county, sd, 5/11/05; mcfarlin v. wm, superior ct. of ak at anchorage, 4/7/05;
mcglothan v. wm, usdc, middle dist. of fl, 1/23/06; michell v. wm, usdc, eastern dist. of tx, marshall div., 9/13/02; montgomery v. wm, usdc, southern dist. of ms, 12/30/02; moore v. wm, usdc, middle dist. of fl, 1/18/06;
moore v. wm, circuit ct. of or, multnomah county, 12/7/05; mussman v. wm, ia dist. ct., clinton county, 6/5/01; nagy v. wm, circuit ct. of boyd county, ky, 8/29/01; newland v. wm, superior ct. of ca, alameda county, ca,
01/14/05; nolan v. wm, usdc, northern dist. of oh, eastern div., 4/4/06; olinger v. wm, usdc, eastern dist. of mi, 9/14/06; osuna v. wm, superior ct. of az, pima county, 11/30/01; parrish v. wm, superior ct., chatham
county, ga, 2/17/05; penn v. wm, usdc, eastern dist. of la, 9/15/06; petty v. wm, common pleas ct. of montgomery county, oh, 5/16/00; pickett v. wm, circuit court, shelby county, tn, 10/22/03; pittman v. wm, circuit ct.
for prince georges county, md, 7/31/02; poha v. wm, usdc, dist. of hi, 11/1/05; pritchett v.
wm, circuit ct. of jefferson county, al, 2/17/05; robinson v. wm, circuit ct., holmes county, ms, 12/30/02;
romero v. wm, superior ct. of ca, monterey county, 03/25/04; sago v. wm, circuit ct., holmes county, ms, 12/31/02; salvas v. wm, superior ct., middlesex county, ma, 8/21/01; sarda v. wm, circuit ct., washington county,
fl, 9/21/01; savaglio v. wm, superior ct. of ca, alameda county, 2/6/01; scott v. wm, circuit ct. of saginaw county, mi, 9/26/01; smith v. wm, usdc, northern dist. of ca, 3/20/06; smith v. wm, circuit ct., holmes county,
ms, 12/31/02; stafford v. wm, usdc, dist. of ne, 12/8/05; thiebes v. wm, usdc, dist. of or, 6/30/98; willey v. wm, dist. ct. of wyandotte county, ks, 9/21/01; williams v. wm, superior ct. of ca, alameda county, 3/23/04;
williams v. wm, usdc, eastern dist. of ny, 1/5/06; williams v. wm, usdc, dist of ut, central div., 1/20/06; williams v. wm, usdc, western dist. of nc, 3/23/06; wilson v. wm, common pleas ct. of butler county, oh,
10/27/03; winters v. wm, circuit ct., holmes county, ms, 5/28/02; woods v. wm, usdc, dist. of me, 1/12/06; works v. wm, circuit ct., miller county, ar, 5/18/05.  california labor code case: cruz v. wm, superior ct. of ca, los angeles county, 10/24/03.  exempt status
cases: fox v. wm, usdc, middle dist. of tn, 1/27/05; comer v. wm, usdc, western dist. of mi, northern div., 2/27/04; highland v. wm, usdc, dist. of nm, 6/24/04; salvador v. sams, usdc, central dist. of ca,
western div., 12/22/05; sepulveda v. wm, usdc, central dist. of ca, western div., 1/14/04.  dukes v. wm: dukes v. wm,
usdc, northern dist. of ca, san francisco div., 6/19/01; 9th circuit ct. of appeals, san francisco, ca, 8/26/04.  mauldin v. wm:
mauldin v. wm, usdc, northern dist. of ga, atlanta div., 10/16/01.  eeoc (smith) v. wm: eeoc (smith) v. wm, usdc,
eastern dist. of ky, london div., 8/31/01.  ii. environmental matters: item103 of sec regulation s-k requires disclosure of certain
environmental matters. the following matters are disclosed in accordance with that requirement:  the district attorney for solano county, california, has
alleged that the companys store in vacaville, california, failed to comply with certain california statutes regulating hazardous waste and hazardous materials handling practices. specifically, the county is alleging that the company improperly
disposed of a limited amount of damaged or returned product containing dry granular fertilizer and pesticides on or about april3, 2002. the parties are currently negotiating toward a resolution of this matter.  the district attorney for orange county, california, has alleged that the companys store in foothill ranch, california, failed to comply with certain california
statutes regulating hazardous waste and hazardous materials handling practices. specifically, the county is alleging that the company improperly disposed of a limited amount of damaged product containing dry granular pesticide on or about
january24, 2005. the parties are currently negotiating toward a resolution of this matter.  the environmental protection agency (epa) has
alleged that the company and one of its construction contractors have violated the epas stormwater regulations at a site in caguas, puerto rico. the administrative complaint filed by the agency proposes an administrative penalty in the amount
of $157,500. the parties are currently negotiating toward a resolution of this matter.  the company is involved in discussions with the california air
resources board (carb) to resolve a notice of violation issued by carb alleging that the company sold portable fuel containers and spouts in california which were not compliant with californias portable fuel containers and spouts
regulations. carb alleges that in june 2006, the company offered for sale various non-compliant 5-gallon portable fuel containers. the company conducted its own research and discovered possible sales of additional items between 2002 and 2006 which
may not have been compliant with the regulations. the company voluntarily reported this additional information to carb. the parties are currently negotiating toward a resolution of this matter.  the epa recently approached a grocery industry group to resolve issues relating to refrigerant-handling practices and to reduce the use of ozone-depleting refrigerants
in refrigeration equipment. the company then approached the epa independently to address these issues, and proposed a plan for removing ozone-depleting refrigerants from certain types of refrigeration equipment. the parties are currently negotiating
toward a resolution of this matter.
on february1, 2007, the company received from the epa a request pursuant to section114(a) of the federal
clean air act seeking detailed information regarding all non-essential products containing ozone-depleting substances including products such as loony string which wal-mart may have sold or distributed since january1, 2002. on march8,
2007, the epa issued a revised request for information in which it limited its request to string products including loony string, silly string and fiesta string, and covering the period from 2004 to the present. wal-mart is in the process of
gathering the information requested.  in january 2007, wal-mart puerto rico, inc. became aware that the u.s. army corps of engineers (usace)
was concerned about alleged violations of a permit issued by that agency in 2003, for the fill of 0.23 acres of a creek and its contiguous wetlands during the construction of the wal-mart store in caguas, puerto rico. on january19, 2007,
wal-mart puerto rico responded to these issues in writing. on january25, 2007, the usace issued a formal notice of non-compliance to wal-mart puerto rico regarding this matter. wal-mart puerto rico filed a formal response and is currently
implementing mitigation measures and working with the usace to resolve the matter.  on november8, 2005, the company received a grand jury subpoena
from the united states attorneys office for the central district of california, seeking documents and information relating to the companys receipt, transportation, handling, identification, recycling, treatment, storage and disposal of
certain merchandise that constitutes hazardous materials or hazardous waste. the company has been informed by the u.s. attorneys office for the central district of california that it is a target of a criminal investigation into potential
violations of the resource conservation and recovery act (rcra), the clean water act, and the hazardous materials transportation statute. this u.s. attorneys office contends, among other things, that the use of company trucks to
transport certain returned merchandise from the companys stores to its return centers is prohibited by rcra because those materials may be considered hazardous waste. the government alleges that, to comply with rcra, the company must ship from
the store certain materials as hazardous waste directly to a certified disposal facility using a certified hazardous waste carrier. the company contends that the practice of transporting returned merchandise to its return centers for
subsequent disposition, including disposal by certified facilities, is compliant with applicable laws and regulations. the company cannot reasonably estimate the possible loss or range of loss which may arise from this matter.  additionally, the u.s. attorneys office in the northern district of california has initiated its own investigation regarding the companys handling of
hazardous materials and hazardous waste and the company has received administrative document requests from the california department of toxic substances control requesting documents and information with respect to two of the companys
distribution facilities. further, the company also received a subpoena from the los angeles county district attorneys office for documents and administrative interrogatories requesting information, among other things, regarding the
companys handling of materials and hazardous waste. california state and local government authorities and the state of nevada have also initiated investigations into these matters. the company is cooperating fully with the respective
authorities. the company cannot reasonably estimate the possible loss or range of loss which may arise from this matter.
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders   no matters were submitted to a vote of the companys security holders during the last quarter of the fiscal year ended january31, 2007.
executive officers of the registrant  the following chart names each of the executive officers of the company, each of whom is elected by and serves at the pleasure of the board of directors.
the business experience shown for each officer has been his principal occupation for at least the past five years.
name
business experience
currentpositionheldsince
age
eduardo castro-wright
executive vice president, president and chief executive officer, wal-mart stores division. from february 2005 to september 2005, he served as executive vice president, chief operating
officer, wal-mart stores division. from december 2002 to february 2005, he served as president and chief executive officer of wal-mart de mexico. from july 2001 to december 2002, he served as senior vice president and chief operating officer of
wal-mart de mexico.
m. susan chambers
executive vice president, people division. from december 2003 to april 2006, she served as executive vice president, risk management, insurance and benefits administration. from january 2002
to december 2003, she served as senior vice president, insurance and benefits administration.
lesile a. dach
executive vice president, corporate affairs and government relations. from march 1997 to august 2006, he served as vice chairman of daniel j. edelman, inc.
michaelt.duke
vice chairman, responsible for international. from april 2003 to september 2005, he served as executive vice president, president and chief executive officer, wal-mart stores division. from
july 2000 to april 2003, he served as executive vice president, administration.
thomas d. hyde
executive vice president and corporate secretary. from june 2003 to june 2005, he served as executive vice president, legal and corporate affairs and corporate secretary. from july 2001 to
june 2003, he served as executive vice president and senior general counsel.
c. douglas mcmillon
executive vice president, president and chief executive officer, sams club. from august 2002 to august 2005, he served as executive vice president, merchandising and replenishment,
sams club. prior to that mr. mcmillon served as senior vice president, general merchandise manager from october 1999 to august 2002.
john b. menzer
vice chairman, responsible for u.s. from june 1999 to september 2005, he served as executive vice president, president and chief executive officer, wal-mart international.
thomasm.schoewe
executive vice president and chief financial officer.
h. lee scott, jr.
president and chief executive officer.
s. robson walton
chairman of the board of directors.
steven p. whaley
senior vice president and controller. from december 2005 to january 2007, he served as vice president and controller. from september 2005 to december 2005, he served as vice president and
assistant controller. prior to september 2005, he served as vice president and controller at southwest airlines co. since 2001.
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities   certain information required to be provided in this item is incorporated herein by reference to the information included under the captions
eleven-year financial summary, market price of common stock, listingsstock symbol: wmt and dividends paid per share in our annual report to shareholders. such information is included in an
exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.  our common stock is principally traded in the united states on the new york stock exchange. at
march 16, 2007, the latest practicable date, there were 312,423 common stock shareholders of record.  from time to time, we repurchase
shares of our common stock under a $10.0 billion share repurchase program authorized by our board of directors in september 2004. there is no expiration date for or other restriction limiting the period over which we can make our share repurchases
under the program, which will expire if and when we have repurchased an aggregate of $10.0 billion of shares under that program. share repurchase activity for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007 was as follows:
fiscal period
totalnumber ofsharespurchased
averagepricepaidpershare
totalnumber ofsharespurchasedas part ofpubliclyannouncedplans orprograms
approximatedollarvalueofshares thatmayyet
bepurchasedundertheplansorprograms(billions)
november1-30, 2006
8,149,600
$
47.37
8,149,600
$
5.7
december1-31, 2006
17,601,300
$
46.17
17,601,300
4.9
january1-31, 2007
13,110,600
$
47.77
13,110,650
4.3
total
38,861,500
$
46.96
38,861,500
4.3
item6.
selected financial data   the information
required by this item is incorporated by reference to all information under the caption eleven-year financial summary included in our annual report to shareholders. such information is included in an exhibit to this annual report on form
10-k.
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations  the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to all information under the caption managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations included in the annual report to shareholders. such information is included in an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk   the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to all information under the sub-caption market risk of the caption managements discussion and analysis of financial condition
and results of operations included in the annual report to shareholders. such information is included in an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data   the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to all information under the captions consolidated statements of income, consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of
shareholders equity, consolidated statements of cash flows, notes to consolidated financial statements and report of independent auditors included in the annual report to shareholders. such information
is included in an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure   none.
item9a.
controls and procedures   evaluation of disclosure
controls and procedures  we maintain a system of disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to provide reasonable assurance
that information, which is required to be timely disclosed, is accumulated and communicated to management in a timely fashion. in designing and evaluating such controls and procedures, we recognize that any controls and procedures, no matter how
well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives. our management is necessarily required to use judgment in evaluating controls and procedures. also, we may have investments in certain
unconsolidated entities. since we do not control or manage those entities, our controls and procedures with respect to those entities are substantially more limited than those we maintain with respect to our consolidated subsidiaries.  in the ordinary course of business, we review our system of internal control over financial reporting and make changes to our systems and processes to
improve controls and increase efficiency, while ensuring that we maintain an effective internal control environment. changes may include such activities as implementing new, more efficient systems and automating manual processes.  an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures was performed as of the end of the period
covered by this report. this evaluation was performed under the supervision and with the participation of management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial officer. based upon that evaluation, our chief executive officer and
chief financial officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures are effective to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by the company in the reports that it files or submits under the securities
exchange act of 1934 is accumulated and communicated to management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure and are effective to provide reasonable
assurance that such information is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified by the secs rules and forms.  managements report on internal control over financial reporting  managements report on internal control over
financial reporting and the attestation report of ernst& young llp, the companys independent registered public accounting firm, on managements assessment of internal control over financial reporting are included in our annual
report to shareholders, and are incorporated in this item9a by reference. portions of our annual report to shareholders is included as an exhibit to this annual report on form 10-k.  changes in internal control over financial reporting  there has been no change in the companys internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fiscal quarter ended january31, 2007, that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
companys internal control over financial reporting.
item9b.
other information  none.  part iii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance  information required by this item with respect to the companys directors, certain family relationships, and compliance by the companys directors, executive officers and certain beneficial owners of the
companys common stock with section16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934 is incorporated by reference to all information under the captions entitled information about the boardproposal no.1: nominees for election
to the board and stock ownershipsection 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance from our proxy statement relating to the annual meeting of shareholders to be held on june1, 2007 (our proxy
statement).  please see the information concerning our executive officers contained in part i of this annual report on form 10-k
under the caption executive officers of the registrant which is included there in accordance with instruction 3 to item401(b) of the secs regulation s-k.  the information regarding our audit committee, including our audit committee financial expert, our director nomination process, and our codes of ethics
for senior financial officers and other associates required by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to all information under the caption entitled corporate governance included in our proxy statement. item
1. business, above contains information relating to the availability of a copy of this code on our website.
item11.
executive compensation  the information
required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to all information under the caption executive compensation, and under the subcaptions compensation committee interlocks and insider participation and
compensation committee report that appear under the caption corporate governance included in our proxy statement.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters  the information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to all information under the subcaptions holdings of major
shareholders and holdings of officers and directors that appear under the caption stock ownership and all information that appears under the caption equity compensation plan information included in our proxy
statement.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence.  the information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to all information under the caption related-party transactions and under the caption information about the
boarddirector independence included in our proxy statement.
item14.
principal accountant fees and services  the
information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to all information under the caption corporate governanceaudit committee pre-approval policy and under the caption company proposal proposal
no.2: ratification of independent accountants included in our proxy statement.  part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
(a)
(1)and (2)consolidated financial statements   the financial statements listed in the following table, which are included in our annual report to shareholders, are incorporated herein by reference to the portions of this annual report on form 10-k filed as exhibit 13 hereto.
annual report to shareholders(page)
consolidated statements of income for each of the three years in the period ended january31, 2007
consolidated balance sheets at january31, 2007 and 2006
consolidated statements of shareholders equity for each of the three years in the period ended
january31,2007
consolidated statements of cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended january31, 2007
notes to consolidated financial statements
report of independent registered public accounting firm
report of independent registered public accounting firm on internal control over financial reporting
managements report to our shareholders
all schedules have been omitted because the required information is not present or is not present in amounts
sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the financial statements, including the notes thereto.
(3) exhibits   the
following documents are filed as exhibits to this form 10-k:
(a)
restated certificate of incorporation of the company, is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3(a) to the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the year ended january 31, 1989
(which document may be found and reviewed in the secs public reference room at 100 f street, ne, room 1580, washington, d.c. 20549, in the files therein relating to the company, whose sec file number is no. 1-6991), the certificate of
amendment to the restated certificate of incorporation is incorporated herein by reference to registration statement on form s-8 (file number 33-13315) and the certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of incorporation is incorporated
hereby by reference to the current report on form 8-k of the company, dated august 11, 1999 (which document may be found and reviewed in the secs public reference room at 100 f street, ne, room 1580, washington, d.c. 20549, in the files
therein relating to the company, whose sec file number is no. 1-6991).
(b)
amended and restated bylaws of the company are incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated september 25, 2006.
(a)
form of indenture dated as of june 1, 1985, between the company and bank of new york, trustee, (formerly boatmens trust company and centerre trust company) is incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 4(c) to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 2-97917).
(b)
form of indenture dated as of august 1, 1985, between the company and bank of new york, trustee, (formerly boatmens trust company and centerre trust company) is incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 4(c) to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 2-99162).
(c)
form of amended and restated indenture, mortgage and deed of trust, assignment of rents and security agreement dated as of december 1, 1986, among the first national bank of boston and james e.
mogavero, owner trustees, rewal corporation i, estate for years holder, rewal corporation ii, remainderman, the company and the first national bank of chicago and r.d. manella, indenture trustees, is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4(b)
to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 33-11394).
(d)
form of indenture dated as of july 15, 1990, between the company and harris trust and savings bank, trustee, is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4(b) to registration statement on form
s-3 (file number 33-35710).
(e)
indenture dated as of april 1, 1991, between the company and j.p. morgan trust company, national association, as successor trustee to bank one trust company, na, as successor trustee to the
first national bank of chicago, trustee, is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4(a) to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 33-51344).
(f)
first supplemental indenture dated as of september 9, 1992, to the indenture dated as of april 1, 1991, between the company and j.p. morgan trust company, national association, as successor
trustee to bank one trust company, na, as successor trustee to the first national bank of chicago, trustee, is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4(b) to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 33-51344).
(g)
indenture dated as of july 5, 2001, between the company and j.p. morgan trust company, national association, as successor trustee to bank one trust company, na, is incorporated by reference to
exhibit 4.1 to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 333-64740).
(h)
indenture dated as of december 11, 2002, between the company and j.p. morgan trust company, national association, as successor trustee to bank one trust company, na, is incorporated by reference
to exhibit 4.5 to registration statement on form s-3 (file number 333-101847).
(i)
indenture dated as of july 19, 2005, between the company and j.p. morgan trust company, national association is incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.5 to registration statement on form s-3
(file number 333-126512)
+10
(a)
form of individual deferred compensation agreements is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(b) from the annual report on form 10-k of the company, as amended, for the fiscal year ended
january 31, 1986 (which document may be found and reviewed in the secs public reference room at 100 f street, ne, room 1580, washington, d.c. 20549, in the files therein relating to the company, whose sec file number is no.
1-6991).
+10
(b)
wal-mart stores, inc. stock option plan of 1994 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4(c) to registration statement on form s-8 (file number 33-55325).
+10(c)
wal-mart stores, inc. officer deferred compensation plan as amended and restated effective march31, 2003 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(g) from the annual report on form
10-k of the company for the fiscal year ended january31, 2004, filed on april9, 2004.
+10(d)
wal-mart stores, inc. restricted stock plan is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(j) from the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the fiscal year ended january 31, 1997,
filed on april 21, 1997.
+10(e)
wal-mart stores, inc. management incentive plan as amended and restated effective february 1, 2003 is incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(l) to the annual report on form 10-k of the
company for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2004, filed on april 9, 2004.
+10(f)
the rules of the asda sharesave plan 2000, as amended june 4, 2004, are incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(m) to the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the fiscal year ended
january 31, 2005, filed on march 31, 2005.
+10(g)
the asda colleague share ownership plan 1999, as amended june 4, 2004, is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(n) to the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the fiscal year ended
january 31, 2005, filed on march 31, 2005.
+10(h)
retirement agreement, dated january 22, 2005 between the company and thomas m. coughlin is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated
january 25, 2005.
+10(i)
form of notice of non qualified stock option grant, as amended january 3, 2005, is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(p) to the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the fiscal year
ended january 31, 2005, filed on march 31, 2005.
+10(j)
form of notification of restricted stock award and terms and conditions of award, as amended january 3, 2005, is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(q) to the annual report on form 10-k of
the company for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005, filed on march 31, 2005.
+10(k)
form of notification of stock value equivalent award and terms and conditions of award, is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(r) to the annual report on form 10-k of the company for the
fiscal year ended january 31, 2005, filed on march 31, 2005.
+10(l)
form of post -termination agreement and covenant not to compete with attached schedule of executive officers who have executed a post-termination agreement and covenant not to compete, together
with summary of material differences from form of agreement filed is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(o) from amendment no. 1 to the annual report on form10-k of the company for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2004, filed on august
26, 2004.
+10(m)
wal-mart stores, inc. 2004 associate stock purchase plan, as amended and restated effective as of february 1, 2004, is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(p) to the annual report on form
10-k of the company for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2005, filed on march 31, 2005.
+10(n)
wal-mart stores, inc. stock incentive plan of 2005, as amended january 1, 2005, is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated june 9,
2005.
+10(o)
form of wal-mart stores, inc. stock incentive plan, notice of non qualified stock option grant is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated
june 9, 2005.
+10(p)
form of wal-mart stores, inc. stock incentive plan, restrictive stock award, notification of award and terms and conditions of award is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to the current
report on form 8-k of the company dated june 9, 2005.
+10(q)
form of wal-mart stores, inc. stock incentive plan, performance share award, notification of award and terms and conditions of award is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to the current
report on form 8-k of the company dated june9, 2005.
+10(r)
form of wal-mart stores, inc. stock incentive plan, performance based restrictive stock award, notification of award and terms and conditions of award is incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company, dated september 28, 2005.
+10(s)
amendment to form of post-termination agreement and covenant not to compete agreements is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company, dated
december 12, 2005.
+10(t)
amendment to form of post-termination agreement and covenant not to compete agreements is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated
december 12, 2005.
+10(u)
wal-mart stores, inc. supplemental executive retirement plan (as amended effective january 1, 2005) is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company
dated march 7, 2006.
+10(v)
wal-mart stores, inc. director compensation plan, amended and restated effective january 1, 2005 (except as otherwise provided therein) is incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the
current report on form 8-k of the company dated march 7, 2006.
*12
statement re computation of ratios.
*13
portions of the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ending january 31, 2007. all information incorporated by reference in items 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 7a, 8 and 9a of this annual report
on form 10-k from the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2006 is filed with the sec. the balance of the information in the annual report to shareholders will be furnished to the sec in accordance with item 601(13) of
regulation s-k.
*21
list of the companys significant subsidiaries.
*23
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
*31.1
chief executive officer section 302 certification.
*31.2
chief financial officer section 302 certification.
**32.1
chief executive officer section 906 certifications.
**32.2
chief financial officer section 906 certifications.
*
filed herewith as an exhibit.
**
furnished herewith as an exhibit.
+
management contracts and compensatory plans and arrangements required to be filed as exhibits pursuant to item15(b) of this report.
signatures  pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
wal-mart stores, inc.
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ h. lee scott, jr.
h. lee scott, jr.
president and chief executive officer
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated:
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ h. lee scott, jr.
h. lee scott, jr.
president and chief executive officer and director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ s. robson walton
s. robson walton
chairman of the board and director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ thomas m. schoewe
thomas m. schoewe
executive vice president and chief financial officer (principal financial officer)
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ steven p. whaley
steven p. whaley
senior vice president and controller (principal
accounting officer)
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ aida m. alvarez
aida m. alvarez
director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ james w. breyer
james w. breyer
director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ m. michele burns
m. michele burns
director
date: march27, 2007
by
james i. cash, jr.
director
signature page to wal-mart stores, inc.  form 10-k for fiscal year ended january 31, 2007
date: march27, 2007
by
roger c. corbett
director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ douglas n. daft
douglas n. daft
director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ david d. glass
david d. glass
director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ roland a. hernandez
roland a. hernandez
director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ jack c. shewmaker
jack c. shewmaker
director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ jim c. walton
jim c. walton
director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ christopher j. williams
christopher j. williams
director
date: march27, 2007
by
/s/ linda s. wolf
linda s. wolf
director
signature page to wal-mart stores, inc.  form 10-k for fiscal year ended january 31, 2007
