10-k
d03879e10vk.htm
form 10-k
e10vk
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2002
or
o
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file number 1-8606
verizon communications inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
23-2259884
(state of incorporation)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
1095 avenue of the americas
new york, new york
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (212)395-2121
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
name of each exchange on
title of each class
which registered
common stock, $.10 par value
new york, philadelphia, boston,
chicago and pacific stock exchanges
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:
none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90days. yes   no
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405
of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the
best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in partiii of this form 10-k or any amendment to
this form10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as
defined in rule12b-2 of the act). yes   no
at june28, 2002, the aggregate market value of the registrants voting stock
held by nonaffiliates was approximately $107,221,649,000.
at january31, 2003, 2,745,782,839 shares of the registrants common stock were
outstanding, after deducting 5,867,645 shares held in treasury.
documents incorporated by reference:
portions of the registrants annual report to shareowners for the year ended
december31, 2002 (parts i and ii).
portions of the registrants proxy statement prepared in connection with the
2003 annual meeting of shareowners (partiii).
table of contents
item no.
page
part i
item 1.
business
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the registrant
part ii
item 5.
market for registrants common equity and related stockholder matters
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item 14.
controls and procedures
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form8-k
signatures
certifications
unless otherwise indicated, all information is as of march10, 2003
part i
item1.business
general
verizon communications inc. is one of the worlds leading providers of
communications services. verizon companies are the largest providers of
wireline and wireless communications in the united states, with 135.8million
access line equivalents and 32.5million verizon wireless customers. verizon
is also the largest directory publisher in the world. with more than $67
billion in annual revenues and 229,500 employees, verizons global presence
extends to 32 countries in the americas, europe, asia and the pacific.
verizon was formerly known as bell atlantic corporation, which was incorporated
in 1983 under the laws of the state of delaware. we began doing business as
verizon communications on june30, 2000, when bell atlantic corporation merged
with gte corporation in a transaction accounted for as a pooling-of-interests
business combination.
our principal executive offices are located at 1095 avenue of the americas, new
york, new york 10036 (telephone number 212-395-2121).
we have four reportable segments, which we operate and manage as strategic
business units and organize by products and services. our segments and their
principal activities consist of the following:
domestic telecom
domestic wireline communications
services, principally representing
our telephone operations that
provide local telephone services in
29 states and the district of
columbia. these services include
voice and data transport, enhanced
and custom calling features, network
access, directory assistance,
private lines and publictelephones.
this segment also provides long
distance services, customer premises
equipment distribution,data
solutions and systems integration,
billing and collections, internet
access services and inventorymanagement services.
domestic wireless
domestic wireless products and
services include wireless voice and
data services, paging services and
equipment sales.
international
international wireline and wireless
communications operations and
investments in the americas, europe,
asia and the pacific.
information services
domestic and international
publishing businesses, including
print superpages and electronic
superpages.com directories, as well
as website creation and other
electronic commerce services. this
segment has operations principally
in north america, europe and latin
america.
you can find segment financial information under the heading segment results
of operations on pages 15 through 20 and in note 20 on pages 63 through 64 of
the 2002 verizon annual report to shareowners, which is incorporated herein by
reference.
domestic telecom
operations
our domestic telecom segment, principally representing our wireline telephone
operations, provided approximately 60% of 2002 total operating revenues. our
telephone operations presently serve a territory consisting of 135.8million
access line equivalents in 29 states and the district of columbia. this
segment also provides long distance and other telecommunication services.
domestic telecom provides mainly two types of telecommunications services:
exchange telecommunications service is the transmission of
telecommunications among customers located within a local calling area
within a local access and transport area (lata). examples of exchange
telecommunications services include switched local residential and
business services, local private line voice and data services and
centrex services. we also provide toll services within a lata
(intralata long distance) and toll services outside a lata (interlata
long distance).
exchange access service links a customers premises and the
transmission facilities of other telecommunications carriers,
generally interlata carriers. examples of exchange access services
include switched access and special access services.
we have organized our domestic telecom segment into five marketing units
operating across our telephone subsidiaries. the units focus on specific
markets. we are not dependent on any single customer. our telephone
operations remain responsible within their respective service areas for the
provision of telephone services, financial performance and regulatory matters.
the enterprise unit markets communications and information technology and
services to large businesses and to departments, agencies and offices of the
executive, judicial and legislative branches of the federal, state and local
governments. these services include voice switching/processing services (e.g.,
dedicated private lines, custom centrex, call management and voice messaging),
end-user networking (e.g., credit and debit card transactions and personal
computer-based conferencing, including data and video), internetworking
(establishing links between the geographically disparate networks of two or
more companies or within the same company), network optimization (disaster
avoidance, 911 service and intelligent vehicle highway systems) and other
communications services such as distance learning, telemedicine,
videoconferencing and interactive multimedia applications. the enterprise unit
also includes our network integration group which provides
data transmission,
internet and network integration services (integrating multiple geographically
disparate networks into one system) and our select services unit which operates
as a provider of interlata long distance services, network monitoring services
and telecommunications equipment sales to medium and large businesses.
revenues in 2002 were approximately $6.8billion, representing approximately
17% of domestic telecoms aggregate revenues.
the retail unit markets communications and information services to residential
customers and to small and medium-sized businesses within our territory,
including our long distance services and internet access services. some of our
long distance subsidiaries operate as a reseller of national and international
long distance services and provide service in all 50 states to residential and
business customers, including long distance services, calling cards, 800/888
services and operator services to its customers. under the telecommunications
act of 1996 (1996 act), our ability to offer in-region long distance services
in the states where the former bell atlantic telephone subsidiaries operate as
local exchange carriers is largely dependent on satisfying prescribed
requirements. see telecommunications act of 1996 below. this unit also
provides operator and pay telephone services. the retail unit includes verizon
avenue, a subsidiary that markets to customers located in multi-tenant
buildings and teleproducts, a subsidiary that markets customer premises
equipment to the end-user. revenues in 2002 were approximately $23.9billion,
representing approximately 59% of domestic telecoms aggregate revenues. these
revenues were derived primarily from the provision of telephone services to
residential users.
the wholesale unit markets our network operations, which principally includes
our carrier access and telecom industry services. revenues in 2002 were
approximately $8.9billion, representing approximately 22% of domestic
telecoms aggregate revenues. approximately 34% of total wholesale revenues
were derived from interexchange carriers (calculated using wholesales switched
access revenue over total wholesale revenue). most of the remaining revenues
came from business customers and government agencies with their own special
access network connections, wireless companies and other local exchange
carriers which resell network connections to their own customers.
the network unit principally manages our switched and special access to the
telephone operations local exchange networks. revenues in 2002 were
approximately $600million, representing approximately 1% of domestic telecoms
aggregate revenues.
the national operations unit markets our connected solutions services that
supply installation and repair labor and manages our supply unit that is
responsible for the procurement and management of inventory and supplies for
our telephone operations, as well as other subsidiaries. our supply unit also
sells material and logistic services to third parties. revenues in 2002 (after
eliminations and combined with all other domestic telecom revenues) were
approximately $500million, representing approximately 1% of domestic telecoms
aggregate revenues.
telecommunications act of 1996
we face increasing competition in all areas of our business. the 1996 act,
regulatory and judicial actions and the development of new technologies,
products and services have created opportunities for alternative
telecommunication service providers, many of which are subject to fewer
regulatory constraints. we are unable to predict definitively the impact that
the ongoing changes in the telecommunications industry will ultimately have on
our business, results of operations or financial condition. the financial
impact will depend on several factors, including the timing, extent and success
of competition in our markets, the timing and outcome of various regulatory
proceedings and any appeals, and the timing, extent and success of our pursuit
of new opportunities resulting from the 1996 act and technological advances.
in-region long distance
we offer long distance service throughout most of the country, except in
maryland, west virginia and the district of columbia where we have not yet
received authority to offer long distance service under the 1996 act, and in
alaska. under the 1996 act, our ability to offer in-region long distance
services in the regions where the former bell atlantic telephone subsidiaries
operate as local exchange carriers is largely dependent on satisfying specified
requirements. the requirements include a 14-point competitive checklist of
steps which we must take to help competitors offer local services through
resale, through purchase of unbundled network elements (unes), or by
interconnecting their own networks to ours. we must also demonstrate to the
federal communications commission (fcc)that our entry into the in-region long
distance market would be in the public interest.
we now have authority to offer in-region long distance service in 11 states in
the former bell atlantic territory, accounting for approximately 90% of the
lines served by the former bell atlantic. these states are new york,
massachusetts, connecticut, pennsylvania, rhode island, vermont, maine, new
jersey, new hampshire, delaware and virginia. the pennsylvania and new jersey
orders are currently on appeal to the u.s. court of appeals. the u.s. court of
appeals has remanded the massachusetts order to the fcc for further explanation
on one issue, but left our long distance authority in effect. in december
2002, we filed an application with the fcc for permission to enter the
in-region long distance market in maryland, west virginia and the district of
columbia. the fcc must act on this application by march19, 2003.
fcc regulation and interstate rates
our telephone operations are subject to the jurisdiction of the fcc with
respect to interstate services and related matters. in 2002, the fcc continued
to implement reforms to the interstate access charge system and to implement
the universal service and other requirements of the 1996 act.
access charges and universal service
on may31, 2000, the fcc adopted the coalition for affordable local and long
distance services (calls)plan as a comprehensive five-year plan for regulation
of interstate access charges. the calls plan has three main components.
first, it establishes a portable interstate access universal service support of
$650million for the industry. this explicit support replaces implicit support
embedded in interstate access charges. second, the plan simplifies the
patchwork of common line charges into one subscriber line charge (slc)and
provides for de-averaging of the slc by zones and class of customers in a
manner that will not undermine comparable and affordable universal service.
third, the plan sets into place a mechanism to transition to a set target of
$0.0055 per minute for switched access services. once that target rate is
reached, local exchange carriers are no longer required to make further annual
price cap reductions to their switched access prices. the annual reductions
leading to the target rate, as well as annual reductions for the subset of
special access services that remain subject to price cap regulation was set at
6.5% per year.
on september10, 2001, the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit ruled on
an appeal of the fcc order adopting the plan. the court upheld the fcc on
several challenges to the order, but remanded two aspects of the decision back
to the fcc on the grounds that they lacked sufficient justification. the court
remanded back to the fcc for further consideration its decision setting the
annual reduction factor at 6.5% minus an inflation factor and the size of the
new universal service fund at $650million. the entire plan (including these
elements) will continue in effect pending the fccs further consideration of
its justification of these components.
as a result of tariff adjustments which became effective in july2002,
approximately 98% of our access lines reached the $0.0055 benchmark.
the fcc has adopted rules for special access services that provide for pricing
flexibility and ultimately the removal of services from price regulation when
prescribed competitive thresholds are met. in order to use these rules,
carriers must forego the ability to take advantage of provisions in the current
rules that provide relief in the event earnings fall below prescribed
thresholds. we have been authorized to remove special access and dedicated
transport services from price caps in 36 metropolitan statistical areas (msas)
in the former bell atlantic territory and in 17 additional msas in the former
gte territory. in addition, the fcc has found that in 20 msas we have met the
stricter standards to remove special access connections to end-user customers
from price caps. approximately 55% of special access revenues are now removed
from price regulation. we also have an application pending that, if granted,
would remove an additional three msas, and special access connections to
end-user customers in two additional msas, from price cap regulation.
in november1999, the fcc adopted a new mechanism for providing universal
service support to high cost areas served by large local telephone companies.
this funding mechanism provides additional support for local telephone services
in several states served by our telephone operations. this system has been
supplemented by the new fcc access charge plan described above. on july31,
2001, the u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit reversed and remanded to
the fcc for further proceedings. the court concluded that the fcc had failed
to adequately explain some aspects of its decision and had failed to address
any need for a state universal service mechanism. the current universal
service mechanism remains in place pending the outcome of any fcc review as a
result of these appeals.
unbundling of network elements
in november1999, the fcc announced its decision setting forth new unbundling
requirements, eliminating elements that it had previously required to be
unbundled, limiting the obligation to provide others and adding new elements.
in addition to the unbundling requirements released in november1999, the fcc
released an order in a separate proceeding in december1999, requiring
incumbent local exchange companies also to unbundle and provide to competitors
the higher frequency portion of their local loop. this provides competitors
with the ability to provision data services on top of incumbent carriers voice
services.
in july2000, the u.s. court of appeals for the eighth circuit found that some
aspects of the fccs requirements for pricing unes were inconsistent with the
1996 act. in particular, it found that the fcc was wrong to require incumbent
carriers to base these prices not on their real costs but on the imaginary
costs of the most efficient equipment and the most efficient network
configuration. this portion of the courts decision was stayed pending review
by the u.s. supreme court. on may13, 2002, the u.s. supreme court reversed
that decision and upheld the fccs pricing rules.
on may24, 2002, the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c. circuit released an
order that overturned the most recent fcc decision establishing which network
elements were required to be unbundled. in particular, the court found that
the fcc did not adequately consider the limitations of the necessary and
impair standards of the 1996 act when it chose national rules for unbundling
and that it failed to consider the relevance of competition from other types of
service providers, including cable and satellite. the court also vacated a
separate order that had authorized an unbundling requirement for line sharing
where a competing carrier purchases only a portion of the copper connection to
the end-user in order to provide high-speed broadband services using dsl
technology. several parties, including the fcc, petitioned the court for
rehearing of the court order. the court rejected the petitions that asked it
to change its decision on september4, 2002. the court did, however, stay its
order vacating the fccs rules until february20, 2003, to provide the fcc time
to complete an ongoing rulemaking to determine what elements should be
unbundled. several carriers have sought u.s. supreme court review of the
underlying court decision. that request remains pending.
on october25, 2002, the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c. circuit released an
order upholding the fccs decisions that established interim limits on the
availability of combinations of unes known as enhanced extended links or
eels. eels consist of unbundled loops and transport elements. the fcc
decisions limited access to eels to carriers that would use them to provide a
significant amount of local traffic, and not just use them as substitutes for
special access services.
prior to the issuance of these orders from the u.s. court of appeals for the
d.c. circuit, the fcc had already begun a review of the scope of its unbundling
requirement through a rulemaking referred to as the triennial review of unes.
this rulemaking reopens the question of what network elements must be made
available on an unbundled basis under the 1996 act and will revisit the
unbundling decisions made in the order overturned by the u.s. court of appeals
for the d.c. circuit. in this rulemaking, the fcc also will address other
pending issues relating to unbundled elements, including the question of
whether competing carriers may substitute combinations of unbundled loops and
transport for already competitive special access services. on february20,
2003, the fcc announced a decision in its triennial review, but the order has
not yet been released.
compensation for internet traffic
on april27, 2001, the fcc released an order addressing intercarrier
compensation for dial-up connections for internet-bound traffic. the fcc found
that internet-bound traffic is interstate and subject to the fccs
jurisdiction. moreover, the fcc again found that internet-bound traffic is not
subject to reciprocal compensation under section251(b)(5) of the 1996 act.
instead, the fcc established federal rates per minute for this traffic that
decline from $0.0015 to $0.0007 over a three-year period. the fcc order also
sets caps on the total minutes of this traffic that may be subject to any
intercarrier compensation and requires that incumbent local exchange carriers
must offer to both bill and pay reciprocal compensation for local traffic at
the same rate as they are required to pay on internet-bound traffic. on may3,
2002, the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c. circuit rejected part of the fccs
rationale for its april27, 2001 order, but declined to vacate the order while
it is on remand.
several parties requested rehearing, asking the court to vacate the underlying
order. those requests were denied in a series of orders released on september
24, 2002 and september25, 2002. one carrier has sought u.s. supreme court
review of that denial. in the meantime, pending further action by the fcc, the
fccs underlying order remains in effect.
state regulation of rates and services
state public utility commissions regulate our telephone operations with respect
to intrastate rates and services and other matters. in many jurisdictions the
telephone operations have been able to replace rate of return regulation with
price regulation plans.
verizon california inc.
arizona
verizon californias operations in arizona are subject to rate of return
regulation.
california
verizon californias operations in california have operated under the new
regulatory framework (nrf)since 1990. the nrf allows for a gradual transition
to less regulation on a service-by-service basis. the nrf is reviewed every
three years and currently has the following features:
earnings ceiling: the ceiling is suspended.
price cap index: by setting inflation equal to productivity, the
california public utilities commission (cpuc)has suspended the price
cap index. limited exogenous changes are allowed. generally,
exogenous changes are changes unique to or specifically targeted to a
company that are beyond its control (in this case, changes are
permitted only for matters mandated by the cpuc or changes in total
intrastate cost recovery resulting from changes between federal and
state jurisdictions).
price flexibility: services fall into three categories.
category i services cannot be changed without cpuc approval.
category ii services are partially competitive and can be adjusted within
a ceiling/floor range. the current price (effectively the ceiling) cannot
be increased without a formal application.
category iii services are considered competitive and can be increased or decreased on short notice.
new services: new services can be classified as category ii or iii. if introduced as category iii, verizon california
must demonstrate insignificant market power.
the cpuc will review nrf features
during 2003  2004.
nevada
verizon californias operations in nevada are subject to rate of return
regulation.
verizon delaware inc.
since 1994, verizon delaware has been regulated under the alternative
regulation provisions of the delaware telecommunications technology investment
act of 1993 (delaware telecommunications act). the delaware telecommunications
act provides the following:
the prices of basic telephone services (e.g., dial tone and local usage) will remain regulated and cannot change in any one year
by more than the gross domestic product  price index (gdp-pi) less 3%.
the prices of discretionary services
(e.g., identa ring(sm) and call waiting) cannot increase more than 15% per year per service.
the prices of competitive services (e.g., voice messaging and message toll service) are not subject to tariff or regulation.
verizon delaware will develop a technology deployment plan with a commitment to invest a minimum of $250million in delawares
telecommunications network during the first five years of the plan.
in april2001, the delaware public service commission approved verizon
delawares request for an extension of the current incentive regulation plan
until one year after verizon delaware obtains authority to enter the long
distance market, or march2004, whichever occurs first. in exchange for the
extension, verizon delaware agreed to cap basic rates until december31, 2002.
on september24, 2002, the fcc granted verizon delawares application to enter
the long distance market. in 2002, verizon delaware advised the delaware
public service commission that it elects to remain regulated under the delaware
telecommunications act, with minor modifications. no action on this request
has yet been scheduled.
verizon florida inc.
florida statutes govern the price cap plan. beginning january1, 2001, verizon
florida was able to raise basic local rates on 30days notice once in any
12-month period not to exceed the gdp-pi less 1%. verizon florida may increase
rates for non-basic services but increases for any category cannot exceed 6% in
any 12-month period unless another company is providing service in a given
exchange, at which time verizon florida can increase its price up to 20% in a
12-month period. earnings are not regulated.
verizon hawaii inc.
verizon hawaiis telephone operations are subject to rate of return regulation.
verizon maryland inc.
in 1996, the public service commission of maryland approved a price cap plan
for regulating the intrastate services provided by verizon maryland. under the
plan, services are divided into six categories: access; basic-residential;
basic-business; discretionary; competitive; and miscellaneous. rates for
access, basic-residential, basic-business and discretionary services can be
increased or decreased annually under a formula that is based upon changes in
the gdp-pi minus a productivity offset based upon changes in the rate of
inflation as reflected in the consumer price index (cpi). rates for
competitive services may be increased without regulatory limits. regulation of
profits is eliminated. the public service commission of maryland is currently
reviewing the incentive regulation plan. verizon maryland has sought to
eliminate the price cap formula and to move all business services into the
competitive category.
verizon new england inc.
maine
in june2001, the maine public utilities commission (puc)ordered the
continuation of an alternative form of regulation (afor)for verizon maine for
a second five-year term. key aspects of the new plan:
eliminates annual filings to adjust rates of core services;
eliminates the 4.5% productivity factor applied in the initial afor term;
provides total pricing flexibility for all services except local service, operator services and directory assistance;
allows an increase in local service rates that offsets (in whole or in part) a legislatively required access charge reduction;
rejects proposals to institute over 9,000 retail service quality measures and instead continues the current service quality
plan with some modifications; and
requires monitoring of verizon maines toll rate/revenue reductions to insure that toll users benefit from the access
reductions, either in reduced toll rates from verizon maine, or in toll savings from alternative carriers. at the end of a
two-year monitoring period that began december31, 2000, verizon maines toll rates/revenues must be $19.8million lower, or
additional cuts in toll rates will be required. thereafter, toll rates are unrestricted. on february6, 2003, verizon maine
filed with the puc proof that the required reduction in toll revenues had occurred and that no further regulation of toll
prices is required. puc consideration of verizon maines filing is pending.
the maine public advocate appealed the pucs afor decision to the maine supreme
judicial court, claiming that any extension to the afor must be preceded by an
investigation of verizon maines costs and earnings utilizing traditional rate
of return principles. on february28, 2003, the court ruled that while state
law requires that telephone rates under an afor are no higher than under rate
of return regulation, the puc has broad discretion in making such a
determination that would not necessarily require a full rate of return inquiry.
however, the court vacated and remanded the decision to the puc for its
failure to expressly make such a determination, or in the alternative that if
such a showing cannot be made, that it nonetheless remains in the best interest
of ratepayers to proceed with an afor. no change in any of verizon maines
rates is required by the courts decision while the remand proceeding is
pending.
massachusetts
in april2001, verizon new england filed with the massachusetts department of
telecommunications and energy (dte)a proposed alternative regulatory plan to
replace the price regulation plan that was to expire in august2001. on may8,
2002, the dte issued its decision in phase i of the case in which it found that
verizon new england had demonstrated the existence of sufficient competition
for most of its retail business services and granted verizon new england
pricing flexibility on the services. price increases are not constrained.
price decreases are subject to price floor requirements. in addition, the dte
ruled that verizon new england should reduce state switched access prices to
interstate levels on a revenue neutral basis by increases in residence dial
tone rates. with respect to residence services, the dte tentatively concluded
that verizon new england should have pricing flexibility for non-basic services
but that increases in basic services should be limited. the dte directed
verizon new england to file proposals consistent with its findings. these
proposals are under review by the dte in phase ii of the case, and a decision
is pending.
on july11, 2002, the dte issued a comprehensive order in which it ruled on the
cost studies used for setting verizon new englands prices for unes. verizon
new england and other parties filed motions for reconsideration of various
portions of the order. on january14, 2003, the dte issued its ruling on the
motions and directed verizon new england to file new cost studies consistent
with the rulings within 30days.
on december20, 2002, the dte issued its decision in response to a remand by
the united states district court for the eastern district of massachusetts in
an appeal brought by worldcom inc. and global naps inc. related to several
orders of the dte dating back to may1999. the court ruled in an august2002
decision that dte orders finding that reciprocal compensation was not owed on
internet-bound traffic did not comply with federal law because the dte had not
rested its rulings on the specific language of the interconnection agreements.
in its latest decision, the dte ruled that the plain terms of the agreements
excluded internet-bound traffic from the scope of the reciprocal compensation
provisions, and therefore, verizon new england had no obligation to pay
reciprocal compensation on such traffic. global naps and worldcom have
appealed the dtes decision to the united states district court for the eastern
district of massachusetts.
new hampshire
verizon new englands operations in new hampshire are currently subject to rate
of return regulation.
rhode island
pursuant to a directive of the rhode island public utilities commission
(ripuc), verizon rhode island filed in july2002 a proposal for a new
alternative regulation plan to replace the existing price cap plan that was to
expire in december2002. following the close of evidentiary hearings in the
case, verizon rhode island and the rhode island division of public utilities
and carriers (division) filed a stipulation on december6, 2002 resolving all
issues in the case. the principal components of the stipulated plan are:
no index or price cap formula;
pricing flexibility for all business services, subject to a long-run incremental cost (lric)-based price floor;
the company may increase residential basic exchange rates by $1 per year in years one and two. an additional $1 increase
in year three will be subject to ripuc and division review;
the company may pass through exogenous changes, subject to a $2.5million annual cap, but must absorb the first $1million
in exogenous changes in the year in which approval is sought;
the company will continue its voluntary funding of a discount program for internet access for schools and libraries at up
to $2million per year until the earlier of december31, 2004, or the implementation of an alternative funding mechanism
(e.g., legislation);
the current retail service quality plan is maintained with certain modifications; and
the term of the plan is three years.
after further hearing and briefing, the ripuc approved the stipulation at an
open meeting on january10, 2003, with two modifications. first, the ripuc
imposed limits on price increases for all other non-basic residential services
as follows:
for services priced at $5 or less, rates may increase 15% per year
for services priced at $5.01 to $10, rates may increase 10% per year
for services priced over $10, rates may increase 5% per year
second, the company is required to file quarterly reports showing for each wire
center in the state the number of access lines served by the company and the
number and type of access lines served by competitors. the ripuc is expected
to enter a written order shortly.
vermont
in 2000, the vermont public service board approved a five-year incentive
regulation plan that will provide verizon new england with increased
flexibility to introduce and price new products and services. the plan also
removes most restrictions on verizon new englands earnings from vermont
operations during the life of the plan and contains no productivity adjustment.
the plan limits verizon new englands ability to raise prices on existing
products and services, and requires revenue reductions of $16.5million at the
outset of the plan, $6.5million during the first year of the plan and
approximately $6.0million over the subsequent years of the plan. the plan
also requires some service quality improvements subject to financial penalty.
verizon new jersey inc.
the 1992 new jersey telecommunications act classifies telecommunications
services as competitive or protected. protected telephone services
include basic residence, touch-tone, access services other than those otherwise
deemed competitive by the new jersey board of public utilities (njbpu),
business local service for customers with four lines or less, and the ordering,
installation and restoration of these services. verizon new jersey provides
protected telephone services and other services, including vertical services
(rate-regulated services), under a plan for alternative form of regulation,
which became effective on july1, 2002, pursuant to a decision announced by the
njbpu on june19, 2002.
the new plan eliminates the prior earnings sharing provisions.
on july15, 2002, the njbpu announced an order on reconsideration of its
december17, 2001 decision in which it prescribed new rates, terms and
conditions under which verizon new jersey is required to make its network
available to competitive local exchange carriers (clecs). many of these rates
constitute substantial reductions to verizon new jerseys prior une rates.
verizon new jersey filed suit in the united states district court for the
district of new jersey on november7, 2002, seeking judicial review of these
rates and compensation for the taking they effected. the case is presently
pending.
verizon new york inc.
the new york state public service commission (nyspsc)has adopted a new
incentive plan to regulate the services of verizon new york, effective march1,
2002. the plan provides pricing flexibility, adopts new service quality
standards and does not restrict verizon new yorks earnings. the plan will
expire in 2004, except that the service quality provisions of the plan will
expire in 2005.
the new plan:
permits verizon new york to increase its retail rates by 3% of its
intrastate revenues per year in each of the two years of the plan,
but limits any increase on residence service first lines to $1.85
in 2002 and $.65 in 2003, and freezes rates and lowers service
connection charges for low income consumers;
establishes state-wide service quality standards, with the
potential for customer credits and restrictions on verizon new
yorks pricing flexibility if it fails to meet those standards;
establishes that the rates provided in the nyspscs january2002
order on pricing of unes will remain in effect for the duration of
the plan; and
requires verizon new york to transition to generally accepted
accounting principles accounting for preparing financial
statements for regulatory purposes, over a three-year period.
on january28, 2002, the nyspsc issued an order mandating substantial
reductions in the rates that verizon new york may charge its local exchange
competitors for access to unes.
on january22, 2003, the nyspsc, noting that current fcc and nyspsc cost
allocation and accounting safeguards imposed on verizon new york offer strong
protection against abusive affiliate transactions, granted our request to
terminate an 11-year old set of structural safeguards that restricted
transactions between verizon new york and its affiliates.
verizon new yorks operations in connecticut have been subject to rate of
return regulation. in february2001, the department of public utility control
adopted an incentive regulation plan proposed by verizon new york, which
eliminates regulation of earnings and provides other deregulatory benefits.
verizon north inc.
illinois
verizon norths telephone operations in illinois are subject to rate of return
regulation. optional toll plans, integrated services digital network (isdn),
frame relay, payphones, centranet, and other data services are considered
deregulated and have total pricing flexibility.
indiana
verizon norths telephone operations in indiana are subject to rate of return
regulation.
michigan
since the michigan telecommunications act was passed in 1991, a form of
regulation that focuses on services, prices and costs has replaced rate of
return regulation. earnings are not regulated. all rates for regulated
services must meet a cost floor. verizon north may increase local rates
annually up to 1% less than the consumer price index. any rate increases above
that amount must be approved by the michigan public service commission (mpsc)
as just and reasonable. the mpsc may only approve rate increases based upon
one or more of the following 5 factors: total service lric; comparison to other
provider rates; whether a new function, feature or capability is offered;
increase in costs to provide local service; and whether further investment is
economically justified. the mpsc has no jurisdiction over numerous unregulated
services. other services have substantial pricing flexibility.
on july17, 2000, several amendments to the michigan telecommunications act,
among other things, reduced verizon norths local rates by approximately $26
million and prohibited any rate increases for three years. on september4,
2000, the u.s. district court for the eastern district of michigan issued an
order that temporarily stopped the rate freeze from going into effect pending
further proceedings, but refused to issue an order to stop the rate reduction
from going into effect. on september28, 2000, the u.s. court of appeals for
the sixth circuit issued an order to temporarily stop the rate reduction from
going into effect, pending further proceedings. on december31, 2002, the
united states district court for the eastern district of michigan approved a
settlement between the parties that reduced verizons $3.50 end user common
line charge by $.25 prospectively. pursuant to the settlement, the pending
proceeding before the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit is being
withdrawn and this matter is closed.
ohio
verizon norths telephone operations in ohio are subject to rate of return
regulation.
pennsylvania
on july26, 2001, the pennsylvania public utility commission (ppuc)rejected,
in part, and accepted, in part, a proposed price cap plan filed by verizon
north. the ppuc accepted, with some modification, that part of the plan that
provided for the deregulation of the pricing of competitive services;
elimination of earnings sharing; adoption of a productivity factor based on
inflation; a provision to adjust rates for exogenous events; and a price cap of
rates of protected services. the ppuc rejected that part of verizon norths
plan that provided for improvement of verizon norths network infrastructure.
in 2002, the ppuc approved a revised infrastructure plan for verizon north.
wisconsin
verizon north entered a price cap plan in 1995. the plan does not regulate
earnings and price cap index increases can be accumulated and deferred up to
three years. the maximum increase for any non-basic rate element is 10% or the
increase in the gdp-pi, whichever is greater. basic local service is limited
to gdp-pi less 2%. intrastate access service mirrors interstate rates. there
are no restrictions on other services as long as they cover lrics. rate
changes are effective on one days notice after customer notice and new
services take effect after ten days. the statute requires that no earlier than
six years, and no more frequently than every three years thereafter, the public
service commission of wisconsin may by rule increase or decrease the gdp-pi
productivity factor in any twelve-month period to reflect any statewide changes
in the productivity experience of the telecommunications industry. the
productivity factor is under review.
verizon northwest inc.
california
verizon northwests california operations are subject to rate of return
regulation.
idaho
verizon northwests idaho operations are subject to rate of return regulation.
oregon
verizon northwests oregon operations are subject to rate of return regulation.
pricing flexibility is permitted in competitive zones and verizon northwest
currently has digital channel service, isdn, pbx trunks (telephone switching
equipment on customer premises), did trunks (trunks from the customer premises
switches to the central office) and single line business service offerings in
these zones. billing and collection and centranet are in a competitive class
and are flexibly priced.
washington
verizon northwests washington operations are subject to rate of return
regulation. intralata toll and billing and collection are flexibly priced.
verizon pennsylvania inc.
the ppuc regulates verizon pennsylvania under an alternative regulationplan
approved in 1994. the plan provides for a pure price cap plan with no sharing
of earnings with customers and replaces rate base, rate of return regulation.
competitive services, including toll, directory advertising, billing services,
centrex service, paging, speed calling, repeat calling, and hicap (high
capacity private line) and business services provided to larger customers are
price deregulated. all non-competitive services are price regulated.
the plan:
permits annual price increases up to, but not exceeding, the gdp-pi minus 2.93%;
requires annual price decreases when the gdp-pi falls below 2.93%;
caps prices for protected services, including residential and business basic exchange services, special access and
switched access, through 1999; and
permits revenue-neutral rate restructuring for noncompetitive services.
the ppucs order approving the bell atlantic-gte merger extended the cap on
residential and business basic exchange services through 2003.
the plan requires verizon pennsylvania to provide a lifeline service for
residential customers. the plan also requires deployment of a universal
broadband network, which must be completed in phases: 20% by 1998, 50% by 2004,
and 100% by 2015. deployment must be reasonably balanced among urban, suburban
and rural areas.
in may 2002, the ppuc found that the
plan required verizon pennsylvania to deploy a broadband network
capable of providing 45 megabits per second service within 5 days of
a customer request. verizon pennsylvania has requested
reconsideration of this ruling and has filed a petition to clarify
its network deployment commitments. a final decision on the petition
is expected by mid-2003.
in 2002, verizon pennsylvania proposed that all business services be
reclassified as competitive. that petition is currently under consideration by
the ppuc.
verizon south inc.
north carolina
verizon souths operations in north carolina have been under a price cap plan
since 1996 that is subject to review in 2002  2003. earnings are not
regulated and local rates can be increased by gdp-pi less 2%. rate increases
are effective on fourteen days notice. verizon south has complete flexibility
to increase rates for billing and collection, centrex, and enhanced digital
switch service. the price plan is currently under review.
south carolina
verizon souths south carolina price cap plan started during 2000. under the
statute, existing rates are deemed just and reasonable on the date of
notification. residential and single-line business local service rates are
capped for two years from the date of election. after two years, these rates
may be adjusted annually pursuant to an inflation-based index. rates for other
services are flexibly priced. price decreases are effective in seven days.
price increases and new services prices are effective in fourteen days.
virginia
on december21, 2000, the virginia state corporation commission (vscc)approved
a price cap plan for verizon south that is substantially similar to verizon
virginias plan described below.
the new plan was effective january1, 2001 and has no expiration date.
verizon southwest
the texas public utilities commission regulates verizon southwest under a price
cap plan with no cap on earnings pursuant to the public utility regulatory act
(pura). the plan places services into four categories:
basic services  these include basic local residential charges such as
service connection, mandatory expanded calling plans and residential
call waiting. price increases prior to september1, 2005 are only
allowed to adjust for changes in fcc separations that affect net
income by at least 10% and for rate group reclassifications due to
access line growth. after september1, 2005, price increases require
approval. full packaging (an integrated offering of some or all of
our products and services) is allowed.
non-basic services  this category only includes switched access,
which is price-capped until september1, 2005. decreases can be made
to the lric. the statute contains no expiration provision.
price-capped non-basic services  these services include basic local
business charges such as service connection and bri-isdn (basic rate
interface  integrated services digital network). these services are
price-capped until september1, 2005. decreases can be made to the
lric. full packaging is allowed.
non-basic services without caps  this category represents all other
regulated services, including intralata toll, custom calling features
(except residential call waiting), special access, operator services,
pbx and isdn services. these services have unlimited upward pricing
flexibility. decreases can be made to the lric (with imputation) or
the prices in effect on september1, 1999, whichever is less. full
packaging is allowed.
verizon virginia inc.
effective in 1995, the vscc approved an alternative regulatory plan that
regulates verizon virginias noncompetitive services on a price cap basis and
does not regulate verizon virginias competitive services. the plan does not
regulate profits. in june2001, the vscc modified the plan and extended the
moratorium on rate increases for basic local telephone service until 2004. the
plan has no expiration date.
verizon washington, dc inc.
on february28, 2002, the district of columbia public service commission
(dcpsc)approved a new price cap plan for local retail services provided by
verizon washington, dc. key provisions of the 2002 plan include:
a two year term;
no earnings restrictions, service penalties or revenue sharing;
four service categories: basic residential, basic business, discretionary and competitive;
a cap on residential dial tone line rates for the term of the plan and a reduction in residential service connection charges;
annual pricing flexibility for all other basic residential services, with the increase in total revenues from these services
limited to the annual inflation rate (as measured by the change in gdp-pi) and increases for any individual service in the
category limited to 10%;
classification of all business services as competitive with complete pricing flexibility except for basic business dial tone
lines, pbx trunks, local directory service and message units, which are subject to a 10% annual limit on any rate increase;
pricing flexibility on discretionary services, with a 15% annual limit on any rate increase;
flexibility to bundle or package existing services; and
assistance by verizon washington, dc to the district of columbia government to set up 211 dialing for district of columbia
social services agencies, as well as additional social services infrastructure investments and one-time customer discounts.
verizon west virginia inc.
on october3, 2001, the west virginia public service commission (wvpsc)
approved verizon west virginias new incentive regulationplan (irp). the new
irp continues, until december31, 2005, the flexible price regulation of
competitive services, caps on basic rates, infrastructure commitments and
unlimited earnings freedom that have been in place since 1988. in addition,
long distance, wide area telephone service and national directory assistance
will be rate-deregulated, and verizon west virginia may petition for the rate
deregulation of any other service, except basic residential service, as early
as january1, 2002.
in addition, verizon west virginia will phase-in an annual rate decrease of
$19.2million by july2004. cumulative rate reductions will be $91.7million
over the five-year life of the irp, and total annual reductions by the end of
the irp will be $26million.
competition
current and potential competitors in telecommunication services include long
distance companies, other local telephone companies, cable companies, wireless
service providers, foreign telecommunications providers, electric utilities,
internet service providers and other companies that offer network services.
many of these companies have a strong market presence, brand recognition and
existing customer relationships, all of which contribute to intensifying
competition and may affect our future revenue growth.
local exchange services
the ability to offer local exchange services has historically been subject to
regulation by state regulatory commissions. applications from competitors to
provide and resell local exchange services have been approved in every
jurisdiction in our service territory. the 1996 act has significantly
increased the level of competition in our local exchange markets.
one of the purposes of the 1996 act was to ensure, and accelerate, the
emergence of competition in local exchange markets. toward this end, the 1996
act requires most existing local exchange carriers (incumbent local exchange
carriers, or ilecs), including our telephone operations, to permit potential
competitors (clecs) to:
purchase service from the ilec for resale to clec customers;
purchase unes from the ilec; and/or
interconnect the clecs network with the ilecs network.
as a result, competition in our local exchange markets continues to increase.
our telephone operations are generally required to sell their services to clecs
at discounts of approximately 51% from the prices our telephone operations
charge their retail customers. a number of our state regulators have recently
mandated reductions in the rates we charge local exchange competitors for
access to unes and others are initiating similar proceedings. see state
regulation of rates and services.
long distance services
we offer intralata and interlata long distance services. intralata toll calls
originate and terminate within the same lata, but generally cover a greater
distance than a local call. state regulatory commissions rather than federal
authorities generally regulate these services. federal regulators have
jurisdiction over interstate toll services. all of our state regulatory
commissions (except in the district of columbia, where intralata toll service
is not provided) permit other carriers to offer intralata toll services within
the state. interlata toll calls terminate outside the lata of origination. we
offer interlata long distance services nationwide, except in those regions
served by the former bell atlantic telephone operations where we have not yet
received authority to offer long distance service under the 1996 act and in
alaska. a number of our major competitors in the long distance business have
strong brand recognition and existing customer relationships.
alternative access services
a substantial portion of our telephone operations revenues from business and
government customers is derived from a relatively small number of large,
multiple-line subscribers.
we face competition from alternative communications systems, constructed by
large end-users, interexchange carriers and alternative access vendors, which
are capable of originating and/or terminating calls without the use of our
plant. the fccs orders requiring us to offer collocated interconnection for
special and switched access services have enhanced the ability of such
alternative access providers to compete with us.
other potential sources of competition include cable television systems, shared
tenant services and other noncarrier systems which are capable of bypassing our
telephone operations local plant, either partially or completely, through
substitution of special access for switched access or through concentration of
telecommunications traffic on fewer of our telephone operations lines.
wireless services
wireless services also constitute a significant source of competition to our
wireline telecommunications services, especially as wireless carriers
(including verizon wireless) expand and improve their network coverage and
continue to lower their prices to end-users. as a result, more end-users are
substituting wireless services for basic wireline service. wireless telephone
services can also be used for data transmission.
public telephone services
the growth of wireless communications has significantly decreased usage of
public telephones, as more customers are substituting wireless services for
public telephone services. in addition, we face competition from other
providers of public telephone services.
operator services
our operator services product line faces competition from alternative operator
services providers and internet service providers.
domestic wireless
operations
our domestic wireless segment provides wireless voice and data services, paging
services and equipment sales in the united states, principally through verizon
wireless.
verizon wireless is the leading wireless communications provider in the united
states in terms of the number of subscribers, network coverage and revenues.
verizon wireless has the largest customer base of any u.s. wireless provider,
with 32.5million wireless subscribers as of december31, 2002, and provides
wireless voice and data services across the united states. approximately 252
million people reside in areas of the united states in which we have fcc
licenses to offer our services and 228million people reside in areas covered
by our service. we provide digital coverage in areas where approximately 220
million people reside, including in almost every major u.s. city.
wireless licenses are granted by the fcc for an initial 10-year term and are
renewable for successive 10-year terms. to date, all verizon wireless and
predecessor company (see following formation discussion) wireless licenses have
been successfully renewed.
background
in september1999, bell atlantic and vodafone group plc agreed to combine their
u.s. wireless telecommunication businesses and form verizon wireless. in april
2000, vodafone contributed u.s. wireless operations (airtouch) and its interest
in primeco personal communications, l.p. (primeco) to verizon wireless in
exchange for a 65.1% economic interest in verizon wireless. bell atlantic
contributed its u.s. wireless operations and its interest in primeco to verizon
wireless. in july2000, after the merger of bell atlantic and gte, verizon
contributed gtes u.s. wireless operations to verizon wireless, increasing
verizons economic interest in verizon wireless from 34.9% to 55%.
verizon wireless brought together the operations of four well-recognized u.s.
wireless carriers: bell atlantic mobile, gte wireless, airtouch and primeco,
resulting in the formation of the most extensive wireless network in the united
states.
bell atlantic mobile
bell atlantic mobile, based in bedminster, new jersey, had 8.0million
customers as of march31, 2000. it operated in 18 states and the district of
columbia and 12 of the top 50 u.s. markets, including baltimore, boston, new
york city, philadelphia and washington, d.c.
gte wireless
gte wireless had more than 7.0million u.s. wireless customers in june2000.
it operated in 19 states and 18 of the top 50 united states markets, including
chicago, cleveland, houston, san francisco and st. louis. gte wireless was
based in alpharetta, georgia and a subsidiary of gte corporation.
airtouch
airtouch, based in san francisco, california and owned by vodafone, served
nearly 10million wireless customers and 3.5million paging customers in the
united states as of march31, 2000. it operated broadband wireless networks in
22 states and 18 of the top 50 u.s. markets, including atlanta, detroit, los
angeles, phoenix, san diego and seattle.
primeco
primeco was formed in october1994 as a limited partnership to provide advanced
wireless digital communications services over an all-digital wireless network.
as of march31, 2000, primeco had more than 1.5million subscribers.
immediately prior to its contribution to the partnership, primeco was a
partnership between bell atlantic and vodafone. based in westlake, texas,
primeco operated in nine states and 13 of the top 50 united states markets,
including dallas, miami, san antonio and tampa.
the preceding customer numbers include overlapping markets that have been
subsequently sold.
recent acquisition
price communications
in december2001, verizon wireless and price communications corp. (price)
announced that an agreement had been reached to combine prices wireless
business with a portion of verizon wireless in a transaction valued at
approximately $1.7billion, including $550million of net debt. the
transaction closed on august15, 2002 and the assumed debt was redeemed on
august16, 2002. the resulting limited partnership is controlled and managed by
verizon wireless. in exchange for its contributed assets, price received a
limited partnership interest in the new
partnership which is exchangeable into
common stock of verizon wireless if an initial public offering of that stock
occurs, or into the common stock of verizon on the fourth anniversary of the
asset contribution date if the initial public offering of verizon wireless
common stock does not occur prior to then. the price of the verizon common
stock used in determining the number of verizon common shares received in an
exchange is also subject to a maximum and minimum amount.
competition
there is substantial competition in the wireless telecommunications industry.
we expect competition to intensify as a result of the consolidation of the
industry, the entry of new competitors, the development of new technologies,
products and services, the auction of additional spectrum and regulatory
changes. other wireless providers serve each of the markets in which we
compete. we currently provide service to 49 of the top 50 markets in the u.s.,
and these 49 markets have an average of five other competing wireless
providers. competition also may increase to the extent that smaller,
stand-alone wireless providers transfer licenses to larger, better capitalized
and more experienced wireless providers.
we compete against five other national wireless service providers: at&t
wireless, cingular wireless, nextel communications, sprint pcs and t-mobile
(formerly voicestream). in addition, we compete against several regional
wireless companies in markets where we provide service. additional competitors
are seeking to enter the market using new types of spectrum. the wireless
communications industry has experienced consolidation over the past several
years, and this trend may continue. this consolidation trend could enhance the
ability of wireless service providers with substantial financial, technical,
marketing and other resources to compete with our offerings.
we believe that the following are the most important competitive factors in our
industry:
brand recognition: we introduced the verizon wireless brand name in april2000
and believe that we have developed strong brand recognition.
network coverage: in recent years, competition in our industry has led to
lower prices and to the popularity of pricing plans that do not charge for
roaming. as a result, the ability to offer national coverage through a
companys own network is important, including the ability to ensure uniform
performance and the availability of features throughout the country, as many
features are not fully available through roaming partners.
digital service and technology: digital service offers benefits to the
customer and also permits a network to have greater capacity.
customer service: quality customer service and care is essential to ensure
that existing customers do not terminate service and to obtain new customers.
capital resources: in order to expand and build-out networks and introduce
next generation services, wireless providers require significant capital
resources.
as a result of competition, we may encounter further market pressures to reduce
our service prices, restructure our service packages to offer more value, or
respond to particular short-term, market-specific situations, for example,
special introductory pricing or packages that may be offered by new providers
launching their service in a particular market. this may result in increased
advertising and promotional spending to respond to competition.
our ability to compete successfully will depend in part on our marketing
efforts and on our ability to anticipate and respond to various competitive
factors affecting the industry, including the factors described above, new
services and technologies, changes in consumer preferences, demographic trends,
economic conditions and pricing strategies by competitors.
international
our international segment includes international wireline and wireless
communications operations and investments in the americas, europe, asia and the
pacific, extending to 24 countries. our consolidated international investments
as of december31, 2002 included grupo iusacell s.a. de c.v. (iusacell) in
mexico, codetel, c. por a. (codetel) in the dominican republic,
telecomunicaciones de puerto rico, inc. (telpri)in puerto rico, micronesian
telecommunications corporation in the northern mariana islands and global
solutions inc. effective january1, 2003, global solutions will be reported as
a part of the domestic telecom segment. as of december31, 2002, our
international segment managed approximately 10million access lines and
provided wireless services to approximately 33million customers.
americas
argentina
at december31, 2001, we owned 65% of cti holdings, s.a. (cti). cti offers
wireless services throughout argentina.
on march28, 2002, we transferred 5.5million of our shares in cti to an
indirectly wholly-owned subsidiary of verizon and subsequently transferred
ownership of that subsidiary to a newly created trust for cti employees. this
decreased our ownership percentage in cti from 65% to 48%. we also reduced our
representation on ctis board of directors from five of nine members to four of
nine (subsequently reduced to
one of five members). as a result of these
actions that surrender control of cti, we changed our method of accounting for
this investment from consolidation to the equity method. on june3, 2002, as a
result of an option exercised by telfone (bvi)limited, a cti shareholder,
verizon acquired approximately 5.3million additional cti shares. also on june
3, 2002 we transferred ownership of a wholly-owned subsidiary of verizon that
held 5.4million cti shares to a second independent trust leaving us with an
approximately 48% non-controlling interest in cti. since we have no other
future commitments or plans to fund ctis operations and we have written our
investment down to zero, in accordance with the accounting rules for equity
method investments, we are no longer recording operating income or losses
related to ctis operations.
canada
telus corporation is a full-service telecommunications provider operating in
the provinces of british columbia, alberta and qubec. telus also provides
wireless, data, voice and internet protocol services in central and eastern
canada. during the third quarter of 2002, telus had an additional equity
offering in which we did not participate. as of december31, 2002, we hold a
21.3% interest in telus. telus served approximately 4.7million access lines
and provided wireless services to approximately 2.9million subscribers as of
december31, 2002.
dominican republic
we own 100% of codetel, the principal telecommunications provider in the
dominican republic. codetel provides local, wireless, national and
international long distance and internet access services throughout the
dominican republic. at december31, 2002, codetel served approximately 743,000
access lines and approximately 693,000 wireless customers.
mexico
we own a 39.4% interest in, and control the management of iusacell, a
telecommunications company which provides wireless, long distance, and data
services primarily in the central and southern regions of mexico. as of
december31, 2002, iusacell served approximately 2.1million wireless
customers.
puerto rico
as of december31, 2002, we owned a 52% interest in telpri, which owns puerto
rico telephone company (prtc), puerto ricos principal wireline company, and
verizon wireless puerto rico, inc. (vwpr), one of the islands wireless
companies. at december31, 2002, prtc served 1.3million access lines and vwpr
provided wireless services to approximately 351,000 customers.
on january25, 2002, we exercised our option to purchase an additional 12% of
telpri common stock from the government of puerto rico. we secured this option
as part of the march1999 telpri privatization. as a result of gaining control
of telpri, we changed our accounting for this investment from the equity method
to full consolidation, effective january1, 2002.
venezuela
we own a 28.5% interest in compaia annima nacional telfonos de venezuela
(cantv), venezuelas full-service telecommunications provider. cantv offers
local, national and international long distance, internet access and wireless
services in venezuela as well as public telephony, private network, data
transmission, directory and other value-added services. at december31, 2002,
cantv served approximately 2.7million access lines and 2.5million wireless
customers.
europe and asia
czech republic and slovakia
we own a 24.5% interest in eurotel praha, spol. s r.o. and a 24.5% interest in
eurotel bratislava, a.s. eurotel praha is the largest provider of wireless
voice and data services in the czech republic. the companys digital and
analog networks served over 3.9million subscribers at december31, 2002.
eurotel bratislava is a leading provider of mobile telecommunication services
and managed data network services in the slovak republic. the companys
digital and analog networks served over 1.2million subscribers at december31,
2002.
gibraltar
gibraltar nynex communications limited, operating as gibtelecom, is a
full-service provider of wireline, wireless, and internet access services to
the country of gibraltar. we currently own a 50% interest in the company. our
sole partner in the company is the government of gibraltar.
italy
we own a 23.1% interest in vodafone omnitel n.v. (vodafone omnitel), an italian
digital cellular telecommunications company. it is the second largest wireless
provider in italy. vodafone omnitel served over 19million subscribers at
december31, 2002 through its gsm network.
indonesia
p.t. excelcomindo pratama (excelcomindo) is a nationwide provider of gsm
services in which we own a 23.1% interest. we also own a 36.7% interest of
p.t. citra sari makmur, a provider of data, voice and video communications.
northern mariana islands
we are the sole shareholder of the micronesian telecommunications corporation
(mtc), a provider of local services. at december31, 2002, mtc served
approximately 27,000 access lines and 11,000 wireless customers on the islands
of saipan, tinian and rota. in november2001 an agreement was signed to sell
mtc, which is pending due to regulatory approvals.
new zealand
telecom corporation of new zealand limited (tcnz)is the principal provider of
telecommunications services in new zealand. at december31, 2001, we owned
21.5% of tcnz. at december31, 2002, we owned less than 1% of tcnz as a result
of stock sales in 2002.
other
our international segment also includes several properties in which our
investment is 20% or less. these include: japan  tu-ka
companies, 2.7%  5%;
philippines  bayantel, 19.4%; taiwan  taiwan cellular corporation, 7.8%;
thailand  telecomasia, 10.9%. all of these investments provide a variety of
telecommunication and cable services to the country or a specific region within
the country in which they reside.
flag
flag telecom holdings ltd. (flag)owns and operates undersea fiber optic cable
systems, providing digital communications links between europe and asia and
north america. on june6, 2001, we exercised an option to exchange 15million
shares in flag for shares in tycom ltd., which were subsequently exchanged for
tyco international ltd. shares. as a result of this transaction, our interest
in flag declined from 29.8% to 18.6%. flag filed for chapter11 bankruptcy
protection in april2002, and the bankruptcy court approved the restructuring
plan in october2002. consequently, verizons ownership in flag has been
reduced to zero.
global solutions
in february2001, verizon launched an initiative designed to expand our
presence in the carrier and large business market. this business unit, global
solutions, offers a primarily facilities based network which connects
commercial centers around the world and provides an array of voice, data and
internet services.
international regulatory and competitive trends
for several years, the telecommunications industry has been experiencing
dynamic changes as national and international regulatory reforms embrace
competition.
in venezuela, cantvs wireless operations have faced competition for several
years. in late 2000, the government opened the basic telephony market for
local, national and international long distance service to competition and
issued new guidelines governing interconnection and the use of wireless
spectrum. however, cantv continues to be venezuelas principal
telecommunications provider.
in the dominican republic, codetel faces both wireline and wireless
competitors. while the competition has slowed both access line and wireless
subscriber growth, codetel remains the principal provider of local, national
and international long distance, wireless and internet services.
the mexican wireless and long distance markets each have several significant
competitors. iusacell has made substantial progress towards its goal of
achieving a national wireless operating footprint with its fourth quarter 2001
acquisition of grupo portatel, s.a. de c.v., a wireless service provider in
southern mexico, and the continued build-out of its pcs network in northeastern
and northwestern mexico. with respect to regulatory matters, mexicos legal
system continues to be unable to implement or enforce effective dominant
carrier regulation against telfonos de mexico, s.a. de c.v., the dominant
local wireline and long distance carrier, and radiomovil dipsa, s.a. de c.v.,
the dominant wireless provider.
in puerto rico, five other facilities-based providers operate in the wireless
market. all wireline services, including local, long distance, internet access
and data, have also experienced new competition. nevertheless, telpri
continues to be the principal provider of telecommunications services in puerto
rico to both the business and consumer markets. with respect to regulatory
matters, the puerto rico telecommunications regulatory board issued orders in
october2001 and february2002, which called for cash refunds and substantial
reductions in access rates for intra-island long distance service. telpri
appealed the order with the puerto rico circuit court of appeals which stayed
the orders and is hearing the appeal. oral presentations to the court are
scheduled to begin in first quarter 2003.
in the czech republic, eurotel praha was awarded a license for the
third-generation mobile spectrum in december2001.
in the slovak republic, eurotel bratislava was awarded a license for the
third-generation mobile spectrum in july2002.
in italy, vodafone omnitel was awarded a license for third-generation mobile
spectrum in 2000, which was extended from a 15-year life to a 20-year life in
november2001. it is expected that vodafone omnitel will begin rolling out the
3g network during 2003. in addition, the italian regulator continued to be
active in the italian market during 2002 introducing mobile number portability
mid-year and reductions in the fixed to mobile tariffs.
information services
information services is the world leader in print and online directory
publishing and a content provider for electronic communications products and
services. a leader in linking buyers and sellers, we produce verizon
superpages print yellow and white pages directories, as well as the internets
preeminent online directory, superpages.com. we pursue national and
international growth by offering customers comprehensive advertising solutions
that include bundled print and electronic commerce offerings.
information services provides sales, publishing and other related services for
nearly 2,100 directory titles in 47 states, the district of columbia and 13
countries. total circulation is approximately 111million copies in the u.s.
and 45million copies internationally.
in 2001, we acquired telus advertising services business in canada. this
acquisition advances our growth strategy by expanding our existing canadian
footprint with the creation of a new company, dominion information services,
inc.
our directory publishing business competes within the yellow pages industry
with six major u.s.-based directory publishers (sbc communications inc.,
bellsouth corporation, r.h. donnelley, yellow book usa, dex media, inc. and
trans western publishing), and encounters competition in nearly all our
domestic print markets. we also compete against alternative advertising media,
including radio, network and cable television, newspapers, magazines, internet,
direct mail and others for a share of the total u.s. advertising media market.
recent developments
verizon wireless
fcc auction
on january29, 2001, the bidding phase of the fcc reauction of 1.9 ghz c and f
block broadband personal communications services (pcs)spectrum licenses, which
began december12, 2000, officially ended. verizon wireless was the winning
bidder for 113 licenses. the total price of these licenses was $8,781million,
$1,822million of which had been paid. there were no legal challenges to our
qualifications to acquire these licenses. we were awarded 33 of the 113
licenses in august2001 and paid approximately $82million for them. however,
the remaining licenses for which we were the high bidder have been the subject
of litigation by the original licensees, whose licenses had been cancelled by
the fcc. in june2001, a federal appeals court ruled that the fccs
cancellation of the licenses violated the federal bankruptcy law. in march
2002, the fcc ordered a refund of 85% of the payments. in december2002,
pursuant to an fcc order, we dismissed our applications for the licenses,
received our remaining payment and were relieved of all of our remaining
obligations with respect to the fcc reauction. on january27, 2003, the u.s.
supreme court ruled that the fccs cancellation of the licenses violated
federal bankruptcy law.
timing of initial public offering
since august2000, when the verizon wireless inc. registration statement was
initially filed with the sec, we periodically reiterated that the initial
public offering would occur when market conditions are favorable. on january
29, 2003, verizon wireless withdrew the registration statement because it
currently does not have significant funding requirements that need to be
addressed.
northcoast spectrum purchase
in december2002, verizon wireless announced that it signed an agreement with
northcoast communications llc to purchase 50 pcs licenses and related network
assets for approximately $750million. the licenses cover large portions of
the u.s. including such markets as new york, ny, boston, ma, minneapolis, mn,
columbus, oh, providence, ri, rochester, ny and hartford, ct. the transaction
is expected to close in the first half of 2003.
new york recovery funding
in august2002, president bush signed the supplemental appropriations bill
passed earlier this year by the u.s. house of representatives and the u.s.
senate. the supplemental appropriations bill includes $5.5billion in new york
recovery funding. of that amount, approximately $750million has been
allocated to cover the uninsured losses of businesses (including the
restoration of utility infrastructure) as a result of the september11th
terrorist attacks. these funds will be distributed through the lower manhattan
development corporation following an application process.
employees
as of december31, 2002, verizon and its subsidiaries had approximately 229,500
employees. unions represent approximately 49% of our employees.
information on our internet website
we make available, free of charge on our website, our annual reports on form10-k,
quarterly reports on form10-q, current reports on form8-k, and all amendments to those reports as soon
as reasonably practicable after such material is electronically filed with or furnished to the sec. our website address is
www.verizon.com. this information is included in investor information on our website.
cautionary statement concerning forward-looking statements
in this annual report on form 10-k we have made forward-looking statements.
these statements are based on our estimates and assumptions and are subject to
risks and uncertainties. forward-looking statements include the information
concerning our possible or assumed future results of operations.
forward-looking statements also include those preceded or followed by the words
anticipates, believes, estimates, hopes or similar expressions. for
those statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for
forward-looking statements contained in the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995.
the following important factors, along with those discussed elsewhere in this
annual report, could affect future results and could cause those results to
differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements:
the duration and extent of the current economic downturn;
materially adverse changes in economic or labor conditions in the markets served by us or by companies in which we
have substantial investments;
material changes in available technology;
technology substitution;
an adverse change in the ratings afforded our debt securities by nationally accredited ratings organizations;
the final results of federal and state regulatory proceedings concerning our provision of retail and wholesale
services and judicial review of those results;
the effects of competition in our markets;
our ability to satisfy regulatory merger conditions;
the ability of verizon wireless to continue to obtain sufficient spectrum resources;
our ability to recover insurance proceeds relating to equipment losses and other adverse financial impacts
resulting from the terrorist attacks on september11, 2001; and
changes in our accounting assumptions that regulatory agencies, including the sec, may require or that result from
changes in the accounting rules or their application, which could result in an impact on earnings.
item2. properties
general
our principal properties do not lend themselves to simple description by
character and location. our total investment in plant, property and equipment
was approximately $178billion at december31, 2002 and $170billion at
december31, 2001, including the effect of retirements, but before deducting
accumulated depreciation. our gross investment in plant, property and
equipment consisted of the following at december31:
network equipment
77.2
%
77.9
%
land, buildings and building equipment
8.7
8.3
furniture and other equipment
10.4
9.2
other
3.7
4.6
100.0
%
100.0
%
our properties are divided among our operating segments at december31, as
follows:
domestic telecom
70.4
%
73.1
%
domestic wireless
23.7
21.5
international
4.5
3.9
information services
0.3
0.3
corporate and other
1.1
1.2
100.0
%
100.0
%
network equipment consists primarily of aerial cable, underground cable,
conduit and wiring, wireless plant, telephone poles, switching equipment,
transmission equipment and related facilities. land, buildings and building
equipment consists of land and land improvements and central office buildings.
furniture and other equipment consists of public telephone instruments and
telephone equipment (including pbxs), furniture, office equipment, motor
vehicles and other work equipment. other property consists primarily of
plant under construction, capital leases, capitalized computer software costs
and leasehold improvements. a portion of our property is subject to the liens
of their respective mortgages securing funded debt.
the customers of our telephone operations are served by electronic switching
systems that provide a wide variety of services. at december31, 2002,
substantially all of the access lines were served by digital capability.
capital expenditures
we continue to make significant capital expenditures to meet the demand for
communications services and to further improve such services. capital spending
for domestic telecom was approximately $7.0billion in 2002, $11.5billion in
2001 and $12.1billion in 2000. capital spending for domestic wireless was
$4.4billion in 2002, $5.0billion in 2001 and $4.3billion in 2000. capital
spending for international, information services and corporate and other
businesses was approximately $.6billion in 2002, $.9billion in 2001 and $1.2
billion in 2000. capital spending for those years excludes capitalized
non-network software and additions under capital leases. capital spending,
including capitalized non-network software, is expected to be in the range of
$12.5billion to $13.5billion in 2003.
item3.legal proceedings
none.
item4.submission of matters to a vote of security holders
not applicable.
executive officers of the registrant
set forth below is information with respect to our executive officers.
name
age
office
held since
ivan g. seidenberg
president and chief executive officer
lawrence t. babbio, jr.
vice chairman and president
mary beth bardin
executive vice president  public affairs and communications
william p. barr
executive vice president and general counsel
david h. benson
executive vice president  strategy, development and planning
william f. heitmann
senior vice president and treasurer
john f. killian
senior vice president and controller
ezra d. singer
executive vice president  human resources
dennis f. strigl
executive vice president and president  domestic wireless
doreen a. toben
executive vice president and chief financial officer
prior to serving as an executive officer, each of the above officers have held
high level managerial positions with the company or one of its subsidiaries for
at least five years.
officers are not elected for a fixed term of office but are removable at the
discretion of the board of directors.
part ii
item5.market for registrants common equity and related stockholder matters
the principal market for trading in the common stock of verizon communications
is the new york stock exchange. the common stock is also listed in the united
states on the boston, chicago, pacific and philadelphia stock exchanges. as of
december31, 2002, there were 1,121,000 shareowners of record.
high and low stock prices, as reported on the new york stock exchange composite
tape of transactions, and dividend data are as follows:
market price
cash dividend
high
low
declared
first quarter
$
51.09
$
43.02
$
.385
second quarter
46.01
36.50
.385
third quarter
40.20
26.01
.385
fourth quarter
43.20
27.50
.385
first quarter
$
57.13
$
43.80
$
.385
second quarter
56.99
47.00
.385
third quarter
57.40
48.32
.385
fourth quarter
55.99
46.90
.385
item6.selected financial data
information required by this item is included in the 2002 verizon annual report
to shareowners under the heading  selected financial data on page 10, which is
incorporated herein by reference.
item7.managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
information required by this item is included in the 2002 verizon annual report
to shareowners under the heading managements discussion and analysis of
results of operations and financial condition on pages 11 through 34, which is
incorporated herein by reference.
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
information required by this item is included in the 2002 verizon annual report
to shareowners under the heading market risk on pages 29 through 30, which is
incorporated herein by reference.
item8.financial statements and supplementary data
information required by this item is included in the 2002 verizon annual report
to shareowners on pages 35 through 67, which is incorporated herein by
reference.
item9.changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
part iii
item10.directors and executive officers of the registrant
for information with respect to our executive officers, see executive officers
of the registrant at the end of parti of this report. for information with
respect to the directors and compliance with section 16(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934, see the proxy statement for our 2003 annual meeting of
shareholders filed pursuant to regulation14a, which is incorporated herein by
reference.
item11.executive compensation
for information with respect to executive compensation, see the proxy statement
for our 2003 annual meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation14a,
which is incorporated herein by reference.
item12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
for information with respect to the security ownership of the directors and
executive officers and related stockholder matters, see the proxy statement for
our 2003 annual meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation14a, which
is incorporated herein by reference. in addition, see the following table for
other equity compensation plan information (numbers of securities in
thousands):
number of securities to be
issued upon exercise of
weighted average exercise price of
number of securities
outstanding options, warrants
outstanding options, warrants and
remaining available for
plan category
and rights
rights
future issuance
(a)
(b)
(c)
equity
compensation plans
approved by
security holders
202,725
$
50.43
142,869
equity
compensation plans
not approved by
security holders
61,573
41.02
3,987
*
total
264,298
48.24
146,856
*
indicates the number of shares available for issuance under the
verizon communications 2000 broad-based incentive plan, which provides
for awards of nonqualified stock options, restricted stock, restricted
stock units and other equity-based hypothetical stock units to employees
of verizon and its subsidiaries.
item13.certain relationships and related transactions
for information with respect to certain relationships and related transactions,
see the proxy statement for our 2003 annual meeting of shareholders filed
pursuant to regulation14a, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.controls and procedures
(a)evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures
our chief executive officer and chief financial officer have evaluated the
effectiveness of the registrants disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in rules13a-14(c) and 15d-14(c) of the securities exchange act of
1934), as of a date within 90days of the filing date of this annual report
(evaluation date), that ensure that information relating to the registrant
which is required to be disclosed in this report is recorded, processed,
summarized and reported, within required time periods. they have concluded
that as of the evaluation date, the registrants disclosure controls and
procedures were adequate and effective to ensure that material information
relating to the registrant and its consolidated subsidiaries would be made
known to them by others within those entities, particularly during the period
in which this annual report was being prepared.
(b)changes in internal controls
there were no significant changes in the registrants internal controls or in
other factors that could significantly affect these controls subsequent to the
evaluation date, nor were there any significant deficiencies or material
weaknesses in these controls requiring corrective actions.
part iv
item15.exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form8-k
(a)documents filed as part of this report:
page
(1)
report of independent auditors
*
financial statements covered by report of independent auditors:
consolidated statements of income
*
consolidated balance sheets
*
consolidated statements of cash flows
*
consolidated statements of changes in shareowners investment
*
notes to consolidated financial statements
*
*
incorporated herein by reference to the
appropriate portions of the registrants annual report to
shareowners for the fiscal year ended december31, 2002.
(see part ii.)
(2)
financial statement schedule
ii  valuation and qualifying accounts
(3)
exhibits
exhibit number
3a
restated certificate of incorporation of verizon communications
inc. (verizon) (exhibit3a to form10-k for the year ended
december31, 2000).
3b
bylaws of verizon, as amended and restated filed herewith.
no instrument which defines the rights of holders of long-term
debt of verizon and its consolidated subsidiaries is filed
herewith pursuant to regulations-k, item601(b)(4)(iii)(a).
pursuant to this regulation, verizon hereby agrees to furnish a
copy of any such instrument to the sec upon request.
10a
description of verizon deferred compensation plan for
non-employee directors (exhibit10a to form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000).*
10b
bell atlantic deferred compensation plan for outside directors,
as amended and restated (exhibit10a to form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1998).*
10c
deferred compensation plan for non-employee members of the board
of directors of gte, as amended (exhibit10-1 to gtes form10-k
for the year ended december31, 1997 and exhibit10.1 to gtes
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1998, file no.
1-2755).*
10d
gtes directors deferred stock unit plan (exhibit10-8 to gtes
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1997, file no.
1-2755).*
10e
description of plan for non-employee directors travel accident
insurance (exhibit10c to form10-k for the year ended december
31, 1999).*
10f
bell atlantic directors charitable giving program, as amended
(exhibit10p to formse dated march29, 1990 and exhibit10p to
formse dated march29, 1993).*
10g
gtes charitable awards program (exhibit10-10 to gtes form10-k
for the year ended december31, 1992, file no.1-2755).*
10h
nynex directors charitable award program (exhibit10i to form
10-k for the year ended december31, 2000).*
10i
verizon communications 2000 broad-based incentive plan (exhibit
10h to form10-q for the period ended september30, 2000).*
10j
verizon communications inc. long-term incentive plan (appendixb
to verizons 2001 proxy statement filed march12, 2001).*
10k
gtes long-term incentive plan, as amended (exhibitb to gtes
1997 proxy statement and exhibit10.5 to gtes 1998 form10-k for
the year ended december31, 1998, file no.1-2755); description
of amendments (exhibit10l to form10-k for the year ended
december31, 2000).*
10l
nynex 1990 stock option plan, as amended (exhibitno.2 to
nynexs proxy statement dated march20, 1995, file no.1-8608);
description of amendments (exhibit10m to form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000).*
10m
nynex 1995 stock option plan, as amended (exhibitno.1 to
nynexs proxy statement dated march20, 1995, file no.1-8608);
description of amendments (exhibit10n to form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000).*
10n
verizon communications inc. short-term incentive plan (appendixc
to verizons 2001 proxy statement filed march12, 2001).*
10o
verizon communications inc. income deferral plan (exhibit10f to
form10-q for the period ended june30, 2002).*
10p
gtes supplemental executive retirement plan, as amended
(exhibits 10-3, 10-3, 10-3 and 10-3 to gtes form10-k for the
years ended december31, 1991, 1992, 1993 and 1994, respectively,
file no.1-2755).*
10q
gtes executive salary deferral plan, as amended (exhibit10.10
to gtes form10-k for the year ended december31, 1998, file no.
1-2755).*
10r
bell atlantic senior management long-term disability and survivor
protection plan, as amended (exhibit10h to formse filed on
march27, 1986 and exhibit10b(ii) to form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1997).*
10s
description of bell atlantic senior management estate management
plan (exhibit10rr to form10-k for year ended december31,
1997).*
10t
gtes executive retired life insurance plan, as amended (exhibits
10-6, 10-6 and 10-6 to gtes form10-k for the years ended
december31, 1991, 1992 and 1993, respectively, file no.
1-2755).*
10u
nynex supplemental life insurance plan (exhibitno.10 iii 21 to
nynexs form10-q for the period ended june30, 1996, file no.
1-8608).*
10v
employment agreement between verizon and charles r. lee, as
amended and supplemented (exhibit10x to form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000, exhibit10e to form10-q for the period
ended june30, 2002 and exhibit10 to the form10-q for the
period ended september30, 2002).*
10w
amended and restated employment agreement between verizon and
ivan g. seidenberg (exhibit10 to form10-q for the period ended
june30, 2000).*
10x
employment agreement and stock option arrangements with respect
to the stock of grupo iusacell, s.a. de c.v., between verizon and
lawrence t. babbio (exhibit10a to form10-q for the period ended
september30, 2000, exhibit10s to form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1993 and exhibit10q to form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1996).*
10y
employment agreement between verizon and mary beth bardin
(exhibit10a to form10-q for the period ended june30, 2002).*
10z
employment agreement between verizon and william p. barr (exhibit
10c to form10-q for the period ended september30, 2000).*
10aa
employment agreement between verizon and david h. benson (exhibit
10b to form10-q for the period ended june30, 2002).*
10cc
employment agreement between verizon and doreen a. toben (exhibit
10d to form10-q for the period ended june30, 2002).*
10dd
description of the split-dollar insurance arrangements for
lawrence t. babbio and william p. barr (exhibit10g to form10-q
for the period ended june30, 2002).*
10ee
employment agreement between verizon and ezra d. singer (exhibit
10c to form10-q for the period ended june30, 2002).*
10ff
employment agreement between verizon wireless and dennis f.
strigl (exhibit10f to form10-q for the period ended september
30, 2000).*
10gg
nynex deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors
(exhibit10gg to nynexs registration statement no.2-87850, file
no.1-8608).*
10gg(i) amendment to nynex corporation deferred compensation plan
for non-employee directors (exhibit10iii 5a to nynexs quarterly
report on form10-q for the period ended june30, 1996, file no.
1-8608).*
10hh
u.s. wireless agreement, dated september21, 1999, among bell
atlantic and vodafone airtouch plc, including the forms of
amended and restated partnership agreement and the investment
agreement (exhibit10 to form10-q for the period ended september
30, 1999).
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges filed herewith.
portions of verizons annual report to shareowners for the fiscal
year ended december31, 2002. only the information incorporated
by reference into this form10-k is included in the exhibit.
list of principal subsidiaries of verizon filed herewith.
consent of ernst & young llp filed herewith.
* indicates management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
(b)
current reports on form 8-k filed during the quarter ended december31,
2002:
a current report on form 8-k, furnished on october25, 2002, containing a
press release announcing earnings for the third quarter of 2002 and
supplemental information about our financial and other projections.
a current report on form 8-k, furnished on november13, 2002, containing
certification statements to the securities and exchange commission
relating to exchange act filings, signed by president and chief executive
officer ivan g. seidenberg and by executive vice president and chief
financial officer doreen a. toben.
a current report on form 8-k, furnished on december5, 2002, containing a
press release announcing the decision to expense the fair value of stock
options granted on or after january1, 2003 and expected amount of 2002
pension income, net of post-retirement benefit costs, and the estimated
amount of net pension income expected in 2003.
a current report on form 8-k, furnished on december18, 2002, containing a
press release with a statement by chief financial officer doreen a. toben
regarding moodys upgrade of our debt outlook, downgrade of our long-term
debt rating and affirmation of our commercial paper rating.
scheduleii  valuation and qualifying accounts
verizon communications inc. and subsidiaries
for the years ended december31, 2002, 2001 and 2000
additions
(dollars in millions)
balance at
beginning of
charged to
charged to other
deductions
balance at end of
description
period
expenses
accounts note (a)
note (b)
period
allowance for uncollectibleaccounts
receivable:
year 2002
$
2,153
$
2,905
$
$
3,248
$
2,782
year 2001
1,562
1,952
2,169
2,153
year 2000
1,170
1,409
1,991
1,562
valuation allowance for deferredtax
assets:
year 2002
$
1,574
$
$
$
1,016
$
year 2001
1,133
1,574
year 2000
discontinued businesses:
year 2002
$
$
(49
)
$
$
$
year 2001
(60
)
year 2000
(52
)
merger-related costs:
year 2002
$
$
$
$
$
year 2001
year 2000
1,056
(a)
allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable includes (1)amounts
previously written off which were credited directly to this account when
recovered, and (2)accruals charged to accounts payable for anticipated
uncollectible charges on purchases of accounts receivable from others
which were billed by us.
(b)
amounts written off as uncollectible or transferred to other accounts or
utilized.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange
act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
verizon communications inc.
date march14, 2003
by
/s/john f. killianjohn
f. killiansenior
vice president and controller
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this
report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
principal executive officer:
/s/   ivan g. seidenberg
ivan g. seidenberg
president and
chief executive officer
march 14, 2003
principal financial officer:
/s/  doreen a. toben
doreen a. toben
executive vice president and
chief financial officer
march 14, 2003
principal accounting officer:
/s/  john f. killian
john f. killian
senior vice president and
controller
march 14, 2003
signatures  continued
/s/  james r. barker
james r. barker
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  edward h. budd
edward h. budd
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  richard l. carrion
richard l. carrion
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  robert f. daniell
robert f. daniell
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  helene l. kaplan
helene l. kaplan
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  charles r. lee
charles r. lee
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  sandra o. moose
sandra o. moose
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  joseph neubauer
joseph neubauer
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  thomas h. obrien
thomas h. obrien
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  russell e. palmer
russell e. palmer
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  hugh b. price
hugh b. price
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  ivan g. seidenberg
ivan g. seidenberg
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  walter v. shipley
walter v. shipley
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  john r. stafford
john r. stafford
director
march 14, 2003
/s/  robert d. storey
robert d. storey
director
march 14, 2003
certifications
i, ivan g. seidenberg, certify that:
1.
i have reviewed this annual report on form 10-k of verizon communications
inc.;
2.
based on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by
this annual report;
3.
based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this annual report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of
the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual
report;
4.
the registrants other certifying officer and i are responsible for
establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in exchange act rules13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and we
have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report is
being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure controls
and procedures as of a date within 90days prior to the filing date of
this annual report (the evaluation date); and
c)
presented in this annual report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on our
evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrants other certifying officer and i have disclosed, based on
our most recent evaluation, to the registrants auditors and the audit
committee of registrants board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent function):
a)
all significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal
controls which could adversely affect the registrants ability to
record, process, summarize and report financial data and have identified
for the registrants auditors any material weaknesses in internal
controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
employees who have a significant role in the registrants internal
controls; and
6.
the registrants other certifying officer and i have indicated in this
annual report whether or not there were significant changes in internal
controls or in other factors that could significantly affect internal
controls subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including
any corrective actions with regard to significant deficiencies and
material weaknesses.
date: march14, 2003
/s/ ivan g. seidenberg
ivan g. seidenberg
president and chief executive officer
i, doreen a. toben, certify that:
1.
i have reviewed this annual report on form 10-k of verizon communications
inc.;
2.
based on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by
this annual report;
3.
based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this annual report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of
the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual
report;
4.
the registrants other certifying officer and i are responsible for
establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in exchange act rules13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and we
have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report is
being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure controls
and procedures as of a date within 90days prior to the filing date of
this annual report (the evaluation date); and
c)
presented in this annual report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on our
evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrants other certifying officer and i have disclosed, based on
our most recent evaluation, to the registrants auditors and the audit
committee of registrants board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent function):
a)
all significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal
controls which could adversely affect the registrants ability to
record, process, summarize and report financial data and have identified
for the registrants auditors any material weaknesses in internal
controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
employees who have a significant role in the registrants internal
controls; and
6.
the registrants other certifying officer and i have indicated in this
annual report whether or not there were significant changes in internal
controls or in other factors that could significantly affect internal
controls subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including
any corrective actions with regard to significant deficiencies and
material weaknesses.
date:  march14, 2003
/s/ doreen a. toben
doreen a. toben
executive vice president
and chief financial officer
