10-k
d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states  securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549    form 10-k
(mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2005
or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file number
1-8606   verizon communications inc.  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
23-2259884
(state of incorporation)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
140 west street new york, new york
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants
telephone number, including area code: (212)395-1000   securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, $.10 par value
new york, philadelphia, boston, chicago and pacific stock exchanges
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:   none   indicate by check mark if
the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act. yes  no
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to
file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the act. yes  no    indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past 90 days. yes  no    indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
item405 of regulation s-k (section 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of
this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.    indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated filer in rule 12b-2 of
the exchange act. (check one):
large accelerated filer
accelerated filer
non-accelerated filer
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act). yes  no
at june30, 2005, the aggregate market value of the
registrants voting stock held by nonaffiliates was approximately $96,045,598,000.   at january31, 2006, 2,926,823,217 shares of the registrants common stock were outstanding, after deducting 11,356,177 shares held in treasury.   documents incorporated by reference:   portions of the registrants annual report to shareowners for the year ended december31, 2005
(parts i and ii).   portions of the registrants proxy
statement prepared in connection with the 2006 annual meeting of shareowners (part iii).
table of contents
table of contents
item no.
page
parti
item1.
business
item1a.
risk factors
item 1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the registrant
part ii
item 5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
item 9b.
other information
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item 14.
principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
certifications   unless otherwise indicated, all information is as of march8, 2006
table of contents
part i
item1.business
general
verizon
communications inc. (verizon) is one of the worlds leading providers of communications services. verizons domestic wireline telecommunications business provides local telephone services, including broadband, in 28 states and washington,
d.c. and nationwide long-distance and other communications products and services. verizons domestic wireless business, operating as verizon wireless, provides wireless voice and data products and services across the united states using one of
the most extensive wireless networks. information services operates directory publishing businesses and provides electronic commerce services. verizons international segment includes wireline and wireless communications operations and
investments in the americas and europe. in connection with the closing of the merger with mci, inc. (mci), which occurred on january6, 2006, verizon now owns and operates one of the most expansive end-to-end global internet protocol (ip)
networks which includes over 270,000 domestic and 360,000 international route miles of fiber optic cable and provides access to over 140 countries worldwide. operating as verizon business, we are now better able to provide next-generation ip network
services to medium and large businesses and government customers. stressing diversity and commitment to the communities in which we operate, verizon has a highly diverse workforce of 250,000 employees, including verizon business.   verizon was formerly known as bell atlantic corporation, which was
incorporated in 1983 under the laws of the state of delaware. we began doing business as verizon communications on june30, 2000, when bell atlantic corporation merged with gte corporation.   our principal executive offices are located at 140 west street, new york, new
york 10007 (telephone number 212-395-1000).   we have four
reportable segments, which we operate and manage as strategic business units and organize by products and services. our segments and their principal activities consist of the following:
domestic
telecom
domestic telecom provides local telephone services, including voice,
dsl, data transport, enhanced and custom calling features, network access, directory assistance, private lines and public telephones in 28 states and washington, d.c. this segment also provides long distance services, customer premises equipment
distribution, video services, data solutions and systems integration, billing and collections and inventory management services.
domestic wireless
domestic wireless products and services include wireless voice and data services and equipment sales
across the united states.
informationservices
information services multi-platform business comprises yellow and white pages directories,
superpages.com, our online directory and search services, and superpages on the go, our directory and information services on wireless telephones. this segments operations are principally in the united states.
international
international wireline and wireless communications operations and investments in the americas and
europe.
you can find
additional business information under the heading overview on pages 14 through 15 and segment financial information under the heading segment results of operations on pages 20 through 25 and in note 17 on pages 61 through 63
of the 2005 verizon annual report to shareowners, which is incorporated herein by reference.
domestic telecom
operations   our domestic telecom segment, principally representing our wireline
telephone operations, provided approximately 50% of 2005 total operating revenues. our telephone operations presently serve a territory consisting of 48.8million access lines in 28 states and washington, d.c. this segment also provides long
distance and other telecommunication services. domestic telecom provides mainly two types of telecommunications services:
exchange telecommunications service is the transmission of telecommunications among customers located within a local calling area within a local access and
transport area (lata). examples of exchange telecommunications services include switched local residential and business services, local private line voice and data services and centrex services. we also provide toll services within a lata (intralata
long distance) and toll services outside a lata (interlata long distance).
exchange access service links a customers premises and the transmission facilities of other telecommunications carriers, generally interlata carriers.
examples of exchange access services include switched access and special access services.   we have organized our domestic telecom segment into four marketing units operating across our telephone subsidiaries. the units focus on specific markets. we are not dependent on any single
customer. our telephone operations remain responsible within their respective service areas for the provision of telephone services, financial performance and regulatory matters.   the enterprise unit markets communications and information technology and services to large businesses and to
departments, agencies and offices of the executive, judicial and legislative branches of the federal, state and local governments. these services include voice switching/processing services (e.g., dedicated private lines, custom centrex, call
management and voice messaging), end-user networking (e.g.,
table of contents
credit and debit card transactions and personal computer-based conferencing, including data and video), internetworking (establishing links between the
geographically disparate networks of two or more companies or within the same company), network optimization (disaster avoidance and 911 service) and other communications services. the enterprise unit also provides data transmission, internet and
network integration services, interlata long distance services, network monitoring services and telecommunications equipment sales to medium and large businesses. revenues in 2005 were approximately $5.6 billion, representing approximately 15% of
domestic telecoms aggregate revenues.   the retail
unit markets communications and information services to residential customers and to small and medium-sized businesses within our territory, including our long distance services and internet access services. our long distance subsidiary provides
national and international long distance services in all 50 states to residential and business customers, including calling cards, 800/888 services and operator services. this unit also provides operator and pay telephone services and sells customer
premises equipment. revenues in 2005 were approximately $21.8 billion, representing approximately 58% of domestic telecoms aggregate revenues. these revenues were derived primarily from the provision of telephone services to residential users.
the partner solutions wholesale unit markets our
network operations, which principally includes our carrier access and telecom industry services. revenues in 2005 were approximately $9.2 billion, representing approximately 24% of domestic telecoms aggregate revenues. approximately 67% of
total wholesale revenues were derived from interexchange carriers (switched and special access). the remaining revenues come from our telecom industry services, principally from other local exchange carriers which resell network connections to their
own customers.   the network unit is principally
responsible for the construction and maintenance of our telephone operations networks. this unit is also responsible for the procurement and management of inventory and supplies for our subsidiaries and sells materials and logistic services to
third-party carriers. revenues in 2005 (after eliminations and combined with all other domestic telecom revenues) were approximately $1.0 billion, representing approximately 3% of domestic telecoms aggregate revenues.   telecommunications act of 1996   the telecommunications act of 1996, regulatory and judicial actions and the
development of new technologies, products and services have created opportunities for alternative telecommunication service providers, many of which are subject to fewer regulatory constraints. we are unable to predict definitively the impact that
the ongoing changes in the telecommunications industry will ultimately have on our business, results of operations or financial condition. the financial impact will depend on several factors, including the timing, extent and success of competition
in our markets, the timing and outcome of various regulatory proceedings and any appeals, and the timing, extent and success of our pursuit of new opportunities resulting from the telecommunications act of 1996 and technological advances.
fcc regulation and interstate rates   our services are subject to the jurisdiction of the federal communications
commission (fcc) with respect to interstate telecommunications services and other matters for which the fcc has jurisdiction under the communications act of 1934, as amended.   broadband   the fcc has adopted a series of orders that recognize the competitive nature of the broadband market, and impose lesser regulatory requirements to
broadband services and facilities than apply to narrowband. with respect to facilities, the fcc has determined that certain unbundling requirements that apply to narrowband facilities do not apply to broadband facilities such as fiber to the premise
loops and packet switches. with respect to services, the fcc has concluded that broadband internet access services offered by telephone companies and their affiliates qualify as largely deregulated information services. the same order also concluded
that telephone companies may offer the underlying broadband transmission services that are used as an input to internet access services through private carriage arrangements on negotiated commercial terms. the fccs order addressing the
appropriate regulatory treatment of broadband internet access services is the subject of a pending appeal.   video   the fcc has a
body of rules that apply to cable operators under title vi of the communications act of 1934, and these rules also generally apply to telephone companies that provide cable services over their networks. in addition, companies that provide cable
service over a cable system generally must obtain a local cable franchise. the fcc currently is conducting a rulemaking proceeding to determine whether the local franchising process is serving as a barrier to entry for new providers of video
services, like verizon. in this proceeding, the fcc is evaluating the scope of its authority over the local franchise process and is considering adopting rules under section621 of the communications act of 1934 to ensure that the local
franchising process does not undermine competitive entry.   interstate access
charges and intercarrier compensation   the current
framework for interstate access rates was established in the coalition for affordable local and long distance services (calls) plan, which the fcc adopted on may31, 2000. the calls plan has three main components. first, it establishes portable
interstate access universal service support of $650 million for the industry that replaces implicit support previously embedded in interstate access charges. second, the plan simplifies the patchwork of common line charges into one subscriber line
charge (slc) and provides for de-averaging of the
table of contents
slc by zones and class of customers. third, the plan set into place a mechanism to transition to a set target of $.0055 per minute for switched access
services. once that target rate is reached, local exchange carriers are no longer required to make further annual price cap reductions to their switched access prices. as a result of tariff adjustments which became effective in july 2003, virtually
all of our switched access lines reached the $.0055 benchmark.   the fcc currently is conducting a broad rulemaking proceeding to consider new rules governing intercarrier compensation including, but not limited to, access charges, compensation for internet traffic, and reciprocal compensation for local
traffic. the notice seeks comments about intercarrier compensation in general, and requests input on seven specific reform proposals.   the fcc also has pending before it issues relating to intercarrier compensation for dial-up internet-bound traffic. the fcc previously found this traffic
is not subject to reciprocal compensation under section251(b)(5) of the telecommunications act of 1996. instead, the fcc established federal rates per minute for this traffic that declined from $.0015 to $.0007 over a three-year period,
established caps on the total minutes of this traffic subject to compensation in a state, and required incumbent local exchange carriers to offer to both bill and pay reciprocal compensation for local traffic at the same rate as they are required to
pay on internet-bound traffic. the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c. circuit rejected part of the fccs rationale, but declined to vacate the order while it is on remand. as a result, pending further action by the fcc, the fccs
underlying order remains in effect. the fcc subsequently denied a petition to discontinue the $.0007 rate cap on this traffic, but removed the caps on the total minutes of internet-bound traffic subject to compensation. that decision is the subject
of an appeal by several parties. disputes also remain pending in a number of forums relating to the appropriate compensation for internet-bound traffic during previous periods under the terms of our interconnection agreements with other carriers.
the fcc also is conducting a rulemaking proceeding to address
the regulation of services that use internet protocol, including whether access charges should apply to voice or other internet protocol services. the fcc also considered several petitions asking whether, and under what circumstances, services that
employ internet protocol are subject to access charges. the fcc previously has held that one providers peer-to-peer internet protocol service that does not use the public switched network is an interstate information service and is not subject
to access charges, while a service that utilizes internet protocol for only one intermediate part of a calls transmission is a telecommunications service that is subject to access charges. another petition asking the fcc to forbear from
applying access charges to voice over internet protocol services that are terminated on switched local exchange networks was withdrawn by the carrier that filed that petition. the fcc also declared the services offered by one provider of a voice
over internet protocol service to be jurisdictionally interstate on the grounds that it was impossible to separate that carriers internet protocol service into interstate and intrastate components. the fcc also stated that its conclusion would
apply to other services with similar characteristics. that order has been appealed.   the fcc also has adopted rules for special access services that provide for pricing flexibility and ultimately the removal of services from price regulation when prescribed competitive thresholds are met. more than
half of special access revenues are now removed from price regulation. the fcc currently has a rulemaking proceeding underway to evaluate experience under its pricing flexibility rules, and to determine whether any changes to those rules are
warranted.   universal service   the fcc also has a body of rules implementing the universal service
provisions of the telecommunications act of 1996, including rules governing support to rural and non-rural high-cost areas, support for low income subscribers, and support for schools, libraries and rural health care. the fccs current rules
for support to high-cost areas served by larger non-rural local telephone companies were previously remanded by u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit, which had found that the fcc had not adequately justified these rules. the fcc
has initiated a rulemaking proceeding in response to the courts remand, but its rules remain in effect pending the results of the rulemaking. the fcc also has proceedings underway to evaluate possible changes to its current rules for assessing
contributions to the universal service fund. any change in the current assessment mechanism could result in a change in the contribution that local telephone companies, wireless carriers or others must make and that would have to be collected from
customers.   unbundling of network elements   under section 251 of the telecommunications act of 1996, incumbent local
exchange carriers were required to provide competing carriers with access to components of their network on an unbundled basis, known as unes, where certain statutory standards are satisfied. the telecommunications act of 1996 also adopted a
cost-based pricing standard for these unes, which the fcc interpreted as allowing it to impose a pricing standard known as total element long run incremental cost or telric. the fccs rules defining the unbundled network
elements that must be made available at telric prices have been overturned on multiple occasions by the courts. in its most recent order issued in response to these court decisions, the fcc eliminated the requirement to unbundle mass market local
switching on a nationwide basis, with the obligation to accept new orders ending as of the effective date of the order (march 11, 2005). the fcc also established a one year transition for existing une switching arrangements. for high capacity
transmission facilities, the fcc established criteria for determining whether high capacity loops, transport or dark fiber transport must be unbundled in individual wire centers, and stated that these standards were only expected to affect a small
number of wire centers. the fcc also eliminated the obligation to provide dark fiber loops and found that there is no obligation to provide unes exclusively for wireless or long distance service. in any instance where a particular high capacity
facility no longer has to be made available as a une, the fcc established a similar one year transition for any existing high capacity loop or transport unes, and an 18 month transition for any existing dark fiber unes. verizon and other parties
have challenged various aspects of the new fcc rules on appeal.
table of contents
as noted above, the fcc has concluded that the requirement under section251 of the
telecommunications act of 1996 to provide unbundled network elements at telric prices generally does not apply with respect to broadband facilities, such as fiber to the premises loops, the packet-switched capabilities of hybrid loops and packet
switching. the fcc also has held that any separate unbundling obligations that may be imposed by section271 of the telecommunications act of 1996 do not apply to these same facilities. the decision with respect to section271 is the
subject of an ongoing appeal.   state regulation of rates and services
state public utility commissions regulate our telephone
operations with respect to intrastate rates and services and other matters. in many jurisdictions the telephone operations have been able to replace rate of return regulation with price regulation plans.   verizon california inc.   arizona   verizon californias operations in arizona are subject to rate of return regulation.   california   verizon californias operations in california have operated under the new regulatory framework (nrf) since 1990. the nrf allows for a gradual
transition to less regulation on a service-by-service basis. the nrf is reviewed every three years and currently has the following features:
earnings ceiling: the ceiling is suspended.
price cap index: by setting inflation equal to productivity, the california public utilities commission (cpuc) has suspended the price cap index. limited
exogenous changes are allowed. generally, exogenous changes are changes unique to or specifically targeted to a company that are beyond its control (in this case, changes are permitted only for matters mandated by the cpuc or changes in total
intrastate cost recovery resulting from changes between federal and state jurisdictions).
price flexibility: services fall into three categories.
category i services cannot be changed without cpuc approval.
category ii services are partially competitive and can be adjusted within a ceiling/floor range. the current price (effectively the ceiling) cannot be increased
without a formal application.
category iii services are considered competitive and can be increased or decreased on short notice.
new services: new services can be classified as category ii or iii. if introduced as category iii, verizon california must demonstrate insignificant market
power.   the cpuc is currently reviewing the
nrf features.   nevada   verizon californias operations in nevada are subject to rate of return
regulation.   verizon delaware inc.   since 1994, verizon delaware has been regulated under the alternative
regulation provisions of the delaware telecommunications technology investment act of 1993 (delaware telecommunications act). on june7, 2005, the delaware public service commission (depsc) granted verizon delawares request that it
continue to be regulated under the delaware telecommunications act through september 2011, with the opportunity for verizon delaware to propose to the depsc an alternative regime for regulation during this time period. on september9, 2003, the
depsc approved a stipulation permitting verizon delaware to continue to be regulated under the delaware telecommunications act through september 2006. the delaware telecommunications act provides the following:
the prices of basic telephone services (e.g., dial-tone and local usage) will remain regulated and cannot change in any one year by more than the
gross domestic product  price index (gdp-pi) less 3%.
the prices of discretionary services (e.g., identa ring(sm) and call waiting) cannot increase more than 15%per year per service.
the prices of competitive services (e.g., voice messaging and message toll service) are not subject to tariff or price regulation.
table of contents
verizon delaware will develop a technology deployment plan with a commitment to invest a minimum of $250 million in delawares telecommunications network
during the first five years of the plan.   verizon florida
inc.   florida statutes govern the price cap plan.
beginning january1, 2001, verizon florida was able to raise basic local rates on 30 days notice once in any 12-month period not to exceed the gdp-pi less 1%. verizon florida may increase rates for non-basic services but increases for any
category cannot exceed 6% in any 12-month period unless another company is providing service in a given exchange, at which time verizon florida can increase its price up to 20% in a 12-month period. earnings are not regulated. legislation was passed
in 2003 that allows verizon florida to offset a reduction in intrastate access rates with an increase in basic local exchange revenues upon florida public service commission (fpsc) approval. the offset must be revenue neutral and take place over two
to four years. in evaluating a petition filed under this statute, the fpsc is to consider whether granting the petition will remove current support for basic local telecommunications services preventing the creation of a more attractive competitive
local exchange market for the benefit of residential consumers and enhanced market entry. the fpsc approved verizon floridas petition in 2003, and the florida supreme court affirmed that decision in 2005. when verizon floridas rates are
reduced to parity as defined by the statute, verizon floridas basic services become subject to the same regulatory treatment as its non-basic services.   verizon maryland inc.   in 2005, the public service commission of maryland approved a new price cap plan for regulating the intrastate services provided by verizon maryland. under the plan, services are divided into six
categories: access; basic-residential; basic-business; discretionary; competitive; and miscellaneous. rates for access, basic-residential, basic-business and discretionary services can be increased or decreased annually under a formula that is based
upon changes in the gdp-pi plus or minus exogenous change adjustments, however, basic-residential rates will be capped until november23, 2007. rates for competitive services may be increased without regulatory limits.   verizon new england inc.   maine   in june 2001, the maine public utilities commission (mpuc) ordered the continuation of an alternative form of regulation
(afor) for verizon maine for a second five-year term.   the
maine public advocate appealed the mpucs 2001 afor decision to the maine supreme judicial court, claiming that any extension to the afor must be preceded by an investigation of verizon maines costs and earnings utilizing traditional rate
of return principles. on february28, 2003, the court ruled that while state law requires that telephone rates under an afor are no higher than under rate of return regulation, the mpuc has broad discretion in making such a determination that
would not necessarily require a full rate of return inquiry. however, the court vacated and remanded the decision to the mpuc for its failure to expressly make such a determination, or in the alternative that if such a showing cannot be made, that
it nonetheless remains in the best interest of ratepayers to proceed with an afor. no change in any of verizon maines rates was required by the courts decision while the remand proceeding was pending.   in march 2003, the mpuc opened a proceeding to address the maine supreme
judicial courts remand of the 2001 afor decision. in an order issued on july11, 2003, the mpuc ruled that it would keep in place the $1.78 increase in verizon new englands monthly basic exchange rates pending completion of the
remand and maintain certain elements (pricing flexibility, service quality index) of the proposed afor on an interim basis until a final decision on the remand. on september25, 2003, the mpuc issued an order reinstating the afor and that order
was appealed. on january26, 2005, the maine supreme judicial court vacated the mpuc order and remanded the case for further investigation. the court held that the mpuc did not sufficiently comply with the statutory requirement that it ensure
that local rates under an afor will not be higher than under traditional rate of return.   on february17, 2005, the mpuc initiated a second remand proceeding to comply with the deficiencies identified in the courts january26, 2005 order. with the consent of the parties, the mpuc proposed
to consider a new afor, rather than seek to re-instate the 2001 afor (that likely would have expired, on its own terms, before the remand could be completed). in the interim, while the second remand investigation is pending, the mpuc determined it
would keep in place the $1.78 increase (and subsequent further increases) in verizon new englands monthly basic exchange rates until the remand proceeding is concluded. in addition, certain elements of the 2001 afor (pricing flexibility,
service quality index) were also extended, on an interim basis, until a final decision on the second remand proceeding. hearings in the second remand investigation are scheduled for the second quarter of 2006, with a decision by the mpuc later in
the year.   massachusetts   in may 2003, the massachusetts department of telecommunications and energy
(dte) approved an alternative regulatory plan for verizon new england. the plan contains no earnings review and gives verizon new england pricing flexibility for most retail business services and residence non-basic services, including second
dial-tone lines. price decreases are subject to price floor requirements. the dte also approved rate reductions for state switched access prices to interstate levels with offsetting revenue-neutral increases in residence dial-tone rates. those rate
changes became effective on june1, 2003.
table of contents
new hampshire   verizon new englands operations in new hampshire are currently subject to rate of return regulation. on
january16, 2004, the new hampshire public utilities commission (nhpuc) concluded a comprehensive proceeding examining the appropriate cost of capital for verizon. in its order, the nhpuc set the average weighted cost of capital for verizon at
8.2%. at present, the newly determined cost of capital has no effect on verizons retail revenues. the nhpuc directed verizon to file revised une rates reflecting this new cost determination by march16, 2004. verizons current une
rates were approved in 2001 relying upon an average weighted cost of capital of 10.46%. verizon filed an appeal of the nhpuc decision in federal district court in new hampshire. the nhpucs order to file new une rates was stayed by stipulation
during the appeal. on august17, 2005, the district court issued a ruling overturning the nhpucs decision. the court found that the agency had failed to apply the fccs standards in reaching its determination. on july9, 2004,
the nhpuc issued an order finding the existing directory licensing agreement between verizon new england and its affiliated yellow pages company to be unreasonable as it did not include a directory revenue sharing provision. as a result, the nhpuc
directed that verizon impute $23.3 million for purposes of intrastate ratemaking in new hampshire. on october19, 2004, the nhpuc issued an order denying verizons motion for reconsideration of the decision. verizon new england appealed
the ruling to the new hampshire supreme court which issued a ruling on december28, 2005, affirming the nhpucs decision. at present, the nhpuc ruling regarding imputation has no effect on verizons retail rates.   rhode island   on december21, 2005, the rhode island public utilities commission
(ripuc) approved a new alternative regulation plan proposed by verizon rhode island to replace the existing alternative regulation plan that was to expire at the end of december 2005. the principal components of the newly approved plan are:
pricing flexibility for all retail services, subject only to a long-run incremental cost (lric)-based price floor;
the company is allowed to reduce the lifeline subsidy for unlimited basic service by $2 per month over two years;
all retail service quality penalties are eliminated. service quality reporting requirements are reduced from monthly to quarterly;
the company must continue to file an annual earnings statement and semi-annual reports showing the total number of access lines served by the company and the
number and type of access lines served by competitors; and
the initial term of the plan is three years, but the plan will continue indefinitely unless verizon or the ripuc seeks to make changes.
vermont   on september26, 2005, the vermont public service board (vpsb) issued a
final order establishing a successor alternative regulatory plan for verizon new england to replace a plan adopted in 2000. the new plan is retroactive to july1, 2005, and runs through june 2008. the vpsbs final order requires
(i)rate reductions or investment in broadband and network diversity and (ii)separate publishing and distribution of directories for verizon new englands vermont operations white and yellow pages listings or the company is subject
to additional revenue reductions. the final order reduces rates by $8.2 million in 2005, $1.6 million in 2007, and $1.8 million in 2008. in the alternative, verizon new england may avoid the price decreases by making annual investments in broadband
and network diversity. any such investment is required in each year of the plan and must include the current years revenue reduction plus any revenue reduction offset by investment in prior years. the final order also requires an annual $40
million investment in infrastructure. although the plan provides pricing flexibility for all new services (including those introduced since the last plan such as freedom), no price increases are permitted for existing services (basic exchange
service, message toll service and most vertical services). the final order also continues a service quality plan with a $10.5 million penalty cap. verizon new england has filed tariffs with the vpsb proposing rated reductions of $8.2 million. those
tariffs are under review by the vpsb. verizon new england has also filed an appeal of the vpsbs order with the vermont supreme court.   verizon new jersey inc.   the 1992 new jersey telecommunications act classifies telecommunications services as competitive or protected. protected telephone services include basic
residence, touch-tone, access services other than those otherwise deemed competitive by the new jersey board of public utilities (njbpu), business local service for customers with less than two lines, and the ordering, installation and restoration
of these services. verizon new jersey provides protected telephone services and other services, including vertical services (rate-regulated services), under a plan for alternative form of regulation, which became effective on
july1, 2002. the plan eliminates earnings regulation, eliminates earnings sharing provisions, streamlines the process to introduce new services and strengthens commitments to service quality, lifeline service and schools and public libraries.
table of contents
verizon new york inc.   new york   the new york state public service commission (nyspsc) adopted an incentive plan to regulate the services of verizon new york, effective march1,
2002. the plan expired in 2005. the plan establishes state-wide service quality standards, with the potential for customer credits if verizon new york fails to meet those standards. verizon new york completed its transition to generally accepted
accounting principles for preparing financial statements for regulatory purposes in march 2005. verizon new yorks rates are proposed by the company based on several factors, including the competitiveness of the service and the companys
underlying costs, and are subject to approval by the nyspsc.   connecticut   in august 2005,
the connecticut department of public utility control adopted an incentive regulation plan proposed by verizon new york, which eliminates regulation of earnings and provides other deregulatory benefits for verizon new yorks operations in
connecticut.   verizon north inc.   illinois   verizon norths telephone operations in illinois are subject to rate of
return regulation. optional toll plans, integrated services digital network (isdn), frame relay, payphones, centranet, and other data services are considered deregulated and have total pricing flexibility.   indiana   verizon norths telephone operations in indiana became subject to an
alternative regulatory plan during 2004. among other matters, earnings are not subject to regulation, tariff filings are streamlined, 3 tiers of services are subject to differing levels of pricing regulation and can be shifted between tiers,
regulation of certain accounting standards and financings are eliminated and depreciation rates are not subject to approval. the plan has a three and one-half year term.   michigan   since the michigan telecommunications act was passed in 1991, a form of regulation that focuses on services, prices and costs has replaced rate of return
regulation. earnings are not regulated. all rates for regulated services must meet a cost floor. subject to that condition, after november22, 2005, only rates for primary basic local exchange services (pbles) are rate regulated by the michigan
public service commission (mpsc). verizon north may increase the pbles rate annually up to 1% less than the consumer price index. any rate increases above that amount must be approved by the mpsc as just and reasonable. the mpsc may only
approve such rate increases for pbles based upon one or more of the following 5 factors: total service lric; comparison to other provider rates; whether a new function, feature or capability is offered; increase in costs to provide local service;
and whether further investment is economically justified. the mpsc has no jurisdiction over numerous unregulated services.   ohio   verizon norths telephone operations in ohio are subject to rate of return regulation.   pennsylvania   on july26, 2001, the pennsylvania public utility commission (ppuc)
rejected, in part, and accepted, in part, a proposed price cap plan filed by verizon north. the ppuc accepted, with some modification, that part of the plan that provided for the deregulation of the pricing of competitive services; adoption of a
productivity factor based on inflation; a provision to adjust rates for exogenous events; and a price cap for the rates for competitive services. the ppuc rejected that part of verizon norths plan that provided for improvement of verizon
norths network infrastructure. the ppuc subsequently approved a revised infrastructure plan for verizon north that requires, inter alia, universal broadband deployment by 2015.   on november30, 2004, a statute reauthorizing alternative regulation in pennsylvania (act 183) was enacted into law and
on may20, 2005 the ppuc approved an amended price cap plan for verizon north pursuant to act 183:
requires verizon north to deploy a universal broadband network, defined at 1.544 megabits per second, not later than 2015, and the plan cannot be subsequently
changed without verizon norths consent;
permits annual price increases on non-competitive services up to, but not exceeding, the gdp-pi minus .5%.
allows nonprotected services to be declared competitive through a one-days notice filing with the ppuc.
table of contents
reduces ppuc reporting and other regulatory oversight requirements.
requires verizon north to contribute annually up to 20% of the first year effect of gdp-pi price increases and an allocated portion of $7 million (based on its
share of verizon access lines in pennsylvania) to a fund designed to promote broadband in schools and broadband education and to provide funding for certain programs to assist local communities in obtaining broadband facilities and services; the
amended plan also requires verizon north to establish certain programs to assist local communities in obtaining broadband facilities and services and to provide discounts to schools for certain broadband services.   wisconsin   verizon north entered a price cap plan in 1995. the plan does not regulate
earnings and price cap index increases can be accumulated and deferred up to three years. the maximum increase for any single basic rate element is 10% or the increase in the gdp-pi, whichever is greater. overall basic local service increases are
limited to gdp-pi less 2%. intrastate access service mirrors interstate rates. there are no restrictions on other services as long as they cover lrics. rate changes are effective on one days notice after customer notice and new services take
effect after ten days. the statute requires that no earlier than six years, and no more frequently than every three years thereafter, the public service commission of wisconsin may by rule increase or decrease the gdp-pi productivity factor in any
twelve-month period to reflect any statewide changes in the productivity experience of the telecommunications industry. the latest productivity factor review is complete and the factor was not changed.   verizon northwest inc.   california   verizon northwests california operations (under the name verizon west coast inc.) are subject to rate of return regulation.   idaho   rate for intrastate services provided by verizon northwests idaho
operations have been deregulated under 2005 legislation. various consumer protection regulations remain.   oregon   verizon northwests oregon operations are subject to rate of return regulation. pricing flexibility is permitted in competitive zones and verizon
northwest currently has digital channel service, isdn, pbx trunks (telephone switching equipment on customer premises), did trunks (trunks from the customer premises switches to the central office) and single line business service offerings in these
zones. billing and collection, intralata toll and centranet and out-of-franchise (seattle area) data services are in a competitive class and are flexibly priced. the company obtains support for basic service in high cost areas from a state universal
service fund.   washington   verizon northwests washington operations are subject to rate of return
regulation. intralata toll, operator services and billing and collection are flexibly priced.   verizon pennsylvania inc.   the ppuc regulates verizon pennsylvania under an alternative regulation plan approved in 1994. the plan provides for a pure price cap plan with no sharing of earnings with customers and replaces rate base, rate of return regulation.
competitive services, including toll, directory advertising, billing services, centrex service, paging, speed calling, repeat calling, and hicap (high capacity private line) and business services provided to larger customers are price deregulated.
all non-competitive services are price regulated.   the plan:
permits annual price increases up to, but not exceeding, the gdp-pi minus 2.93%;
requires annual price decreases when the gdp-pi falls below 2.93%;
caps prices for protected services, including residential and business basic exchange services, special access and switched access, through 1999; and
permits revenue-neutral rate restructuring for noncompetitive services.   the ppucs order approving the bell atlanticgte merger extended the cap on residential and business basic
exchange services through 2003.
table of contents
the plan also requires deployment of a universal broadband network. on september17, 2003, the ppuc
approved a revised plan that requires verizon pennsylvania to deploy a universal broadband network, defined at 1.544 megabits per second, in the following phases: 50% by 2004; 60% by 2006; 70% by 2008; 80% by 2010, 90% by 2012 and 100% by 2015.
verizon pennsylvania is also required to make broadband services at 45 megabits per second available on a commercially reasonable time frame to 50% of exchanges by 2004 and 100% by 2015.   in december 2003, the statute authorizing alternative regulation in pennsylvania expired. in january 2004, the ppuc issued a
policy statement that the expiration of the statute had no effect upon current incentive regulation plans.   as described in verizon norths pennsylvania operations above, on november30, 2004, a new statute reauthorizing alternative regulation in pennsylvania, act 183, was enacted into law.
the provisions of act 183 also apply to verizon pennsylvania.   verizon south
inc.   north carolina   verizon souths operations in north carolina have been under a price
cap plan since 1996, which was modified in june 2005. earnings are not regulated and local rates can be increased by gdp-pi times 1.5, but specific rate elements cannot be increased beyond 10% in one year. rate increases are effective on fourteen
days notice. verizon south has complete flexibility to increase rates for billing and collection, centrex, enhanced digital switch service, and premium local calling plan services.   south carolina   verizon souths south carolina price cap plan started during 2000. under the statute, existing rates are deemed just and reasonable on the date of
notification. residential and single-line business local service rates are capped for two years from the date of election. after two years, these rates may be adjusted annually pursuant to an inflation-based index. rates for other services are
flexibly priced. price decreases are effective in seven days. price increases and new services prices are effective in fourteen days.   virginia   on december21, 2000, the virginia state corporation commission (vscc) approved a price cap plan for verizon south that was substantially similar to
verizon virginias plan. in january 2005, the vscc approved modifications to the plan described below.   verizon southwest   in
general, the texas public utilities commission regulates verizon southwest under a price cap plan with no cap on earnings pursuant to the public utility regulatory act (pura). the plan places services into three categories:
basic services  these include basic local residential charges such as service connection, mandatory expanded calling plans and, until july1, 2006,
residential call waiting. price increases require the texas public utilities commission approval. full packaging (an integrated offering of some or all of our products and services) is allowed.
access charges  prices are capped; carriers can reduce rates to any amount above lric.
non-basic services  this category represents all other regulated services, including basic local business services, intralata toll, custom calling features
(except residential call waiting), special access, operator services, pbx and isdn services. these services have unlimited upward pricing flexibility. full packaging is allowed.   in 2005, pura was amended to allow incumbent local exchange carriers to
deregulate all or some of their exchanges. verizon southwest opted into this plan, and in 2005 the texas public utilities commission granted verizon southwests petition to deregulate eleven of its most populous exchanges. in these deregulated
exchanges, verizon southwest has upward pricing flexibility for all basic telecommunications services, including basic residential service, provided that verizon southwest offers stand-alone residential local exchange voice service at
capped rates. this rate cap expires in september 2007. as a result of opting into puras deregulation plan, verizon southwest must phase-down its intrastate switched access rates over time to interstate levels.   verizon virginia inc.   effective in 1995, the vscc approved an alternative regulatory plan that regulates verizon virginias noncompetitive
services on a price cap basis and does not regulate verizon virginias competitive services. the plan does not regulate profits. in june 2001, the vscc modified the plan and extended the moratorium on rate increases for basic local telephone
service until 2004. in january 2005, the vscc again modified the plan, permitting additional pricing flexibility for noncompetitive services and eliminating various regulatory requirements. the plans effective date is february1, 2005 and
it has no expiration date.
table of contents
verizon washington, dc inc.   on september9, 2004, the district of columbia public service commission (dcpsc) approved an amended price cap plan for
local retail services provided by verizon washington, d.c. key provisions of the 2004 plan include:
a three-year term;
no earnings restrictions, service penalties or revenue sharing;
four service categories: basic residential, basic business, discretionary and competitive;
a cap on residential dial-tone line rates until 2006;
annual pricing flexibility for all other basic residential services, with the increase in total revenues from these services limited to the annual inflation rate
(as measured by the change in gdp-pi) and increases for any individual service in the category limited to 10%;
classification of all business services as competitive with complete pricing flexibility except for basic business dial-tone lines and message units, e911, local
directory service and connect request;
pricing flexibility on discretionary services, with a 15% annual limit on any rate increase; and
flexibility to bundle or package existing services.   verizon west virginia inc.   on october3, 2001, the west virginia public service commission (wvpsc) approved verizon west virginias new incentive regulation plan (irp). the irp continued, until december31,
2005, the flexible price regulation of competitive services, caps on basic rates, infrastructure commitments and unlimited earnings freedom that had been in place since 1988. verizon west virginia may petition the wvpsc for another incentive
regulatory plan at any time.   competition   current and potential competitors in telecommunication services include long
distance companies, other local telephone companies, cable companies, wireless service providers, foreign telecommunications providers, electric utilities, internet service providers and other companies that offer network services. many of these
companies have a strong market presence, brand recognition and existing customer relationships, all of which contribute to intensifying competition and may affect our future revenue growth.   local exchange services   the ability to offer local exchange services historically has been subject to regulation by state regulatory commissions.
applications from competitors to provide and resell local exchange services have been approved in every jurisdiction in our service territory. the telecommunications act of 1996 has significantly increased the level of competition in our local
exchange markets.   one of the purposes of the
telecommunications act of 1996 was to ensure, and accelerate, the emergence of competition in local exchange markets. toward this end, the 1996 act requires most existing local exchange carriers (incumbent local exchange carriers, or ilecs),
including our telephone operations, to permit potential competitors (competitive local exchange carriers, or clecs) to:
purchase service from the ilec for resale to clec customers;
purchase unes from the ilec; and/or
interconnect the clecs network with the ilecs network.   as a result, competition in our local exchange markets continues to increase. our telephone operations generally have been
required to sell their services to clecs at significant discounts from the prices our telephone operations charge their retail customers. the scope of these obligations going forward will be affected by the new unbundling rules described above, and
the rates we charge local exchange competitors for access to unes remain under near-continual review and revision by state regulators and often result in reductions in those rates. see state regulation of rates and services.
long distance services   we offer intralata and interlata long distance services. intralata toll
calls originate and terminate within the same lata, but generally cover a greater distance than a local call. state regulatory commissions rather than federal authorities generally regulate these services. federal regulators have jurisdiction over
interstate toll services. all of our state regulatory commissions (except in washington, d.c., where intralata
table of contents
toll service is not provided) permit other carriers to offer intralata toll services within the state.
interlata toll calls terminate outside the lata of origination. we now offer long distance services throughout the united states, capping a seven-year effort. our authority in alaska is limited to interstate and international services. a number of
our major competitors in the long distance business have strong brand recognition and existing customer relationships.   alternative access services   a substantial portion of our telephone operations revenues from business and government customers is derived from a relatively small number of large, multiple-line subscribers.
we face competition from alternative communications systems, constructed
by large end-users, interexchange carriers and alternative access vendors, which are capable of originating and/or terminating calls without the use of our plant. the fccs orders requiring us to offer collocated interconnection for special and
switched access services have enhanced the ability of such alternative access providers to compete with us.   other potential sources of competition include cable television systems, shared tenant services and other noncarrier systems which are capable of bypassing our telephone operations local
plant, either partially or completely, through substitution of special access for switched access or through concentration of telecommunications traffic on fewer of our telephone operations lines, and through substitution of unes for special
access services.   voice over internet protocol services   our wireline telecommunications services also face increasing competition
from companies which provide voice over internet protocol (voip) services. these services use the internet or private broadband networks to transmit voice communications. voip services are available from a wide range of companies including cable
companies, long-distance companies, national voip providers and regional service providers.   wireless services   wireless services also constitute a significant source of competition to our wireline telecommunications services, especially as wireless carriers (including verizon wireless) expand and improve their network coverage and continue to lower
their prices to end-users. as a result, more end-users are substituting wireless services for basic wireline service. wireless telephone services can also be used for data transmission.   public telephone services   the growth of wireless communications has significantly decreased usage of public telephones, as more customers are substituting wireless services for
public telephone services. in addition, we face competition from other providers of public telephone services.   operator services   our
operator services product line faces competition from alternative operator services providers and internet service providers.
domestic wireless
operations   our domestic wireless segment provides wireless voice and data services and
equipment sales in the united states, principally through verizon wireless.   verizon wireless is the industry-leading wireless communications provider in the united states in terms of profitability, as measured by operating income. verizon wireless has the second largest customer base of any
u.s. wireless provider, with 51.3million wireless subscribers as of december31, 2005, and provides wireless voice and data services across one of the most extensive networks in the united states. approximately 282million people
reside in areas of the u.s. in which we have fcc licenses to offer our services and approximately 250million people reside in areas covered by our service. this coverage includes approximately 90% of the population in our licensed areas and 49
of the 50 and 98 of the 100 most populated u.s. metropolitan areas.   wireless licenses are granted by the fcc for an initial 10-year term and are renewable for successive 10-year terms. to date, all verizon wireless and predecessor company wireless licenses have been successfully renewed.   background   the wireless joint venture was formed in april 2000 in connection with the combination of the u.s. wireless operations and
interests of verizon and vodafone group plc (vodafone). the wireless joint venture operates as verizon wireless. verizon owns a controlling 55% interest in verizon wireless and vodafone owns the remaining 45%.
table of contents
recent acquisitions   on march4, 2005, we completed the purchase from qwest wireless, llc of all of its personal communications services (pcs) licenses and related
network assets for $419 million in cash, including post-closing adjustments. the licenses cover a population of approximately 31million in 62 markets, and will provide additional spectrum capacity in certain of our existing major markets, such
as denver, portland, phoenix, salt lake city and seattle.   on
april13, 2005, we completed the purchase of all of the stock of nextwave telecom inc., whereby we acquired 23 pcs licenses for $3,003 million in cash. the licenses cover a population of approximately 73million and will provide spectrum
capacity in key markets such as new york, los angeles, boston, washington d.c. and detroit, and will expand our footprint into tulsa, oklahoma.   on may11, 2005, we completed the purchase from metro pcs, inc. of its pcs license in the san francisco basic trading area for $230 million in cash.
the license covers a population of approximately 7million and will provide spectrum capacity in the san francisco, oakland and san jose markets.   on february15, 2005, the fccs auction of broadband personal communications services licenses ended and verizon wireless and vista pcs, llc
were the highest bidders for 63 licenses totaling approximately $697 million. on may13, 2005, the licenses won by verizon wireless were granted by the fcc. the licenses won by vista pcs remain subject to fcc approval.   competition   there is substantial competition in the wireless telecommunications industry. we expect competition to intensify as a result
of the higher penetration levels that currently exist in the industry, ongoing industry consolidation, the development and deployment of new technologies, the introduction of new products and services, new market entrants, the availability of
additional spectrum, both licensed and unlicensed, and regulatory changes. other wireless providers, including other cellular and pcs operators and resellers, serve each of the markets in which we operate. we currently provide service to 49 of the
top 50 markets in the u.s., and each of these 49 markets is served by other competing wireless providers. competition also may increase if smaller, stand-alone wireless providers transfer licenses to larger, better capitalized and more experienced
wireless providers. in addition, resellers that buy bulk wholesale service from facilities-based carriers for resale provide another set of differentiated competitors in the marketplace. also, as wireless data proliferates, content will become an
increasingly significant factor in the appeal of these services. this may give content providers and other participants in the wireless value chain opportunities for increased leverage and/or opportunities to compete for wireless data revenues.
we compete primarily against three other national wireless
service providers: cingular wireless llc, sprint nextel corporation and t-mobile usa, inc. in addition, in many markets we also compete with regional carriers, such as alltel corporation and us cellular corporation.   we believe that the following are the most important competitive factors in
our industry:   network reliability, capacity and
coverage: lower prices, improved service quality and new service offerings have led to increased minutes of use per customer. as a result, the ability to keep pace with network capacity needs and offer highly reliable national coverage through
ones own network is important. we have an extensive national network, and we continue to look for expansion opportunities through the build-out of existing licenses, acquisitions and/or spectrum leasing. we own licenses that cover much of the
country but we will need to spend significant amounts to expand our capacity and extend our coverage area and maintain and improve the quality of our network. our competitors also have these needs and they are using similar means to address them.
pricing: service and equipment pricing is an important
area in which wireless carriers compete. we seek to compete in this area by offering our customers services and equipment that they will regard as the best available value for their money.   customer service: quality customer service is essential to ensure that
existing customers do not terminate service and to obtain new customers. we believe that our quality customer service will be a key factor in retaining our customers and in attracting new customers and those who want to switch from other carriers.
we are very focused on continually enhancing our customer service. our competitors also recognize the importance of customer service and are also focusing on improving the customer experience.   product development: as wireless technologies develop and wireless
broadband networks proliferate, continued customer and revenue growth will be increasingly dependent on the development of new and enhanced products and services. we are committed to continue pursuing the development, evaluation and rapid deployment
of new and innovative devices and customer solutions, both independently and in collaboration with application service providers.   distribution: key to achieving sales success in the wireless industry is the reach and quality of sales channels and distribution points. we
believe that the optimal mix of direct, indirect and wholesale distribution channels is an important ingredient in achieving industry-leading profitability. a goal of our distribution strategy is to increase sales through our company-operated stores
and our outside sales team, as well as through telemarketing and web-based sales and fulfillment capabilities. supplementing this is an extensive indirect distribution network of retail outlets and prepaid replenishment locations, original equipment
manufacturers and value-added distributors, as well as various resellers who buy our service on a wholesale basis.   capital resources: in order to expand the capacity and coverage of their networks and introduce new products and services, wireless providers require significant capital resources. we
generate significant cash flow from operations. some of our competitors also have significant cash flow.
table of contents
our success will depend on our ability to anticipate and respond to various factors affecting the
industry, including the factors described above, as well as new technologies, changes in customer preferences, regulatory changes, demographic trends, economic conditions and pricing strategies of competitors.
information services
information services
is a world leader in print and online directory publishing and a content provider for electronic communications products and services. a leader in linking buyers and sellers, we produce verizon yellow and white pages directories, as well as the
internets most advanced online directory, superpages.com. we pursue growth by offering customers comprehensive advertising programs that include bundled print and electronic commerce offerings.   information services provides sales, publishing and other related services
for approximately 1,726 directory titles in 44 states, washington, d.c., four countries and a commonwealth outside the united states. this includes over 1,200 verizon directory titles with a circulation of approximately 121million copies in
the u.s. and 8million copies internationally.   in 2003,
we completed the sale of our directory businesses in europe, which consisted of publishing operations in austria, the czech republic, gibraltar, hungary, poland and slovakia.   in 2004, verizon sold verizon information services canada inc. directory operations to an affiliate of bain capital, a
private investment firm, for $1.6 billion. the sale closed in the fourth quarter 2004, generating an after tax-gain of $516 million.   our directory publishing business competes within the yellow pages industry with five major u.s.-based directory publishers (at&t inc., bellsouth
corporation, r.h. donnelley corporation, dex media, inc, and yellow book usa) and encounters competition in nearly all of our domestic print markets. we also compete against alternative advertising media, including radio, network and cable
television, newspapers, magazines, internet, direct mail and others for a share of the total u.s. advertising media market. our superpages.com competitors include national directory and local internet search engines including yahoo and google.
in december 2005, verizon announced that it is exploring
divesting information services through a spin-off, sale or other strategic transaction.
international
our international
segment includes international wireline and wireless communications operations and investments in the americas and europe. our consolidated international investments as of december31, 2005 included verizon dominicana, c. por a. (verizon
dominicana) in the dominican republic and telecomunicaciones de puerto rico, inc. (telpri) in puerto rico. as of december31, 2005, our international segment managed approximately 5million access lines and provided wireless services to
approximately 31million customers.   americas   dominican republic   we own 100% of verizon dominicana, the principal telecommunications provider in the dominican republic. verizon dominicana
provides local, wireless, national and international long distance and internet access services throughout the dominican republic. at december31, 2005, verizon dominicana served approximately 752,000 access lines and 1.9million wireless
customers.   puerto rico   we own a 52% interest in telpri, which owns puerto rico telephone company
(prtc), puerto ricos principal wireline company. verizon wireless puerto rico (vwpr), a division of prtc, is puerto ricos second largest wireless company. at december31, 2005, prtc served 1.1million access lines and vwpr
provided wireless services to approximately 485,000 customers.   venezuela
we own a 28.5% interest in compaia annima
nacional telfonos de venezuela (cantv), venezuelas largest full-service telecommunications provider. cantv offers local services, national and international long distance, internet access and wireless services in venezuela as well as
public telephone, private network, data transmission, directory and other value-added services. at december31, 2005, cantv served approximately 3.5million access lines and 5.2million wireless customers.   europe   italy   we own a 23.1% interest in vodafone omnitel n.v. (vodafone omnitel), an italian digital cellular telecommunications company. it is the second largest
wireless provider in italy. at december31, 2005, vodafone omnitel served 23.7million subscribers.
table of contents
gibraltar   gibraltar nynex communications limited, operating as gibtelecom, is a full-service provider of wireline, wireless, and internet access services to the
country of gibraltar. we currently own a 50% interest in the company. our sole partner in the company is the government of gibraltar.   other   in september 2005, we sold our 100% interest in micronesian telecommunications corporation (mtc), a full-service telecommunications provider.   international regulatory and competitive trends   for several years, the telecommunications industry has been experiencing dynamic changes as national and international
regulatory reforms embrace competition.   in the dominican
republic, verizon dominicana faces both wireline and wireless competitors, although it remains the principal service provider in all telecommunication segments. notwithstanding, competition is particularly dynamic in wireless services and the number
of emerging operators in long distance and voip is growing. verizon dominicanas primary competitors are orange dominicana, tricom and centennial dominicana. these three companies all have wireless networks and tricom has a fixed line presence
in the islands principal population centers. there are several other companies that indotel, the countrys independent regulator, has authorized to provide wireless and/or wireline phone and internet services. at least four of those
companies are likely to commence operations in 2006.   under
dominican republic law, pricing is set at market rates and telecommunication companies are free to provide services according to their own criteria. indotel is primarily focused on providing a regulatory framework for the industry and protecting
end-users rights. indotel may intervene if parties fail to agree on interconnection agreements or if competition for network services is insufficient. indotel has indicated that it expects to address the cost standard it will apply in
establishing rates in circumstances where it is required to intervene, number portability, equal access and resale of services during 2006.   in puerto rico, telpri operates in a highly competitive telecommunications market. all wireline services, including local, long distance, internet access
and data, face competition from various providers including a facilities-based local carrier, interexchange carriers, resellers, cable providers, and internet service providers. prtc remains the leading wireline service provider in puerto rico. in
the wireless market, vwpr competes against five other wireless carriers and is second in wireless market share operating under the verizon wireless brand. with respect to regulatory matters, prtc continues to operate in a very challenging
environment. in april 2005, prtc filed with the puerto rico telecommunications regulatory board (trb) a new tariff structure for basic telephone service that creates a single local calling zone across the island. a number of carriers asked the trb
to initiate a proceeding to determine if the plan met the statutory standard. after numerous changes and delays in the schedule for concluding this proceeding, prtc withdrew the tariff on february3, 2006. prtc plans in the near future to
implement a new tariff plan which will address customer needs and market realities.   in venezuela, cantvs wireless operations have faced competition since inception. in late 2000, the government opened the basic telephone market for local, national and international long distance service to
competition and issued new guidelines governing interconnection and the use of wireless spectrum. at the end of 2005, cvg telecom, the government sponsored telephone operator, was granted a license to provide services in seven venezuelan states and
internet services nationwide, in direct competition with cantv. cantv remains venezuelas leading provider of switched, fixed local and domestic and international long distance services and is one of the countrys top providers of wireless
services. cantv is still subject to comprehensive price cap regulation, especially with respect to residential services, that limits the companys ability to raise prices to keep pace with changes in foreign exchange rates and inflation. the
regulator, conatel, has indicated an intention to move to an efficient enterprise model for establishing regulated rates for basic services.   in italy, vodafone omnitel operates in an intensely competitive and highly penetrated market. it continues to perform well in italy through customer
growth, driven by successful promotions and a focus on high value customers through targeted retention initiatives. vodafone omnitel was awarded a license for third-generation mobile spectrum in 2000, which was subsequently extended from a 15-year
life to a 20-year life in november 2001. during 2004, vodafone omnitel launched the commercial operations of its third-generation network.
recent developments
mci merger   on february14, 2005, verizon announced that it had agreed to acquire
mci for a combination of verizon common shares and cash (including mci dividends). on may2, 2005, verizon announced that it agreed with mci to further amend its agreement to acquire mci for cash and stock of at least $26.00 per share,
consisting of cash of $5.60, which was paid as a special dividend by mci on october27, 2005, after the october6, 2005 approval of the transaction by mci shareholders, plus the greater of .5743 verizon shares for each mci common share or
a sufficient number of verizon shares to deliver to shareholders $20.40 of value. under this price protection feature, verizon had the option of paying additional cash instead of issuing additional shares over the .5743 exchange ratio. this
consideration was subject to adjustment at closing and
table of contents
may have been decreased based on mcis bankruptcy claims-related experience and international tax liabilities. the merger received the required state,
federal and international regulatory approvals by year-end 2005, and on january6, 2006, verizon and mci closed the merger.   under terms of the merger agreement, mci shareholders received .5743 shares of verizon and cash for each of their mci shares. verizon elected to make a
supplemental cash payment of $2.738 per mci share, $779 million in the aggregate, rather than issue additional shares of verizon common stock, so that the merger consideration was equal to at least $20.40 per mci share. verizon and mci management
mutually agreed that there was no purchase price adjustment related to the amount of mcis bankruptcy claims-related experience and international tax liabilities.   separately, on april9, 2005, verizon entered into a stock purchase agreement with eight entities affiliated with
carlos slim helu to purchase 43.4million shares of mci common stock for $25.72 per share in cash plus an additional cash amount of 3%per annum from april9, 2005 until the closing of the purchase of those shares. the transaction
closed on may17, 2005 and the additional cash payment was made through may13, 2005. the total cash payment was $1,121 million. under the stock purchase agreement, verizon will pay the slim entities an adjustment at the end of one year in
an amount per mci share calculated by multiplying (i).7241 by (ii)the amount, if any, by which the price of verizons common stock exceeds $35.52 per share (measured over a 20-day period), subject to a maximum excess amount per
verizon share of $26.98. after the closing of the stock purchase agreement, verizon transferred the shares of mci common stock it had purchased to a trust established pursuant to an agreement between verizon and the department of justice. we
received the special dividend of $5.60 per mci share on these 43.4million mci shares, or $243 million, on october27, 2005.   redemption of mci debt   on january17, 2006, verizon announced offers to purchase two series of mci senior notes, mci $1,983 million aggregate principal amount of 6.688% senior notes due 2009 and mci $1,699 million
aggregate principal amount of 7.735% senior notes due 2014, at 101% of their par value. due to the change in control of mci that occurred in connection with the merger with verizon on january6, 2006, verizon is required to make this offer to
noteholders within 30 days of the closing of the merger of mci and verizon. separately, verizon notified noteholders that mci is exercising its right to redeem both series of senior notes prior to maturity under the optional redemption procedures
provided in the indentures. the 6.688% notes were redeemed on march1, 2006, and the 7.735% notes were redeemed on february16, 2006.   in addition, on january20, 2006, verizon announced an offer to repurchase mci $1,983 million aggregate principal amount of 5.908% senior notes due
2007 at 101% of their par value. on february21, 2006, $1,804 million of these notes were redeemed by verizon. verizon satisfied and discharged the indenture governing this series of notes shortly after the close of the offer for those
noteholders who did not accept this offer.   issuance of debt
in february 2006, verizon issued $4,000 million of floating rate and
fixed rate notes maturing from 2007 through 2035.   spectrum purchases
on february15, 2005, the fccs auction of
broadband personal communications services licenses ended and verizon wireless and vista pcs, llc were the highest bidders for 63 licenses totaling approximately $697 million. on may13, 2005, the licenses won by verizon wireless were granted
by the fcc. the licenses won by vista pcs remain subject to fcc approval.   sales of businesses and investments   information services
in december 2005, we announced that we are exploring
divesting information services through a spin-off, sale or other strategic transaction. however, since this process is still ongoing, information services results of operations, financial position and cash flows remain in verizons
continuing operations.   telephone access lines   we continually consider plans for a reduction in the size of our access line
business, including through a spin-off mechanism or otherwise, so that we may pursue our strategy of placing greater focus on the higher growth businesses of broadband and wireless.   environmental matters   during 2003, under a government-approved plan, remediation commenced at the site of a former sylvania facility in hicksville, new york that processed
nuclear fuel rods in the 1950s and 1960s. remediation beyond original expectations proved to be necessary and a reassessment of the anticipated remediation costs was conducted. a reassessment of costs related to remediation efforts at several other
former facilities was also undertaken. as a result, an additional environmental remediation expense of $240 million was recorded in 2003, for remedial activities likely to take place over the next several years. in september 2005 the army corps of
engineers (ace) accepted the hicksville site into the formerly utilized sites remedial action program. this may result in the ace performing some or all of the remediation effort for the hicksville site with a corresponding decrease in costs to
verizon. to the extent that the ace assumes responsibility for remedial work at the hicksville site,
table of contents
an adjustment to this reserve may be made. adjustments may also be made based upon actual conditions discovered during the remediation at any of the sites
requiring remediation.   new york recovery funding   in august 2002, president bush signed the supplemental appropriations bill
that included $5.5 billion in new york recovery funding. of that amount, approximately $750 million has been allocated to cover utility restoration and infrastructure rebuilding as a result of the september11th terrorist attacks on lower
manhattan. these funds will be distributed through the lower manhattan development corporation following an application and audit process. as of september 2004, we had applied for reimbursement of approximately $266 million under category one,
although we did not record this amount as a receivable. we received advances totaling $88 million in connection with this application process. on december22, 2004, we applied for reimbursement of an additional $136 million of category
2 losses, and on march29, 2005 we amended our application seeking an additional $3 million. category 2 funding is for permanent restoration and infrastructure improvement. according to the plan, permanent restoration is reimbursed up to
75% of the loss. on november3, 2005, we received the results of preliminary audit findings disallowing all but $44 million of our original $266 million of costs in our category one applications. on december8, 2005, we provided a detailed
rebuttal to the preliminary audit findings and are currently awaiting the final audit report. our applications are pending.
employees
as of
december31, 2005, verizon and its subsidiaries had approximately 217,000 employees. unions represent approximately 46% of our employees.
information on our internet website
we make available,
free of charge on our website, our annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k, and all amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material is electronically filed with or
furnished to the securities and exchange commission (sec). our website address is www.verizon.com. this information is included in investor information on our website.
table of contents
cautionary statement concerning forward-looking statements
in this annual report
on form 10-k we have made forward-looking statements. these statements are based on our estimates and assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties. forward-looking statements include the information concerning our possible or assumed
future results of operations. forward-looking statements also include those preceded or followed by the words anticipates, believes, estimates, hopes or similar expressions. for those statements, we
claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the private securities litigation reform act of 1995.   the following important factors, along with those discussed elsewhere in this annual report, could affect future results and could cause those results to
differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements:
materially adverse changes in economic and industry conditions and labor matters, including workforce levels and labor negotiations, and any resulting financial
and/or operational impact, in the markets served by us or by companies in which we have substantial investments;
material changes in available technology;
technology substitution;
an adverse change in the ratings afforded our debt securities by nationally accredited ratings organizations;
the final results of federal and state regulatory proceedings concerning our provision of retail and wholesale services and judicial review of those results;
the effects of competition in our markets;
the timing, scope and financial impacts of our deployment of fiber-to-the-premises broadband technology;
the ability of verizon wireless to continue to obtain sufficient spectrum resources;
changes in our accounting assumptions that regulatory agencies, including the sec, may require or that result from changes in the accounting rules or their
application, which could result in an impact on earnings; and
the extent and timing of our ability to obtain revenue enhancements and cost savings following our business combination with mci.
table of contents
item 1a.risk factors
we face significant competition
that may reduce our market share and lower our profits   we
face significant competition in our industry. the rapid development of new technologies, services and products has eliminated the traditional lines between local, long distance, wireless, cable and internet communication services and brought new
competitors to our markets, including other telephone companies, cable companies, wireless service providers, satellite providers, electric utilities, and providers of voip services. while these changes have enabled us to offer new types of
services, they have also allowed other service providers to broaden the scope of their own competitive offerings. our ability to compete successfully will depend on how successfully we anticipate and respond to various competitive factors, including
new services that may be introduced by our competitors, changes in consumer preferences, demographic trends and pricing pressures. because many of our competitors are subject to less regulation and have lower cost structures than us, due in part to
the absence of a unionized work force and fewer retirees, they may be able to offer services at lower prices. the resulting pressure on the price of services provided by us may result in reduced revenues and reduction of profits.   unless we effectively keep pace with technological developments in the
telecommunications industry we may experience a decline in demand for our services   our industry is experiencing rapid change as new technologies are developed that offer consumers an array of choices for their communications needs. in order to grow and remain competitive, we will need to adapt to
future changes in technology, to enhance our existing offerings and introduce new offerings to address our customers changing demands. if we are unable to meet future advances in competing technologies on a timely basis or at an acceptable
cost, we could lose customers to our competitors. in general, the development of new services in our industry requires us to anticipate and respond to the varied and continually changing demands of our customers. we may not be able to accurately
predict technological trends or the success of new services in the market. in addition, there could be legal or regulatory restraints to our introduction of new services. if these services fail to gain acceptance in the marketplace, or if costs
associated with implementation and completion of the introduction of these services materially increase, our ability to retain and attract customers could be adversely affected.   changes in the regulatory regime under which we operate could adversely affect our business prospects or results of
operations   our operations are subject to regulation by
the fcc and other federal, state and local agencies. it is impossible to predict with any certainty the outcome of pending federal and state regulatory proceedings relating to our provision of retail or wholesale services, or the reviews by federal
or state courts of regulatory rulings. unless we are able to obtain relief, existing laws and regulations may inhibit our ability to expand our business and introduce new products and services. in addition, the adoption of new laws or regulations or
changes to the existing regulatory framework could adversely affect our business plans. for example, the development of new technologies, such as internet protocol-based services, including voip and super high-speed broadband and video, could be
subject to conflicting regulation between the fcc and various state and local authorities, which could significantly increase the cost of implementing and introducing new services based on this technology.
item 1b.unresolved staff comments
none.
item 2.properties
general
our principal
properties do not lend themselves to simple description by character and location. our total investment in plant, property and equipment was approximately $194 billion at december31, 2005 and $186 billion at december31, 2004, including
the effect of retirements, but before deducting accumulated depreciation. our gross investment in plant, property and equipment consisted of the following at december31:
network equipment
80.9
%
80.5
%
land, buildings and building equipment
9.1
9.1
furniture and other equipment
6.7
7.0
other
3.3
3.4
100.0
%
100.0
%
table of contents
our properties are divided among our operating segments at december31, as follows:
domestic telecom
74.6
%
76.2%
domestic wireless
21.7
19.9
information services
0.3
0.3
international
2.7
3.0
corporate and other
0.7
0.6
100.0
%
100.0%
network equipment
consists primarily of aerial cable, underground cable, conduit and wiring, wireless plant, telephone poles, switching equipment, transmission equipment and related facilities. land, buildings and building equipment consists of land and land
improvements and central office buildings. furniture and other equipment consists of public telephone instruments and telephone equipment (including pbxs), furniture, office equipment, motor vehicles and other work equipment. other property consists
primarily of plant under construction, capital leases, capitalized computer software costs and leasehold improvements. a portion of our property is subject to the liens of their respective mortgages securing funded debt.   the customers of our telephone operations are served by electronic switching
systems that provide a wide variety of services. at december31, 2005, substantially all of the access lines were served by digital capability.
capital expenditures
we continue to make
significant capital expenditures to meet the demand for telecommunications services and to further improve such services. capital spending for domestic telecom was $8,267 million in 2005, $7,118 million in 2004 and $6,820 million in 2003. capital
spending for domestic wireless was $6,484 million in 2005, $5,633 million in 2004 and $4,590 million in 2003. capital spending for information services, international and corporate and other businesses was $573 million in 2005, $508 million in 2004
and $464 million in 2003. capital spending for those years includes capitalized software and excludes additions under capital leases. in 2006, verizon management expects capital expenditures to be in the range of $15.4 billion to $15.7 billion,
excluding capital expenditures associated with mci. including mci, capital expenditures are expected to be $17.0 billion to $17.4 billion in 2006.
item 3.legal proceedings
none.
item 4.submission of matters to a vote of security holders
not
applicable.
executive officers of the registrant
set
forth below is information with respect to our executive officers.
name
age
office
heldsince
ivan g. seidenberg
chairman and chief executive officer
lawrence t. babbio, jr.
vice chairman and president
william p. barr
executive vice president and general counsel
thomas a. bartlett
senior vice president and controller
john w. diercksen
executive vice president  strategy, development and planning
marc c. reed
executive vice president  human resources
dennis f. strigl
executive vice president and president and ceo  verizon wireless
thomas j. tauke
executive vice president  public affairs, policy and communications
doreen a. toben
executive vice president and chief financial officer
catherine t. webster
senior vice president and treasurer
prior to serving as an
executive officer, each of the above officers have held high level managerial positions with the company or one of its subsidiaries for at least five years.   officers are not elected for a fixed term of office but are removable at the discretion of the board of directors.
table of contents
part ii
item 5.market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the principal market
for trading in the common stock of verizon is the new york stock exchange. the common stock is also listed in the united states on the boston, chicago, pacific and philadelphia stock exchanges. as of december31, 2005, there were 947,767
shareowners of record.   high and low stock prices, as reported
on the new york stock exchange composite tape of transactions, and dividend data are as follows:
market price
cashdividenddeclared
high
low
first quarter
$41.06
$34.38
$.405
second quarter
36.25
33.71
.405
third quarter
34.97
31.65
.405
fourth quarter
32.78
29.13
.405
first quarter
$39.54
$35.08
$.385
second quarter
38.20
34.25
.385
third quarter
41.01
34.13
.385
fourth quarter
42.27
38.26
.385
the
following table provides information about verizons common stock repurchases during the fourth quarter of 2005.
period
totalnumberofsharespurchased
averagepricepaidpershare
totalnumberofsharespurchasedaspartofpubliclyannouncedplansorprograms(1)
maximumnumberofshares that may yet be purchased undertheplansorprograms(2)
october 2005
$
64,201,280
november 2005
1,600,000
31.19
1,600,000
62,601,280
december 2005
62,601,280
1,600,000
31.19
1,600,000
62,601,280
(1)
on january22, 2004, verizons board of directors authorized a common stock repurchase program.
(2)
the program authorizes total repurchases of up to 80million common shares and expires no later than the close of business on february28, 2006. under
the plan, verizon had the option to repurchase shares for the corporation over time, with the amount and timing of repurchases depending on market conditions and corporate needs.   on january19, 2006, the board of directors authorized the repurchase of
up to 100million common shares terminating no later than the close of business on february28, 2008. the board of directors also determined that no additional common shares may be purchased under the previous program.
item 6.selected financial data
information required
by this item is included in the 2005 verizon annual report to shareowners under the heading selected financial data on page 13, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 7.managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition
information required
by this item is included in the 2005 verizon annual report to shareowners under the heading managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition on pages 14 through 35, which is incorporated herein
by reference.
item 7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
information required
by this item is included in the 2005 verizon annual report to shareowners under the heading market risk on page 30, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 8.financial statements and supplementary data
information required
by this item is included in the 2005 verizon annual report to shareowners on pages 36 through 71, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 9.changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
table of contents
item 9a.controls and procedures
our chief executive
officer and chief financial officer have evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the securities exchange act of 1934), as of the end of the period
covered by this annual report, that ensure that information relating to the registrant which is required to be disclosed in this report is recorded, processed, summarized and reported, within required time periods. based on this evaluation, our
chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that the registrants disclosure controls and procedures were adequate and effective to ensure that material information relating to the registrant and its consolidated
subsidiaries would be accumulated and communicated to them by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report was being prepared, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. there were no changes
in the registrants internal control over financial reporting during the period covered by this annual report that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting and
the attestation report of verizons independent registered accounting firm is included in the 2005 verizon annual report to shareowners on pages 36 through 37 and is incorporated herein by reference.
item 9b.other information
none.
part iii
item 10.directors and executive officers of the registrant
for information with
respect to our executive officers, see executive officers of the registrant at the end of part i of this report. for other information required by this item see the proxy statement for our 2006 annual meeting of shareholders filed
pursuant to regulation 14a, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 11.executive compensation
for information with
respect to executive compensation, see the proxy statement for our 2006 annual meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation 14a, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
for information with
respect to the security ownership of the directors and executive officers and related stockholder matters, see the proxy statement for our 2006 annual meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation 14a, which is incorporated herein by
reference. in addition, see the following table for other equity compensation plan information:
plan category
numberofsecuritiestobeissued upon exercise ofoutstandingoptions,warrantsand rights
weightedaverageexercisepriceofoutstanding options, warrants andrights
numberofsecuritiesremainingavailableforfutureissuanceunderequitycompensation plans
equity compensation plans approvedbysecurityholders
204,434,714
$48.66
113,515,713
equity compensation plans not approvedbysecurityholders
52,061,908
42.37
5,972,715*
total
256,496,622
47.39
119,488,428
*
indicates the number of securities available for issuance under the verizon communications 2000 broad-based incentive plan, which provides for awards of
nonqualified stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units and other equity-based hypothetical stock units to employees of verizon and its subsidiaries.
item 13.certain relationships and related transactions
none.
item 14.principal accounting fees and services
for information with
respect to principal accounting fees and services, see the proxy statement for our 2006 annual meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation 14a, which is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
part iv
item 15.exhibits, financial statement schedules
(a)
documents filed as part of this report:
page
(1)
report of management on internal control over financial reporting
*
report of independent registered public accounting firm on internal control over financial reporting
*
report of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statements
*
financial statements covered by report of independent registered public accounting firm:
consolidated statements of income
*
consolidated balance sheets
*
consolidated statements of cash flows
*
consolidated statements of changes in shareowners investment
*
notesto consolidated financial statements
*
*incorporated herein by reference to the appropriate portions of the
registrants annual report to shareowners for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2005. (see part ii.)
(2)
financial statement schedule
ii  valuation and qualifying accounts
(3)
exhibits
table of contents
exhibit number
3a
restated certificate of incorporation of verizon communications inc. (verizon) filed herewith.
3b
bylaws of verizon, as amended and restated, filed herewith.
no instrument which defines the rights of holders of long-term debt of verizon and its consolidated subsidiaries is filed herewith pursuant to regulation s-k, item
601(b)(4)(iii)(a). pursuant to this regulation, verizon hereby agrees to furnish a copy of any such instrument to the sec upon request.
10a
description of verizon deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors (exhibit 10a to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000).*
10a(i) description of amendment to plan (exhibit 10a(i) to form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2004).
10b
bell atlantic deferred compensation plan for outside directors, as amended and restated (exhibit 10a to form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
1998).*
10c
deferred compensation plan for non-employee members of the board of directors of gte, as amended (exhibit 10-1 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997
and exhibit 10.1 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1998, file no. 1-2755).*
10d
gtes directors deferred stock unit plan (exhibit 10-8 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997, file no. 1-2755).*
10e
description of plan for non-employee directors travel accident insurance (exhibit 10c to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1999).*
10f
bell atlantic directors charitable giving program, as amended (exhibit 10p to form se dated march 29, 1990 and exhibit 10p to form se dated march 29,
1993).*
10g
gtes charitable awards program (exhibit 10-10 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1992, file no. 1-2755).*
10h
nynex directors charitable award program (exhibit 10i to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000).*
10i
verizon communications 2000 broad-based incentive plan (exhibit 10h to form 10-q for the period ended september 30, 2000).*
10j
verizon communications inc. long-term incentive plan (appendix b to verizons 2001 proxy statement filed march 12, 2001).*
10j(i) performance stock unit agreement 2003-2005 award cycle filed herewith.*
10j(ii) performance stock unit agreement 2004-2006 award cycle filed herewith.*
10j(iii) restricted stock unit agreement 2005-2007 award cycle (exhibit 10a to form 10-q for the period ended march31, 2005).*
10j(iv) performance stock unit agreement 2005-2007 award cycle (exhibit 10b to form 10-q for the period ended march31, 2005).*
10j(iv)(a) addendum to performance stock unit agreement 2005-2007 award cycle filed herewith.*
10j(v) restricted stock unit agreement 2006-2008 award cycle filed herewith.*
10j(vi) performance stock unit agreement 2006-2008 award cycle filed herewith.*
10k
gtes long-term incentive plan, as amended (exhibit b to gtes 1997 proxy statement and exhibit 10.5 to gtes 1998 form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
1998, file no. 1-2755); description of amendments (exhibit 10l to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000).*
10m
nynex 1995 stock option plan, as amended (exhibit no. 1 to nynexs proxy statement dated march 20, 1995, file no. 1-8608); description of amendments (exhibit 10n to
form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000).*
10n
verizon communications inc. short-term incentive plan (appendix c to verizons 2001 proxy statement filed march 12, 2001).*
10o
verizon communications inc. income deferral plan (exhibit 10f to form 10-q for the period ended june 30, 2002).*
table of contents
10o(i) description of amendment to plan (exhibit 10o(i) to form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2004).*
10p
verizon communications inc. excess pension plan (exhibit 10p to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004).*
10p(i) description of amendment to plan (exhibit 10p(i) to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004).*
10q
gtes executive salary deferral plan, as amended (exhibit 10.10 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1998, file no. 1-2755).*
10r
bell atlantic senior management long-term disability and survivor protection plan, as amended (exhibit 10h to form se filed on march 27, 1986 and exhibit 10b(ii) to form
10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997).*
10s
description of bell atlantic senior management estate management plan (exhibit 10rr to form 10-k for year ended december 31, 1997).*
10t
gtes executive retired life insurance plan, as amended (exhibits 10-6, 10-6 and 10-6 to gtes form 10-k for the years ended december 31, 1991, 1992 and 1993,
respectively, file no. 1-2755).*
10u
nynex supplemental life insurance plan (exhibit no. 10 iii 21 to nynexs form 10-q for the period ended june 30, 1996, file no. 1-8608).*
10v
summary plan description of verizon executive deferral plan filed herewith.*
10w
description of salary increase for ivan g. seidenberg (exhibit 10w to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004).*
10x
employment agreement between verizon and lawrence t. babbio (exhibit 10a to form 10-q for the period ended september 30, 2000).*
10y
employment agreement between verizon and marc c. reed (exhibit 10a to form 10-q for the period ended june 30, 2004).*
10z
employment agreement between verizon and william p. barr (exhibit 10z to form 10-q for the period ended march 31, 2003).*
10cc
employment agreement between verizon and doreen a. toben (exhibit 10d to form 10-q for the period ended june 30, 2002).*
10dd
description of the split-dollar insurance arrangements (exhibit 10g to form 10-q for the period ended june 30, 2002).*
10dd(i) description of changes to arrangements (exhibit 10dd(i) to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004).*
10ee
employment agreement between verizon wireless and dennis f. strigl (exhibit 10f to form 10-q for the period ended september 30, 2000).*
10ff
employment agreement between verizon and thomas j. tauke (exhibit 10b to form 10-q for the period ended june 30, 2004).*
10gg
form of employment agreement between verizon and band 1 senior management employee (exhibit 10gg to the form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2004).*
10hh
nynex deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors (exhibit 10gg to nynexs registration statement no. 2-87850, file no. 1-8608).*
10hh(i) amendment to nynex corporation deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors (exhibit 10iii 5a to nynexs quarterly report on form 10-q for the period
ended june 30, 1996, file no. 1-8608).*
10ii
u.s. wireless agreement, dated september 21, 1999, among bell atlantic and vodafone airtouch plc, including the forms of amended and restated partnership agreement and the
investment agreement (exhibit 10 to form 10-q for the period ended september 30, 1999).
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges filed herewith.
portions of verizons annual report to shareowners for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2005. only the information incorporated by reference into this form 10-k is
included in the exhibit.
list of principal subsidiaries of verizon filed herewith.
table of contents
consent of ernst & young llp filed herewith.
31.1
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
31.2
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.1
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*
indicates management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
table of contents
schedule ii  valuation and qualifying accounts   verizon communications inc. and subsidiaries   for the years ended december31, 2005, 2004 and 2003
additions
(dollars in millions)
description
balanceatbeginningofperiod
chargedtoexpenses
chargedtootheraccountsnote (a)
deductionsnote (b)
balanceatendof period
allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable:
year 2005
$1,670
$1,290
$566
$2,238
$1,288
year 2004
2,382
1,181
2,873
1,670
year 2003
2,767
1,789
3,123
2,382
valuation allowance for deferred tax assets:
year 2005
$1,217
$46
$43
$491
$815
year 2004
1,463
1,217
year 2003
1,463
discontinued businesses:
year 2005
$287
$5
$
$44
$248
year 2004
year 2003
(a)
allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable includes: (1)amounts previously written off which were credited directly to this account when recovered,
and (2)accruals charged to accounts payable for anticipated uncollectible charges on purchases of accounts receivable from others which were billed by us. also includes amounts transferred from other accounts.
(b)
amounts written off as uncollectible or transferred to other accounts or utilized.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the
requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.   verizon communications inc.
date:march14, 2006
by:
/s/ thomas a. bartlett
thomas a. bartlett senior vice president and controller
pursuant to the
requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
principal executive officer:
/s/ivan g. seidenberg
chairman and chief executive officer
march 14, 2006
ivan g. seidenberg
principal financial officer:
/s/doreen a. toben
executive vice president and chief financial officer
march 14, 2006
doreen a. toben
principal accounting officer:
/s/thomas a. bartlett
senior vice president and controller
march 14, 2006
thomas a. bartlett
table of contents
signatures  continued
/s/ivan g. seidenberg
director
march14, 2006
ivan g. seidenberg
/s/james r. barker
director
march 14, 2006
james r. barker
/s/richard l. carrin
director
march 14, 2006
richard l. carrin
/s/robert w. lane
director
march 14, 2006
robert w. lane
/s/sandra o. moose
director
march 14, 2006
sandra o. moose
/s/joseph neubauer
director
march 14, 2006
joseph neubauer
/s/donald t. nicolaisen
director
march 14, 2006
donald t. nicolaisen
/s/thomas h. obrien
director
march 14, 2006
thomas h. obrien
/s/clarence otis, jr.
director
march 14, 2006
clarence otis, jr.
/s/hugh b. price
director
march 14, 2006
hugh b. price
/s/walter v. shipley
director
march 14, 2006
walter v. shipley
/s/john r. stafford
director
march 14, 2006
john r. stafford
/s/robert d. storey
director
march 14, 2006
robert d. storey
