10-k
d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states  securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549    form 10-k
(mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file number
1-8606   verizon communications inc.  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
23-2259884
(state of incorporation)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
140 west street new york, new york
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants
telephone number, including area code: (212)395-1000   securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, $.10 par value
new york, philadelphia, boston, chicago, london, swiss, amsterdam and frankfurt stock exchanges
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:   none   indicate by check mark if
the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act. yes  no
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to
file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the act. yes  no    indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past 90 days. yes  no    indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k (section 229.405 of
this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated filer in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act. (check one):
large accelerated filer
accelerated filer
non-accelerated filer
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act). yes  no
at june30, 2006, the aggregate market value of the
registrants voting stock held by nonaffiliates was approximately $93,436,462,000.   at january31, 2007, 2,909,893,627 shares of the registrants common stock were outstanding, after deducting 57,758,811 shares held in treasury.   documents incorporated by reference:   portions of the registrants annual report to shareowners for the year ended december31, 2006
(parts i and ii).   portions of the registrants proxy
statement prepared in connection with the 2007 annual meeting of shareowners (part iii).
table of contents
table of contents
item no.
page
parti
item1.
business
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the registrant
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
item9b.
other information
part iii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item14.
principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
certifications
unless otherwise indicated, all
information is as of february23, 2007
table of contents
part i item1.business
general
verizon
communications inc. (verizon) is one of the worlds leading providers of communications services. our wireline business provides telephone services, including voice, network access and nationwide long-distance services, broadband video and data
services, and other communications products and services. our wireline business also owns and operates one of the most expansive end-to-end global internet protocol (ip) networks. our domestic wireless business, operating as verizon wireless,
provides wireless voice and data products and services across the united states using one of the most extensive domestic wireless networks. stressing diversity and commitment to the communities in which we operate, we have a highly diverse workforce
of 242,000 employees.   verizon, formerly known as bell atlantic
corporation, was incorporated in 1983 under the laws of the state of delaware. we began doing business as verizon communications on june30, 2000 following our merger with gte corporation. we completed our merger with mci on january6,
2006, and have incorporated its operations into our wireline business.   our principal executive offices are located at 140 west street, new york, new york 10007 (telephone number 212-395-1000).   we have two reportable segments, wireline and domestic wireless, which we operate and manage as strategic business units and organize by products and
services. our segments and their principal activities consist of the following:
wireline
wireline provides communications services including voice, broadband
video and data, next generation ip network services, network access, long distance and other services to consumers, carriers, business and government customers both domestically and globally in 150 countries.
domesticwireless
domestic wireless products and services include wireless voice and data products and other value
added services and equipment sales across the united states.
you can find
additional business information under the heading overview on pages 18 through 19 and segment financial information under the heading segment results of operations on pages 24 through 27 and in note 17 on pages 69 through 71
of the 2006 verizon annual report to shareowners, which is incorporated herein by reference.
wireline
background   our wireline segment, which includes the operations of the former mci, is
comprised of two strategic units, verizon telecom and verizon business. revenues in 2006 were $50,794 million, representing approximately 58% of verizons aggregate revenues. verizon telecom provides local telecommunications, broadband data and
video services in 28 states and washington, d.c., as well as nationwide long-distance and other communications products and services. verizon is deploying a fiber-to-the-premises network under the fios service mark, that we believe is the platform
of the future for digital voice, data and video services with sufficient bandwidth and capabilities to meet our customers needs for the foreseeable future. fios allows us to offer our customers fast, reliable broadband access speeds, as well as
robust video services. the wireline segment also includes verizon business, a provider of next-generation ip network and information technology (it) products and services to medium and large businesses and government customers.   operations   verizon telecom   verizon telecom consists of three lines of business which operate across our telephone subsidiaries and focus on specific customer market areas. we are
not dependent on any single customer. our telephone operations remain responsible within their respective service areas for the provision of telephone services and regulatory matters.   our mass markets line of business markets communications and information services to residential customers and small
businesses including basic telecommunication service and end-user access; value-added services such as voicemail, caller id and call forwarding; and broadband services, which include digital subscriber lines (dsl) and fiber optics to the premise
(fios data and fios television services). our long distance subsidiary provides national and international long distance services in all 50 states to residential and business customers, including calling cards, 800/888 services and operator
services. mass market revenues in 2006 were approximately $22,528 million, representing approximately 44% of wirelines aggregate revenues. these revenues were derived primarily from the provision of telecommunication services to residential
users.   our wholesale line of business markets our long
distance and local exchange network facilities for resale to other long distance and competing communications carriers. wholesale services include switched access, special access, high-capacity, high-speed digital services, unbundled network
elements (unes) and interconnection revenues from competitive local exchange carriers (clec) and wireless carriers. wholesale revenues in 2006 were approximately $8,323 million, representing approximately 16% of wirelines aggregate
revenues. approximately 70% of total wholesale revenues were derived from interexchange carriers. the remaining revenues principally come from other local exchange carriers, which resell network connections to their own customers.
table of contents
other services include operator services (including deaf relay services), public (coin) telephone,
as well as former mci dial around services including 10-10-987, 10-10-220, 1-800-collect and prepaid phone cards. other revenues in 2006 were approximately $2,408 million, representing approximately 5% of wirelines aggregate revenues.
verizon business   verizon business consists of three lines of business which focus on the
needs of our enterprise business customers. we are not dependent on any single customer.   our enterprise business line of business markets voice, data and internet communications services to medium and large business customers, multi-national corporations, and state and federal governments. the
enterprise business also provides value-added services that make communications more secure, reliable and efficient, as well as managed network services that enable customers to outsource all or a portion of their communications and information
processing operations. in addition, enterprise business provides traditional data services in specific markets, such as private line, frame relay and atm services, as well as advanced ip network services, both domestically and internationally.
enterprise businesss fastest growing product line is the internet suite of products that include private ip, ip vpn, web hosting and voice over internet protocol (voip). enterprise business revenues in 2006 were approximately $13,999 million,
representing approximately 28% of wirelines aggregate revenues.   our wholesale line of business focuses on the domestic wholesale services markets, which includes all wholesale traffic in the united states, as well as traffic that originates in the united states and terminates in a different
country. total wholesale revenue was approximately $3,381 million in 2006, representing approximately 7% of wirelines aggregate revenues. revenues from wholesale local and long distance voice products, including transport, were approximately
$1,601 million in 2006, representing 47% of wholesales aggregate revenues. wholesale revenue is influenced by aggressive competitive pricing, in particular long distance voice services. revenues from wholesale data and internet products were
approximately $1,780 million in 2006, representing approximately 53% of wholesales aggregate revenues.   our international and other operations serve businesses, government entities and telecommunication carriers outside of the united states and include our skytel paging business. the
international and other market represents a new revenue stream to verizon resulting from the mci acquisition. our revenues from international and other were approximately $3,110 million, representing approximately 6% of wirelines aggregate
revenues in 2006. of this amount, international and other had voice revenue of approximately $1,822 million representing approximately 4% of wirelines aggregate revenues.   competition   the telecommunications industry is highly competitive. factors contributing to the industrys increasingly competitive market include regulatory
changes, product substitution, technological advances, excess network capacity and the entrance of new competitors. in this environment, competition is based on price and pricing plans, the types of services offered, the combination of services into
bundled offerings, customer service, the quality and reliability of services provided and the development of new products and services. current and potential competitors in telecommunication services include cable companies, wireless service
providers, long distance companies, other local telephone companies, foreign telecommunications providers, electric utilities, internet service providers and other companies that offer network services. many of these companies have a strong market
presence, brand recognition and existing customer relationships, all of which contribute to intensifying competition and may affect our future revenue growth.
cable services   cable competitors have aggressively increased the size and digital capacity of their cable networks. cable companies have continued to upgrade their networks to offer more digital products and
services. they continue to aggressively market competitive bundled offerings that include high-speed internet access, digital television and voice services.   voice over internet protocol services   our wireline telecommunications services also face increasing competition from companies which provide voip services. these services use the internet or
private broadband networks to transmit voice communications. voip services are available from a wide range of companies including cable companies, long-distance companies, national voip providers and regional service providers.   wireless services   wireless services also constitute a significant source of competition to our wireline telecommunications services,
especially as wireless carriers (including verizon wireless) expand and improve their network coverage and continue to lower their prices. as a result, more consumers are substituting wireless services for basic wireline service. wireless telephone
services can also be used for data transmission.   local exchange services
the ability to offer local exchange services historically
has been subject to regulation by state regulatory commissions. applications from competitors to provide and resell local exchange services have been approved in every jurisdiction in our service territory. the telecommunications act of 1996 has
significantly increased the level of competition in our local exchange markets.
table of contents
as a result of the telecommunications act of 1996, which required us to permit potential competitors to
purchase our services for resale, or access components of our network on an unbundled basis (unes) at a prescribed cost, competition in our local exchange markets continues to increase. our telephone operations generally have been required to sell
their services to clecs at significant discounts from the prices our telephone operations charge their retail customers. the scope of these obligations going forward and the rates we receive, are subject to ongoing review and revision by the federal
communications commission (fcc) and state regulators. see regulatory and competitive trends.   long distance services   we offer long distance services regionally and throughout the united states. state regulatory commissions rather than federal authorities generally regulate regional long distance services. federal regulators have jurisdiction over
interstate long distance services. all of our state regulatory commissions (except in washington, d.c., where regional long distance is not provided) permit other carriers to provide long distance services within the state. our authority in alaska
is limited to interstate and international services. a number of our major competitors in the long distance business have strong brand recognition and existing customer relationships.   public telephone services   the growth of wireless communications has significantly decreased usage of public telephones, as more customers are substituting wireless services for
public telephone services. in addition, we face competition from other providers of public telephone services.   operator services   our
operator services product line faces competition from alternative operator services providers and internet service providers.   equipment manufacturers   in addition to producing telecommunications products and computer network devices and systems, equipment manufacturers may also provide consulting and outsourcing services that compete directly
with products and services we offer.   international competition
our international business competes primarily with
incumbent telephone companies, some of which have special regulatory status and exclusive rights to provide certain services and have historically dominated their local markets. we also compete with other international service providers, some of
which are affiliated with incumbent telephone companies in other countries.   network   verizon telecom presently serves a
territory of 45.1million access lines in 28 states and washington d.c. we continue to upgrade our network in order to provide an ever increasing number of customers with broadband capabilities. our advanced fios network uses state of the art
fiber-optic cable and optical electronics to directly link homes and businesses to our network. our fiber network will offer us the opportunity to provide our customers with improved network reliability and speed for voice, data and video
connections. as of the end of 2006, our fios network passed more than 6million homes, doubling the amounts of premises passed from the previous year.   verizon business owns and operates one of the most expansive ip backbone networks in the world. the verizon business data network includes more than
446,000 route miles, including terrestrial and undersea cable, spanning six continents and access to another 187,000 route miles from verizon telecom. verizon business provides voice, data and internet services on its state-of-the-art fiber-optic
network to customers in more than 2,700 cities and 150 countries. verizon business currently operates eight satellite facilities located throughout the united states and guam. verizon business also operates satellite links to more than 200 teleports
worldwide in approximately 110 countries for both government and business customers.
table of contents
wireline offerings   verizon telecom provides a broad array of communications services to our residential and small business customers, including voice, broadband data and
video, network access, long-distance and other communications products and services.
voice services include the provision of local exchange services, local private line, wire maintenance, voice messaging and value-added services. value-added
services are a family of services that expand the utilization of our network, including products such as caller id, call waiting and return call.
broadband data and video services include dsl and fios high speed data and fios tv services.
network access services are provided to end-user customers and long distance and other competing carriers who use our local exchange facilities to provide usage
services to their customers.
long-distance services include regional toll and long distance voice and data services.
other communications products and services include operator services (including deaf relay services), public (coin) telephone, as well as former mci dial around
services including 10-10-987, 10-10-220, 1-800 collect and prepaid phone cards.
domestic wireless
background   our domestic wireless segment, cellco partnership doing business as verizon
wireless (verizon wireless), is a joint venture formed in april 2000 by the combination of the u.s. wireless operations and interests of verizon and vodafone group plc (vodafone). verizon owns a controlling 55% interest in verizon wireless and
vodafone owns the remaining 45%.   operations   verizon wireless provides wireless voice and data services across one of the
most extensive wireless networks in the u.s. verizon wireless is the largest domestic wireless carrier in terms of total revenue and the most profitable, as measured by operating income. we believe, based on publicly available information, that
verizon wireless has the largest base of retail customers, that is, customers who are directly served and managed by verizon wireless and who buy its branded services.   competition   there is substantial competition in the wireless telecommunications industry. other wireless providers, including other cellular and pcs operators and
resellers, serve each of the markets in which we operate. we currently compete primarily against three other national wireless service providers: at&t (formerly cingular), sprint nextel and t-mobile usa. in addition, in many markets we also
compete with regional carriers, such as alltel and us cellular. competition may increase due to ongoing industry consolidation, if smaller, stand-alone wireless providers transfer licenses to larger, better capitalized and more experienced wireless
providers. resellers, now sometimes referred to as mobile virtual network operators, who buy bulk wholesale services from facilities-based carriers for resale, provide yet another set of differentiated competitors in the marketplace.   we expect competition for both customers and network usage to intensify as a
result of the higher penetration levels that currently exist in the industry, the development and deployment of new technologies, the introduction of new wireless and fixed line products and services, new market entrants, the availability of
additional spectrum, both licensed and unlicensed, and regulatory changes. for example, we face increased competition as a result of the use of other high-speed wireless technologies, such as wi-fi and wimax, which are being deployed or proposed, to
meet the growing customer appetite for wireless communications in fixed, nomadic and fully mobile environments. in addition, some cable companies have partnered with wireless carriers, acquired wireless spectrum and are now introducing wireless
offerings to their customers. we are also experiencing competition from providers of fixed line voip services, which displace in-building usage from cellular/pcs carriers. additionally, as wireless data proliferates, content is becoming an
increasingly significant factor in the appeal of these services. this may give content providers and other participants in the wireless value chain opportunities for increased leverage and/or opportunities to compete for wireless data revenues.
we believe that the following are the most important
competitive factors in our industry:
network reliability, capacity and coverage. lower prices, improved service quality and new service offerings have led to increased network usage. as a
result, the ability to keep pace with network capacity needs and offer highly reliable national coverage through ones own network is important. we have an extensive national network, and we continue to look for expansion opportunities through
the build-out of existing licenses, acquisitions and/or spectrum leasing. we own licenses that cover much of the country but we expect to spend significant amounts to expand our capacity and extend our coverage area and maintain and improve the
quality of our network. our competitors also have these needs and they are using similar means to address them.
table of contents
pricing. service and equipment pricing is an important area in which wireless carriers compete, as evidenced by recent increases in the marketing of
minutes-sharing plans, free mobile-to-mobile calling, and offerings of larger bundles of included minutes at price points, with no roaming or long distance charges. we seek to compete in this area by offering our customers services and equipment
that they will regard as the best available value for their money.
customer service. quality customer service is essential to ensure that we can obtain new customers and retain existing customers. we believe that the
quality of our customer service is a key factor in retaining our customers and in attracting both new-to-wireless customers and those customers of other carriers who want to switch their wireless service. our competitors also recognize the
importance of customer service and are also focusing on improving the customer experience.
product differentiation. as wireless technologies develop and wireless broadband networks proliferate, continued customer and revenue growth will be
increasingly dependent on the development of new and differentiated products and services. we are committed to providing customer solutions through the development and rapid deployment of new and innovative products and services developed both
internally and in collaboration with application service providers.
sales and distribution. key to achieving sales success in the wireless industry is the reach and quality of sales channels and distribution points. we
believe that the optimal mix of direct, indirect and wholesale distribution channels is an important ingredient in achieving industry-leading profitability. a goal of our distribution strategy is to increase sales through our company-operated stores
and our outside sales team, as well as through telemarketing and web-based sales and fulfillment capabilities. supplementing this is an extensive indirect distribution network of retail outlets and prepaid replenishment locations, original equipment
manufacturers and value-added distributors, as well as various resellers who buy our service on a wholesale basis.   our success will depend on our ability to anticipate and respond to various factors affecting the industry, including the factors described above, as well
as new technologies, new business models, changes in customer preferences, regulatory changes, demographic trends, economic conditions, and pricing strategies of competitors.   network   a key part of our business strategy is to provide the highest network reliability.we believe that network reliability is a key differentiator in the
u.s. market and a driver of customer satisfaction. consistent with this strategy, we will continue to build-out, expand and upgrade our network in an effort to provide sufficient capacity and seamless and superior coverage and reliability throughout
our licensed area so that our customers can enjoy consistent features and high-quality service, regardless of location. in addition, we will continue to explore strategic opportunities to expand our overall national coverage through selective
acquisitions of wireless operations and spectrum licenses.   our
network is among the largest in the u.s., with licensed and operational coverage in 49 of the 50 largest metropolitan areas. our built network covered a population of approximately 256million and provided service to 59.1million
customers, as of december31, 2006.   network technology
our primary network technology platform is cdma, based on spread-spectrum
digital radio technology. cdma technologys compatible 1xrtt upgrade, a wireless technology developed by qualcomm as part of its family of technologies known as cdma2000, is presently deployed in virtually all of our cell sites nationwide.
1xrtt increases the voice traffic capacity available to us and provides increased data rates. further, 1xrtt is a modular infrastructure upgrade that has proven to be cost-efficient and practical for rapid nationwide deployment. in addition to
1xrtt, in 2004 we began deploying ev-do (revision 0), a 3g packet-based technology that is a part of the cdma2000 technology path. ev-do is intended primarily for high-speed data transmission. as with 1xrtt, we have been able to implement ev-do by
changing and/or adding modular components and software in our network. ev-do service, branded and marketed as broadbandaccess, was available in markets covering a population of approximately 200million as of december31, 2006. coverage
expansions and additional market launches are planned for 2007. in addition, during 2006, we began deploying ev-do (revision a) infrastructure that will enable faster data rates.   spectrum   we have licenses to provide mobile wireless services on the 800-900 mhz and 1800 -1900 mhz portions of the radio spectrum. in addition, we recently
acquired advanced wireless services spectrum on the 1700 and 2100 mhz portions of the radio spectrum, which we anticipate using for advanced wireless broadband services. collectively, these licenses cover territories in which approximately
292million people, or approximately 99% of the estimated u.s. population, reside. the 800-900 mhz portion is used to provide both analog and digital cellular voice and data services, while our 1800-1900 mhz portion provides all-digital pcs
voice and data services. our digital wireless service is available to all of the population to which we provide coverage. digital usage currently accounts for more than 99% of our busy-hour traffic. while we provide digital coverage in all of our
markets, we will continue to simultaneously provide analog coverage in our cellular markets. the fcc will no longer require cellular carriers to provide analog cellular service as of february18, 2008, and our intent is to no longer offer such
service after that date.   recent acquisitions   on november29, 2006, we were granted thirteen 20 mhz licenses we won
in an fcc auction of advanced wireless services spectrum that concluded on september18, 2006, for which we had bid a total of $2,809 million. these licenses, which we anticipate using for the provision
table of contents
of advanced wireless broadband services, cover a population of nearly 200 million. we have made all required payments to the fcc for these licenses.
in august 2002, verizon wireless and price communications
corp. (price) combined prices wireless business with a portion of verizon wireless. the resulting limited partnership, verizon wireless of the east lp (vz east), is controlled and managed by verizon wireless. in exchange for its contributed
assets, price received a limited partnership interest in the new partnership which was exchangeable into the common stock of verizon wireless if an initial public offering of that stock occurred, or into the common stock of verizon on the fourth
anniversary of the asset contribution date. on august15, 2006, verizon delivered 29.5million shares of newly-issued verizon common stock to price valued at $1,007million in exchange for prices limited partnership interest in
vz east. as a result of acquiring prices limited partnership interest, verizon recorded goodwill of $345 million in the third quarter of 2006 attributable to its domestic wireless segment.   wireless offerings   we believe that increasing the value of our service offerings to customers will help us to retain our existing customers,
attract new customers and increase customer usage, all of which will, in turn, drive revenue and net income growth.   our service packages are designed around key customer groups, from the young adult market to multinational business accounts. we tailor our wireless services, which include both voice and data
offerings, and postpaid and prepaid pricing options, to the needs of these customers.   wireless services   voice services. we
offer a variety of packages for voice services with features and competitive pricing plans that are predominantly offered on a postpaid basis with a contract term. specifically, we offer our americas choice plans, which provide a choice
in amounts of bundled minutes together with no roaming or long distance charges for calls on our preferred network; family/small group and shared minute plans for multiple-user households and small businesses; and plans targeted to business accounts
with over 100 lines and national accounts with over 1,000 lines. in addition, we offer a national prepaid product that enables individuals to obtain wireless voice services without a long-term contract by paying in advance.   data services. we believe that we are in a strong position to take
advantage of the growing demand for wireless data services. our strategy is to continue to expand our wireless data, messaging and multi-media offerings for both consumer and business customers.   we offer an array of data transmission and content services, such as:
broadbandaccess/nationalaccess. ev-do, our wide area network packet ip solution, which we market as broadbandaccess, provides significantly increased data
transmission rates on existing applications and enables the provisioning of enhanced data applications that can operate at broadband speeds. in addition, our 1xrtt digital technology, which we market as nationalaccess, enables higher-speed
applications, such as e-mail, enterprise applications, image downloads, and full browsing capabilities for laptop computer users.
text and picture messaging. with compatible wireless devices, our customers can send and receive text messages, as well as still pictures and full-motion
video clips with sound.
v cast. our v cast service, available on ev-do-enabled handsets, enables customers to access daily-updated videos from leading content providers of
current news, weather, sports and entertainment programming. in addition, our v cast music service enables customers to download music either directly to their v cast music-enabled phones or to their personal computers.
get it now. our get it now service enables our customers to download hundreds of applications to their handsets, such as ring tones, games and
wallpapers.
mobile web. our mobile web service offers customized access to content through our portal, and allows customers to access the internet, e-mail and
personal information management tools, such as calendars and address books, through handset-based menus.
location based services (lbs). our location-based service, vz navigator, enables customers to obtain audible turn-by-turn directions to their destination,
locate various points of interest and access other location-related information by using vz navigator-capable handsets.
wireless business solutions  vzoffice. through our suite of vzoffice services, we provide enterprise customers solutions for accessing the
internet and corporate intranet, which allow for optimized wireless access to the customers corporate applications or databases. in addition, we offer our corporate customers the ability to wirelessly send and receive e-mail using various
handheld devices, including wirelessly equipped pda devices.   wireless device   we believe our position in
the u.s. wireless industry has enabled us to become a service provider of choice for wireless device manufacturers and has helped us to develop exclusive offers for our customers and branded handsets that complement our focus on high-quality service
and an optimal user experience. the wireless devices that we offer are predominantly ev-do enabled, and all of them are compatible with our 1xrtt
table of contents
network. in addition, all of the handsets that we offer are headphone/earphone compatible and, through gps functionality, compliant with the fccs e-911
requirements.   marketing   we focus our marketing strategy on targeting solutions based upon our
customers needs, promoting our brand, leveraging our extensive distribution network and cross-marketing with our owners.   our marketing efforts are focused on a coordinated program of television, print, radio, outdoor signage, internet and point-of-sale media promotions. we
coordinate our marketing efforts throughout our service area in order to ensure that our marketing message is consistently presented across all of our markets. our promotion of the verizon wireless brand is complemented by verizon
communications own brand marketing efforts, reinforcing the awareness of our services in shared markets and capitalizing on the size and breadth of verizon communications customer base.   sales and distribution channels   our sales strategy is to use a mix of direct, indirect and wholesale
distribution channels in order to increase customer growth while reducing customer acquisition costs.   our company-operated stores are a core component of our distribution strategy. our experience has been that customers entering through this direct channel are generally higher-value customers who
generate higher revenue per month on average and are less likely to cancel their service than those who come through other mass-market channels. we had 2,231 company-operated stores and kiosks (including our store-within-a-store kiosks
in circuit city and bjs wholesale locations) as of december31, 2006. in addition, our direct channel also includes our business-to-business organization, which is focused on supporting the needs of our local, regional and national
business customers, as well as a telemarketing sales force dedicated to receiving incoming calls. we also offer fully-automated, end-to-end, web-based sales of wireless handsets, accessories and service in all of our markets.   we have indirect retail locations throughout the u.s. selling wireless
services, including both full-service locations and locations selling our prepaid products and services, such as wal-mart and target. we also sell wireless access on a wholesale basis. our wholesale business involves the sale of wholesale access and
minutes to independent companies that package and resell wireless services to end-users.   customer service, retention and satisfaction   we believe that quality customer service increases customer satisfaction, which reduces churn, and is a key differentiator in the wireless industry. we are committed to providing high-quality customer service,
investing in loyalty and retention efforts and continually monitoring customer satisfaction in all facets of our service.   while our customer service representatives are available during our normal business hours, we also have representatives available 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week for emergency and technical customer issues. in addition, customers can do business with us at any time, without having to speak with a customer service representative, through our enhanced self-service applications via our interactive voice
response system, through our web site, and via applications accessible from the customers handset.   under our enhanced worry free guarantee, a national retention and loyalty initiative, we commit to our customers an extensive and advanced network, responsive customer service with end-to-end
resolution, the option to change at any time to any qualifying price plan without payment of any additional fees, a satisfaction guarantee, an early termination fee that declines each full month that a customer remains on their contract and, for
customers who do business with us on line, free back-up protection that stores a copy of the customers phone list on a secure website. the initiative also includes a handset upgrade credit every two years, provided that the customer signs a
new two-year contract on a calling plan with at least $35 monthly access. another major retention and loyalty program is a customer life cycle management program in which we contact customers at key points in their service tenure with targeted
offers and to provide proactive rate-plan analysis.
regulatory and competitive trends
competition and regulation
technological, regulatory and market changes have
provided verizon both new opportunities and challenges. these changes have allowed verizon to offer new types of services in this increasingly competitive market. at the same time, they have allowed other service providers to broaden the scope of
their own competitive offerings. current and potential competitors for network services include other telephone companies, cable companies, wireless service providers, foreign telecommunications providers, satellite providers, electric utilities,
internet service providers, providers of voip services, and other companies that offer network services using a variety of technologies. many of these companies have a strong market presence, brand recognition and existing customer relationships,
all of which contribute to intensifying competition and may affect our future revenue growth. many of our competitors also remain subject to fewer regulatory constraints than verizon.   we are unable to predict definitively the impact that the ongoing changes in the telecommunications industry will ultimately
have on our business, results of operations or financial condition. the financial impact will depend on several factors, including the timing, extent and success of competition in our markets, the timing and outcome of various regulatory proceedings
and any appeals, and the timing, extent and success of our pursuit of new opportunities.
table of contents
fcc regulation   our services are subject to the jurisdiction of the fcc with respect to interstate telecommunications services and other matters for which the fcc has
jurisdiction under the communications act of 1934, as amended (communications act). the communications act generally obligates us not to charge unjust or unreasonable rates nor engage in unreasonable discrimination when we are providing
services as a common carrier, and regulates some of the rates, terms and conditions under which we provide certain services. the fcc also has adopted regulations governing various aspects of our business, such as the following: (i)use and
disclosure of customer proprietary network information; (ii)telemarketing; (iii)assignment of telephone numbers to customers; (iv)provision to law enforcement agencies of the capability to obtain call identifying information and
call content information from calls pursuant to lawful process; (v)accessibility of services and equipment to individuals with disabilities if readily achievable; (vi)interconnection with the networks of other carriers; and
(vii)customers ability to keep (or port) their telephone numbers when switching to another carrier. in addition, we pay various fees to support other fcc programs, such as the universal service program discussed below.
changes to these mandates, or the adoption of additional mandates, could require us to make changes to our operations or otherwise increase our costs of compliance.   broadband   the fcc has adopted a series of orders that recognize the competitive nature of the broadband market, and impose lesser regulatory requirements on
broadband services and facilities than apply to narrowband. with respect to facilities, the fcc has determined that certain unbundling requirements that apply to narrowband facilities do not apply to broadband facilities such as fiber to the premise
loops and packet switches. with respect to services, the fcc has concluded that broadband internet access services offered by telephone companies and their affiliates qualify as largely deregulated information services. the same order also concluded
that telephone companies may offer the underlying broadband transmission services that are used as an input to internet access services through private carriage arrangements on negotiated commercial terms. in addition, a verizon petition asking the
fcc to forbear from applying common carrier regulation to certain broadband services sold primarily to larger business customers when those services are not used for internet access was deemed granted by operation of law on march19, 2006 when
the fcc did not deny the petition by the statutory deadline. both the fccs order addressing the appropriate regulatory treatment of broadband internet access services and the relief obtained through the forbearance petition are the subject of
pending appeals.   video   the fcc has a body of rules that apply to cable operators under title vi of
the communications act, and these rules also generally apply to telephone companies that provide cable services over their networks. in addition, companies that provide cable service over a cable system generally must obtain a local cable franchise.
on december21, 2006, the fcc announced the adoption of rules under section621 of the communications act to set parameters consistent with federal law, on the timing and scope of franchise negotiations by local franchising authorities.
interstate access charges and intercarrier compensation   the current framework for interstate access rates was established in the
coalition for affordable local and long distance services (calls) plan, which the fcc adopted on may31, 2000. the calls plan has three main components. first, it establishes portable interstate access universal service support of $650 million
for the industry that replaces implicit support previously embedded in interstate access charges. second, the plan simplifies the patchwork of common line charges into one subscriber line charge (slc) and provides for de-averaging of the slc by
zones and class of customers. third, the plan set into place a mechanism to transition to a set target of $.0055 per minute for switched access services. once that target rate is reached, local exchange carriers are no longer required to make
further annual price cap reductions to their switched access prices. as a result of tariff adjustments which became effective in july 2003, virtually all of our switched access lines reached the $.0055 benchmark.   the fcc currently is conducting a broad rulemaking proceeding to consider new
rules governing intercarrier compensation including, but not limited to, access charges, compensation for internet traffic, and reciprocal compensation for local traffic. the fcc has sought comments about intercarrier compensation in general, and
has requested input on several specific reform proposals.   the
fcc also has pending before it issues relating to intercarrier compensation for dial-up internet-bound traffic. the fcc previously found that this traffic is not subject to reciprocal compensation under section251(b)(5) of the
telecommunications act of 1996. instead, the fcc established federal rates per minute for this traffic that declined from $.0015 to $.0007 over a three-year period, established caps on the total minutes of this traffic subject to compensation in a
state, and required incumbent local exchange carriers to offer to both bill and pay reciprocal compensation for local traffic at the same rate as they are required to pay on internet-bound traffic. the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c. circuit
rejected part of the fccs rationale, but declined to vacate the order while it is on remand. as a result, pending further action by the fcc, the fccs underlying order remains in effect. the fcc subsequently denied a petition to
discontinue the $.0007 rate cap on this traffic, but removed the caps on the total minutes of internet-bound traffic subject to compensation. that decision has been upheld on appeal. disputes also remain pending in a number of forums relating to the
appropriate compensation for internet-bound traffic during previous periods under the terms of our interconnection agreements with other carriers.   the fcc also is conducting a rulemaking proceeding to address the regulation of services that use internet protocol, including whether access charges
should apply to voice or other internet protocol services. the fcc also considered several petitions asking whether, and under what circumstances, services that employ internet protocol are subject to access charges. the fcc previously has held that
one providers peer-to-peer internet protocol service that does not use the public switched network is an interstate information service and is not subject to access charges, while a service that utilizes internet protocol for only one
intermediate part of a calls transmission is a telecommunications service that is subject to access charges. another petition asking the fcc to forbear from applying access charges to voice over internet protocol services
table of contents
that are terminated on switched local exchange networks was withdrawn by the carrier that filed that petition. the fcc also declared the services offered by
one provider of a voice over internet protocol service to be jurisdictionally interstate on the grounds that it was impossible to separate that carriers internet protocol service into interstate and intrastate components. the fcc also stated
that its conclusion would apply to other services with similar characteristics. that order has been appealed.   the fcc also has adopted rules for special access services that provide for pricing flexibility and ultimately the removal of services from price regulation when prescribed competitive thresholds
are met. more than half of special access revenues are now removed from price regulation. the fcc currently has a rulemaking proceeding underway to evaluate experience under its pricing flexibility rules, and to determine whether any changes to
those rules are warranted.   universal service   the fcc also has a body of rules implementing the universal service
provisions of the telecommunications act of 1996, including rules governing support to rural and non-rural high-cost areas, support for low income subscribers, and support for schools, libraries and rural health care. the fccs current rules
for support to high-cost areas served by larger non-rural local telephone companies were previously remanded by u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit, which had found that the fcc had not adequately justified these rules. the fcc
has initiated a rulemaking proceeding in response to the courts remand, but its rules remain in effect pending the results of the rulemaking. the fcc also has proceedings underway to evaluate possible changes to its current rules for assessing
contributions to the universal service fund. as an interim step, in june 2006, the fcc ordered that providers of voip services are subject to federal universal service obligations. the fcc also increased the percentage of revenues subject to federal
universal service obligations that wireless providers may use as a safe harbor. these decisions are the subject of a pending appeal. any further change in the current assessment mechanism could result in a change in the contribution that local
telephone companies, wireless carriers or others must make and that would have to be collected from customers.   unbundling of network elements   under section251 of the telecommunications act of 1996, incumbent local exchange carriers were required to provide competing carriers with access to components of their network on an unbundled basis, known as unes, where certain
statutory standards are satisfied. the telecommunications act of 1996 also adopted a cost-based pricing standard for these unes, which the fcc interpreted as allowing it to impose a pricing standard known as total element long run incremental
cost or telric. the fccs rules defining the unbundled network elements that must be made available at telric prices have been overturned on multiple occasions by the courts. in its most recent order issued in response to
these court decisions, the fcc eliminated the requirement to unbundle mass market local switching on a nationwide basis, with the obligation to accept new orders ending as of the effective date of the order (march 11, 2005). the fcc also established
a one year transition for existing une switching arrangements. for high capacity transmission facilities, the fcc established criteria for determining whether high capacity loops, transport or dark fiber transport must be unbundled in individual
wire centers, and stated that these standards were only expected to affect a small number of wire centers. the fcc also eliminated the obligation to provide dark fiber loops and found that there is no obligation to provide unes exclusively for
wireless or long distance service. in any instance where a particular high capacity facility no longer has to be made available as a une, the fcc established a similar one year transition for any existing high capacity loop or transport unes, and an
18 month transition for any existing dark fiber unes. this decision has been upheld on appeal.   as noted above, the fcc has concluded that the requirement under section251 of the telecommunications act of 1996 to provide unbundled network elements at telric prices generally does not apply with respect to
broadband facilities, such as fiber to the premises loops, the packet-switched capabilities of hybrid loops and packet switching. the fcc also has held that any separate unbundling obligations that may be imposed by section271 of the
telecommunications act of 1996 do not apply to these same facilities. the decision with respect to section271 has been upheld on appeal and a petition for rehearing of that appellate order was denied.   wireless services   the fcc regulates the licensing, construction, operation, acquisition and transfer of wireless communications systems,
including the systems that verizon wireless operates, pursuant to the communications act, other legislation, and the fccs rules. the fcc and congress continuously consider changes to these laws and rules. adoption of new laws or rules may
raise the cost of providing service or require modification of verizon wireless business plans or operations.   to use the radio frequency spectrum, wireless communications systems must be licensed by the fcc to operate the wireless network and mobile devices in assigned spectrum segments. verizon wireless
holds fcc licenses to operate in several different radio services, including the cellular radiotelephone service, personal communications service, advanced wireless service, and point-to-point radio service. the technical and service rules, the
specific radio frequencies and amounts of spectrum we hold, and the sizes of the geographic areas we are authorized to operate in, vary for each of these services. however, all of the licenses verizon wireless holds allow it to use spectrum to
provide a wide range of mobile and fixed communications services, including both voice and data services, and verizon wireless operates a seamless network that utilizes those licenses to provide services to customers. because the fcc issues licenses
for only a fixed time, generally 10 years, verizon wireless must periodically seek renewal of those licenses. although the fcc has routinely renewed all of verizon wireless licenses that have come up for renewal to date, challenges could be
brought against the licenses in the future. if a wireless license were revoked or not renewed upon expiration, verizon wireless would not be permitted to provide services on the licensed spectrum in the area covered by that license.   the fcc has also imposed specific mandates on carriers that operate wireless
communications systems, which increase verizon wireless costs. these mandates include requirements that verizon wireless: (i)meet specific construction and geographic coverage requirements during the license term; (ii)meet
technical operating standards that, among other things, limit the radio frequency radiation from mobile devices and antennas; (iii)deploy enhanced 911 wireless services that provide the wireless callers number, location and
other information upon request by a state or local public safety agency that handles 911 calls; and (iv)comply with regulations for the construction of transmitters and towers that, among other things, restrict siting of towers in
environmentally sensitive locations and in places where the towers would affect a site listed
table of contents
or eligible for listing on the national register of historic places. changes to these mandates could require verizon wireless to make changes to operations
or increase its costs of compliance.   the communications act
imposes restrictions on foreign ownership of u.s. wireless systems. the fcc has approved the interest that vodafone group plc holds, through various of its subsidiaries, in verizon wireless. the fcc may need to approve any increase in
vodafones interest or the acquisition of an ownership interest by other foreign entities. in addition, as part of the fccs approval of vodafones ownership interest, verizon wireless, verizon and vodafone entered into an agreement
with the u.s. department of defense, department of justice and federal bureau of investigation which imposes national security and law enforcement-related obligations on the ways in which verizon wireless stores information and otherwise conducts
its business.   verizon wireless anticipates that it will need
additional spectrum to meet future demand. it can meet spectrum needs by purchasing licenses or leasing spectrum from other licensees, or by acquiring new spectrum licenses from the fcc. under the communications act, before verizon wireless can
acquire a license from another licensee in order to expand its coverage or its spectrum capacity in a particular area, it must file an application with the fcc, and the fcc can grant the application only after a period for public notice and comment.
this review process can delay acquisition of spectrum needed to expand services. the communications act also requires the fcc to award new licenses for most commercial wireless services through a competitive bidding process in which spectrum is
awarded to bidders in an auction. verizon wireless has participated in spectrum auctions to acquire licenses in the personal communication service and most recently the advanced wireless service. however, the timing of future auctions, and the
spectrum being sold, may not match verizon wireless needs, and the company may not be able to secure the spectrum in the auction.   the fcc is also conducting several proceedings to explore whether and how to use spectrum more intensively by, for example, allowing unlicensed wireless
devices to operate in licensed spectrum bands. these proceedings could increase radio interference to verizon wireless operations from other spectrum users, or allow other users to share its spectrum. these changes may adversely impact the
ways in which it uses spectrum, the capacity of that spectrum to carry traffic, and the value of that spectrum.   state regulation and local approvals   telephone operations   state public utility commissions regulate our telephone operations with respect to certain telecommunications intrastate rates and services and other matters. our competitive local exchange
carrier and long distance operations are generally classified as nondominant and lightly regulated the same as other similarly situated carriers. our incumbent local exchange operations are generally classified as dominant. these latter operations
predominantly are subject to alternative forms of regulation (afors) in the various states, although they remain subject to rate of return regulation in a few states. arizona, illinois, nevada, new hampshire, oregon and washington are rate of return
regulated with various levels of pricing flexibility for competitive services. california, connecticut, delaware, the district of columbia, florida, indiana, maryland, michigan, maine, massachusetts, new jersey, new york, north carolina, ohio,
pennsylvania, rhode island, south carolina, texas, vermont, virginia, west virginia and wisconsin are under afors with various levels of pricing flexibility, detariffing, and service quality standards. none of the afors include earnings regulation.
in idaho, verizon has made the election under a recent statutory amendment into a deregulatory regime that phases out all price regulation.   video   companies that provide cable service over a cable system are typically subject to state and/or local cable television rules and regulations. as noted above, cable operators generally must obtain a local cable
franchise from each local unit of government prior to providing cable service in that local area. some states have recently enacted legislation that enables cable operators to apply for, and obtain, a single cable franchise at the state, rather than
local, level. to date, verizon has applied for and received state-issued franchises in indiana, new jersey and texas. california has enacted statewide franchise reform legislation, but has not yet finalized implementing rules.   wireless services   the rapid growth of the wireless industry has led to an increase in efforts by some state legislatures and state public
utility commissions to regulate the industry in ways that may impose additional costs on verizon wireless. the communications act generally preempts regulation by state and local governments of the entry of, or the rates charged by, wireless
carriers. although a state may petition the fcc to allow it to impose rate regulation, no state has done so. in addition, the communications act does not prohibit the states from regulating the other terms and conditions of wireless
service. while numerous state commissions do not currently have jurisdiction over wireless services, state legislatures may decide to grant them such jurisdiction, and those commissions that already have authority to impose regulations on wireless
carriers may adopt new rules.   state efforts to regulate
wireless services have included proposals to regulate customer billing, termination of service, trial periods for service, advertising, network outages, the use of handsets while driving, and the provision of emergency or alert services. over the
past several years, only a few states have imposed regulation in one or more of these areas, and in 2006 a federal appellate court struck down one such state statute, but verizon wireless expects these efforts to continue. some states also impose
their own universal service support regimes on wireless and other telecommunications carriers, and other states are considering whether to create such regimes.
verizon wireless (as well as at&t (formerly cingular) and sprint-nextel) is a party to an assurance of voluntary compliance (avc) with
33 state attorneys general. the avc, which generally reflected verizon wireless practices at the time it was entered into in july 2004, obligates the company to disclose certain rates and terms during a sales transaction, to provide maps
depicting coverage, and to comply with various requirements regarding advertising, billing, and other practices.
table of contents
at the state and local level, wireless facilities are subject to zoning and land use regulation. under
the communications act, neither state nor local governments may categorically prohibit the construction of wireless facilities in any community or take actions, such as indefinite moratoria, which have the effect of prohibiting service. nonetheless,
securing state and local government approvals for new tower sites has been and is likely to continue to be a difficult, lengthy and expensive process. finally, state and local governments continue to impose new or higher fees and taxes on wireless
carriers.
recent developments
mci merger   on january6, 2006, verizon acquired 100% of the outstanding common
stock of mci, inc. (mci) for a combination of verizon common shares and cash. mci was a global communications company that provided internet, data and voice communication services to businesses and government entities throughout the world and
consumers in the united states.   on april9, 2005, verizon
entered into a stock purchase agreement with eight entities affiliated with carlos slim hel to purchase 43.4million shares of mci common stock for $25.72 per share in cash plus an additional cash amount of 3%per annum from
april9, 2005, until the closing of the purchase of those shares. the transaction closed on may17, 2005. the total cash payment was $1,121 million and the investment was accounted for as a cost investment. no payments were made under a
provision that required verizon to pay an additional amount at the end of one year to the extent that the price of verizons common stock exceeded $35.52 per share. we received a special dividend of $5.60 per mci share on these
43.4million mci shares, or $243 million, on october27, 2005.   under the terms of the merger agreement, mci shareholders received .5743 shares of verizon common stock ($5,050 million in the aggregate) and cash of $2.738 ($779 million in the aggregate) for each of their mci
shares. the merger consideration was equal to $20.40 per mci share, excluding the $5.60 per share special dividend paid by mci to its shareholders on october27, 2005. there was no purchase price adjustment.   price communications   in august 2002, verizon wireless and price communications corp. (price) combined prices wireless business with a
portion of verizon wireless. the resulting limited partnership, verizon wireless of the east lp (vz east), is controlled and managed by verizon wireless. in exchange for its contributed assets, price received a limited partnership interest in the
new partnership which was exchangeable into the common stock of verizon wireless if an initial public offering of that stock occurred, or into the common stock of verizon on the fourth anniversary of the asset contribution date. on august15,
2006, verizon delivered 29.5million shares of newly-issued verizon common stock to price valued at $1,007million in exchange for prices limited partnership interest in vz east. as a result of acquiring prices limited
partnership interest, verizon recorded goodwill of $345 million in the third quarter of 2006 attributable to its domestic wireless segment.   disposition of businesses and investments   verizon dominicana c. por a., telecomunicaciones de puerto rico, inc., and compaa annima nacional telfonos de venezuela
during the second quarter of 2006, we reached definitive
agreements to sell our interests in our caribbean and latin american telecommunications operations in three separate transactions to amrica mvil, s.a. de c.v. (amrica mvil), a wireless service provider throughout
latin america, and a company owned jointly by telfonos de mxico, s.a. de c.v. (telmex) and amrica mvil. we agreed to sell our 100 percent indirect interest in verizon dominicana c. por a. (verizon dominicana) and our
52 percent interest in telecomunicaciones de puerto rico, inc. (telpri) to amrica mvil. an entity jointly owned by amrica mvil and telmex agreed to purchase our indirect 28.5 percent interest in compaa
annima nacional telfonos de venezuela (cantv).   in accordance with sfas no.144, accounting for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets, (sfas no.144) we have classified the results of operations of verizon dominicana and telpri as discontinued
operations. cantv continues to be accounted for as an equity method investment.   on december1, 2006, we closed the sale of verizon dominicana. the transaction resulted in net pretax cash proceeds of $2,042 million, net of a purchase price adjustment of $373 million. the u.s. taxes that
became payable and were recognized at the time the transaction closed exceeded the $30million pretax gain resulting in an after-tax loss of $541 million.
we expect to close the sale of our interest in telpri in 2007 subject to the receipt of regulatory approvals and in accordance with the terms of the
definitive agreement. we expect that the sale will result in approximately $900 million in net pretax cash proceeds.   during the second quarter of 2006, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell our indirect 28.5% interest in cantv to an entity jointly owned by america movil and telmex for estimated pretax
proceeds of $677 million. regulatory authorities in venezuela never commenced the formal review of that transaction and the related tender offers for the remaining equity securities of cantv. on february8, 2007, after two prior extensions, the
parties terminated the stock purchase agreement because the parties mutually concluded that the regulatory approvals would not be granted by the government.
table of contents
in january 2007, the bolivarian republic of venezuela (the republic) declared its intent to nationalize
certain companies, including cantv. on february12, 2007, we entered into a memorandum of understanding (mou) with the republic. the mou provides that the republic will offer to purchase all of the equity securities of cantv through public
tender offers in venezuela and the united states at a price equivalent to $17.85 per ads. if the tender offers are completed, the aggregate purchase price for verizons shares would be $572 million. if the 2007 dividend that has been
recommended by the cantv board is approved by shareholders and paid prior to the closing of the tender offers, this amount will be reduced by the amount of the dividend. verizon has agreed to tender its shares if the offers are commenced. the
republic has agreed to commence the offers within forty-five days assuming the satisfactory completion of its due diligence investigation of cantv. the tender offers are subject to certain conditions including that a majority of the outstanding
shares are tendered to the government and receipt of regulatory approvals. based upon the terms of the mou and our current investment balance in cantv, we expect that we will record a loss on our investment in the first quarter of 2007. the ultimate
amount of the loss depends on a variety of factors, including the successful completion of the tender offer and the satisfaction of other terms in the mou.   spin-off of verizon information services   on november17, 2006 we completed the spin-off of idearc to shareowners of verizon. verizon distributed a dividend of one share of idearc common
stock for every 20 shares of verizon common stock. cash was paid for fractional shares. the distribution of idearc common stock is considered a tax free transaction for us and for our shareowners, except for the cash payments for fractional shares
which are generally taxable. idearc now owns what was the verizon domestic print and internet yellow pages directories publishing operations, which had been the principal component of our information services segment. this transaction resulted in an
increase of nearly $9 billion in shareowners equity, as well as a reduction of total debt by more than $7 billion and we received approximately $2billion in cash.   telephone access lines spin-off   on january16, 2007, we announced a definitive agreement with fairpoint communications, inc. (fairpoint) that will result in verizon establishing a
separate entity for its local exchange and related business assets in maine, new hampshire and vermont, spinning off that new entity to verizons shareowners, and immediately merging it with and into fairpoint.   upon the closing of the transaction, verizon shareowners will own
approximately 60 percent of the new company and fairpoint stockholders will own approximately 40 percent. verizon communications will not own any shares in fairpoint after the merger. in connection with the merger, verizon shareowners will receive
one share of fairpoint stock for approximately every 55 shares of verizon stock held as of the record date. both the spin-off and merger are expected to qualify as tax-free transactions, except to the extent that cash is paid to verizon shareowners
in lieu of fractional shares.   the total value to be received
by verizon and its shareowners in exchange for these operations will be approximately $2,715 million. verizon shareowners will receive approximately $1,015 million of fairpoint common stock in the merger, based upon fairpoints recent stock
price and the terms of the merger agreement. verizon will receive $1,700 million in value through a combination of cash distributions to verizon and debt securities issued to verizon prior to the spin-off. verizon may exchange these newly issued
debt securities for certain debt that was previously issued by verizon, which would have the effect of reducing verizons then-outstanding debt.   redemption of debt   debt assumed from mci merger   on january17, 2006, verizon announced offers to purchase two series of mci senior notes, mci $1,983 million aggregate principal amount of 6.688% senior notes due 2009 and mci $1,699 million aggregate principal amount of 7.735% senior
notes due 2014, at 101% of their par value. due to the change in control of mci that occurred in connection with the merger with verizon on january6, 2006, verizon was required to make this offer to noteholders within 30 days of the closing of
the merger of mci and verizon. separately, verizon notified noteholders that mci was exercising its right to redeem both series of senior notes prior to maturity under the optional redemption procedures provided in the indentures. the 6.688% notes
were redeemed on march1, 2006, and the 7.735% notes were redeemed on february16, 2006.   in addition, on january20, 2006, verizon announced an offer to repurchase mci $1,983 million aggregate principal amount of 5.908% senior notes due 2007 at 101% of their par value. on
february21, 2006, $1,804 million of these notes were redeemed by verizon. verizon satisfied and discharged the indenture governing this series of notes shortly after the close of the offer for those noteholders who did not accept this offer.
zero-coupon convertible notes   previously, verizon global funding issued approximately $5,442 million in
principal amount at maturity of zero-coupon convertible notes due 2021 which were callable by verizon on or after may15, 2006. on may15, 2006, we redeemed the remaining $1,375 million accreted principal of the outstanding zero-coupon
convertible notes at a redemption price of $639.76 per $1,000 principal plus interest of approximately $0.5767 per $1,000 principal. the total payment on the date of redemption was approximately $1,377 million.   other debt redemptions/prepayments   other debt redemptions/prepayments included approximately $697 million of
outstanding debt issuances at various rates associated with our operating telephone companies. original maturity dates ranged from 2010 through 2026.
table of contents
on december15, 2006, verizon wirelesss six year 5.375% fixed rate note of $2.5 billion
matured. at december31, 2006, verizon wireless had no third-party debt outstanding.   on january8, 2007, we redeemed the remaining $1,580 million of the outstanding notes of the verizon communications inc. floating rate notes due 2007.   the gain/(loss) on these redemptions and prepayments were immaterial.   issuance of debt   in february 2006, verizon issued $4,000 million of floating rate and fixed rate notes maturing from 2007
through 2035.   spectrum purchases   on november29, 2006, we were granted thirteen 20 mhz licenses we won
in an fcc auction of advanced wireless services spectrum that concluded on september18, 2006, for which we had bid a total of $2,809 million. these licenses, which we anticipate using for the provision of advanced wireless broadband services,
cover a population of nearly 200 million. we have made all required payments to the fcc for these licenses.   environmental matters   during 2003, under a government-approved plan, remediation commenced at the site of a former sylvania facility in hicksville, new york that processed nuclear fuel rods in the 1950s and 1960s. remediation beyond original expectations proved
to be necessary and a reassessment of the anticipated remediation costs was conducted. a reassessment of costs related to remediation efforts at several other former facilities was also undertaken. in september 2005, the army corps of engineers
(ace) accepted the hicksville site into the formerly utilized sites remedial action program. this may result in the ace performing some or all of the remediation effort for the hicksville site with a corresponding decrease in costs to verizon. to
the extent that the ace assumes responsibility for remedial work at the hicksville site, an adjustment to a reserve previously established for the remediation may be made. adjustments may also be made based upon actual conditions discovered during
the remediation at any of the sites requiring remediation.   new york
recovery funding   in august 2002, president bush signed
the supplemental appropriations bill that included $5.5 billion in new york recovery funding. of that amount, approximately $750 million has been allocated to cover utility restoration and infrastructure rebuilding as a result of the
september11th terrorist attacks on lower manhattan. these funds will be distributed through the lower manhattan development corporation following an application and audit process. as of september 2004, we had applied for reimbursement of
approximately $266 million under category one, although we did not record this amount as a receivable. we received advances totaling $88 million in connection with this application process. on december22, 2004, we applied for reimbursement of
an additional $136 million of category two losses, and on march29, 2005 we amended our application seeking an additional $3 million. category two funding is for permanent restoration and infrastructure improvement. according to the plan,
permanent restoration is reimbursed up to 75% of the loss. on november3, 2005, we received the results of preliminary audit findings disallowing all but $44 million of our $266 million of category one application. on december8, 2005, we
provided a detailed rebuttal to the preliminary audit findings. we received a copy of the final audit report for verizons category one applications and, on january4, 2007, we filed an appeal of the final audit report. that appeal, as
well as our category two applications, are pending.
employees
as of
december31, 2006, verizon and its subsidiaries had approximately 242,000 employees. unions represent approximately 40% of our employees.
information on our internet website
we make available,
free of charge on our website, our annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k, and all amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material is electronically filed with or
furnished to the securities and exchange commission (sec). our website address is www.verizon.com. this information is included in investor information on our website.
cautionary statement concerning forward-looking statements
in this annual report
on form 10-k we have made forward-looking statements. these statements are based on our estimates and assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties. forward-looking statements include the information concerning our possible or assumed
future results of operations. forward-looking statements also include those preceded or followed by the words anticipates, believes, estimates, hopes or similar expressions. for those statements, we
claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the private securities litigation reform act of 1995.   the following important factors, along with those discussed elsewhere in this annual report, could affect future results and could cause those results to
differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements:
table of contents
materially adverse changes in economic and industry conditions and labor matters, including workforce levels and labor negotiations, and any resulting financial
and/or operational impact, in the markets served by us or by companies in which we have substantial investments;
material changes in available technology, including disruption of our suppliers provisioning of critical products or services;
technology substitution;
an adverse change in the ratings afforded our debt securities by nationally accredited ratings organizations;
the final results of federal and state regulatory proceedings concerning our provision of retail and wholesale services and judicial review of those results;
the effects of competition in our markets;
the timing, scope and financial impacts of our deployment of fiber-to-the-premises broadband technology;
the ability of verizon wireless to continue to obtain sufficient spectrum resources;
changes in our accounting assumptions that regulatory agencies, including the sec, may require or that result from changes in the accounting rules or their
application, which could result in an impact on earnings;
the timing of the closings of the sales of our latin american and caribbean properties; and
the extent and timing of our ability to obtain revenue enhancements and cost savings following our business combination with mci,inc.
table of contents
item 1a.risk factors
we face
significant competition that may reduce our market share and lower our profits.   we face significant competition in our industry. the rapid development of new technologies, services and products has eliminated the traditional lines between local, long distance, wireless, cable and internet
communication services and brought new competitors to our markets, including other telephone companies, cable companies, wireless service providers, satellite providers, electric utilities, and providers of voip services. while these changes have
enabled us to offer new types of services, they have also allowed other service providers to broaden the scope of their own competitive offerings. our ability to compete successfully will depend on how successfully we anticipate and respond to
various competitive factors, including new services that may be introduced by our competitors, changes in consumer preferences, demographic trends and pricing pressures. because we are subject to more regulation and have higher cost structures than
many of our competitors, due in part to the presence of a unionized workforce and a large retiree population in our wireline business, our competitors may be able to offer services at lower prices. the resulting pressure on the price of services
provided by us may result in reduced revenues and reduction of profits. in addition, while the workforce of our wireless business is almost entirely non-union, we cannot predict what level of success unions may have in organizing this workforce or
the potentially negative impact of such labor organizing on our costs.   unless we are able to take advantage of technological developments in the telecommunications industry on a timely basis, we may experience a decline in a demand for our services or may be unable to implement our business strategy.
our industry is experiencing rapid change as new
technologies are developed that offer consumers an array of choices for their communications needs. in order to grow and remain competitive, we will need to adapt to future changes in technology, to enhance our existing offerings and introduce new
offerings to address our customers changing demands. if we are unable to meet future advances in competing technologies on a timely basis or at an acceptable cost, we could lose customers to our competitors. in general, the development of new
services in our industry requires us to anticipate and respond to the varied and continually changing demands of our customers. we may not be able to accurately predict technological trends or the success of new services in the market. in addition,
there could be legal or regulatory restraints to our introduction of new services. if these services fail to gain acceptance in the marketplace, or if costs associated with implementation and completion of the introduction of these services
materially increase, our ability to retain and attract customers could be adversely affected.   while we believe our primary wireless technology platform, cdma, and its upgrades offer many advantages, many competing wireless service providers have chosen gsm or other technologies as the technology platforms for
their wireless networks. there are risks that current or future versions of the wireless technologies and evolutionary path that we have selected may not be demanded by existing and prospective customers or provide the advantages that we expect. in
addition, there are risks that other wireless carriers on whom our customers roam may change their technology to gsm or other technologies that are incompatible with ours. as a result, the ability of our and such other carriers customers to
roam on our respective wireless networks could be adversely affected. if these risks materialize, our ability to provide national wireless service to our customers, to retain and attract customers, and to maintain and grow our customer revenues
could be materially adversely affected.   we depend on key
suppliers and vendors to provide equipment that we need to operate our business.   we also depend upon various key suppliers and vendors to provide us with the equipment that we need to operate our business. if these suppliers or vendors fail to provide equipment or service to us on a timely basis,
it could have an adverse impact on our ability to implement our business strategy and, in addition, we might be unable to satisfy the requirements contained in our fcc licenses regarding the construction of our wireless network. these suppliers and
vendors may be subject to litigation with respect to technology that we depend on for our service offerings.   changes in the regulatory framework under which we operate could adversely affect our business prospects or results of operations.   our operations are subject to regulation by the fcc and other federal, state
and local agencies. it is impossible to predict with any certainty the outcome of pending federal and state regulatory proceedings relating to our provision of retail or wholesale services, or the reviews by federal or state courts of regulatory
rulings. unless we are able to obtain relief, existing laws and regulations may inhibit our ability to expand our business and introduce new products and services. in addition, the adoption of new laws or regulations or changes to the existing
regulatory framework could adversely affect our business plans. for example, the development of new technologies, such as internet protocol-based services, including voip and super high-speed broadband and video, could be subject to conflicting
regulation between the fcc and various state and local authorities, which could significantly increase the cost of implementing and introducing new services based on this technology. in addition, the rapid growth of the wireless industry has led to
an increase in efforts by some state legislatures and state public utility commissions to regulate the industry in ways that may impose additional costs on verizon wireless. moreover, many states have also imposed significant taxes on providers in
the wireless industry.
table of contents
we are subject to a significant amount of litigation, which could require us to pay significant damages or
settlements.   our business faces a substantial amount of
litigation, including patent infringement lawsuits, antitrust class actions, personal injury claims and lawsuits relating to our advertising, sales, billing and collection practices. in addition, our wireless business also faces personal injury and
consumer class action lawsuits relating to alleged health effects of wireless phones or radiofrequency transmitters, and class action lawsuits that challenge marketing practices and disclosures relating to alleged adverse health effects of handheld
wireless phones. we may incur significant expenses in defending these lawsuits. in addition, we may be required to pay significant awards or settlements.
item
1b.unresolved staff comments
none.
item 2.properties
general
our principal
properties do not lend themselves to simple description by character and location. our total investment in plant, property and equipment was approximately $204 billion at december31, 2006 and $188 billion at december31, 2005, including
the effect of retirements, but before deducting accumulated depreciation. our gross investment in plant, property and equipment consisted of the following at december31:
network equipment
80.1
%
81.2%
land, buildings and building equipment
9.9
9.1
furniture and other equipment
6.3
6.5
other
3.7
3.2
100.0
%
100.0%
our
properties are divided among our operating segments at december31, as follows:
wireline
76.7
%
76.9%
wireless
22.7
22.4
corporate and other
0.6
0.7
100.0
%
100.0%
network equipment
consists primarily of aerial cable, underground cable, conduit and wiring, wireless plant, telephone poles, switching equipment, transmission equipment and related facilities. land, buildings and building equipment consists of land and land
improvements and central office buildings. furniture and other equipment consists of public telephone instruments and telephone equipment (including pbxs), furniture, office equipment, motor vehicles and other work equipment. other property consists
primarily of plant under construction, capital leases, capitalized computer software costs and leasehold improvements. a portion of our property is subject to the liens of their respective mortgages securing funded debt.   the customers of our telephone operations are served by electronic switching
systems that provide a wide variety of services. at december31,2006, substantially all of the access lines were served by digital capability.
capital expenditures
we continue to make
significant capital expenditures to meet the demand for telecommunications services and to further improve such services. capital spending for wireline was $10,259 million in 2006, $8,267 million in 2005 and $7,118 million in 2004. capital spending
for domestic wireless was $6,618 million in 2006, $6,484 million in 2005 and $5,633 million in 2004. in 2007, verizon management expects capital expenditures to be in the range of $17.5 billion to $17.9 billion.
item 3.legal proceedings
verizon and a number
of other telecommunications companies have been the subject of multiple class action suits concerning its alleged participation in intelligence-gathering activities allegedly carried out by the federal government, at the direction of the president
of the united states, as part of the governments post-september11 program to prevent terrorist attacks. plaintiffs generally allege that verizon has participated by permitting the government to gain access to the content of its
subscribers telephone calls and/or records concerning those calls and that such action violates federal and/or state constitutional and statutory law. relief sought in the cases includes injunctive relief, attorneys fees, and statutory
and punitive damages. on august9, 2006, the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation (panel) ordered that these actions be transferred, consolidated and coordinated in the u.s. district court for the northern district of
california. the panel subsequently ordered that a number of tag along actions also be transferred to the northern district of california. verizon has not answered or otherwise responded to any of the complaints. verizon believes that
these lawsuits are without merit.   in the matter of certain
baseband processor chips and chipsets, transmitter and receiver (radio) chips, power control chips, and products containing same, including cellular telephone handsets, an action brought before the united states international trade commission,
table of contents
broadcom corporation alleges that certain chips and chipsets manufactured by respondent qualcomm corporation infringe three broadcom patents. broadcom is
currently seeking a ban on the importation of certain devices containing qualcomms ev-do chipsets, but not with respect to data cards, pdas, smartphones or handheld email devices containing those chips. verizon wireless was granted permission
to intervene in the proceeding on the issue of remedy but not on the issue of liability. the itc staff, which is a party to the proceeding, has supported broadcoms position with respect to liability and remedy. the trial on remedy was
completed on july11, 2006 before an itc administrative law judge. the administrative law judge issued an initial determination, finding that qualcomm has infringed one of the three broadcom patents and recommended that qualcomms chipsets
should be excluded from importation into the united states. however, the administrative law judge further recommended that verizon wireless handsets that incorporate the qualcomm ev-do chipsets should not be subject to an exclusion order. broadcom
and the itc staff requested review of the initial determination by the full itc. on december8, 2006, the itc affirmed in substantial part the administrative law judges initial determination with respect to liability, determining that
qualcomm infringed one broadcom patent. the itc will hold a public hearing on the issues of remedy and the public interest on march21, 2007. the decision of the full itc with respect to remedy is expected to be made by may8, 2007. during
a 60-day period following any exclusion order by the itc, the president of the united states may disapprove the order. further, itc exclusion orders are reviewable by the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit. disruption of the supply of
handsets incorporating qualcomm ev-do chipsets could have a material adverse effect on the availability of handsets to sell to verizon wireless customers and could therefore have a material adverse effect on its business.
item 4.submission of matters to a vote of security holders
not
applicable.
executive officers of the registrant
set
forth below is information with respect to our executive officers.
name
age
office
heldsince
ivan g. seidenberg
chairman and chief executive officer
william p. barr
executive vice president and general counsel
thomas a. bartlett
senior vice president and controller
john w. diercksen
executive vice president  strategy, development and planning
shaygan kheradpir
executive vice president and chief information officer
john f. killian
president  verizon business
lowell c. mcadam
president and chief executive officer  verizon wireless
marc c. reed
executive vice president  human resources
virginia p. ruesterholz
president  verizon telecom
john g. stratton
executive vice president and chief marketing officer
dennis f. strigl
president and chief operating officer
thomas j. tauke
executive vice president  public affairs, policy and communications
doreen a. toben
executive vice president and chief financial officer
catherine t. webster
senior vice president and treasurer
prior to serving as an
executive officer, each of the above officers held high level managerial positions with the company or one of its subsidiaries for at least five years.   officers are not elected for a fixed term of office but are removable at the discretion of the board of directors.   lawrence t. babbio jr. (62)served as vice chairman and
president and as an executive officer through december31,2006.
part ii
item 5.market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the principal market
for trading in the common stock of verizon is the new york stock exchange. the common stock is also listed in the united states on the boston, chicago and philadelphia stock exchanges. as of december31, 2006, there were 887,678 shareowners of
record.   high and low stock prices, as reported on the new york
stock exchange composite tape of transactions, and dividend data are as follows:
market price
cashdividenddeclared
high
low
first quarter
$33.89
$28.95
$.405
second quarter
33.46
29.00
.405
third quarter
36.62
30.22
.405
fourth quarter
37.64
33.99
.405
first quarter
$39.56
$33.13
$.405
second quarter
34.93
32.48
.405
third quarter
33.70
30.50
.405
fourth quarter
31.59
28.07
.405
*
all verizon prices have been adjusted for the spin-off of idearc.
table of contents
the following table provides information about verizons common stock repurchases
during the fourth quarter of 2006.
period
totalnumberofsharespurchased
averagepricepaidpershare
total number of sharespurchased as part of publiclyannouncedplansorprograms(1)
maximum number of shares that may yet be purchased undertheplansorprograms(2)
october
3,555,000
$37.22
3,555,000
56,020,200
november
475,000
37.65
475,000
55,545,200
december
5,611,600
35.80
5,611,600
49,933,600
9,641,600
9,641,600
49,933,600
(1)
on january19, 2006, verizons board of directors authorized a common stock repurchase program.
(2)
the program authorizes total repurchases of up to 100million common shares terminating no later than the close of business on february28, 2008. under
the plan, verizon has the option to repurchase shares for the corporation over time, with the amount and timing of repurchases depending on market conditions and corporate needs.
item 6.
selected financial data
information required
by this item is included in the 2006 verizon annual report to shareowners under the heading selected financial data on page 17, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 7.managements discussion and analysis of results of financial condition and results of operations
information required
by this item is included in the 2006 verizon annual report to shareowners under the heading managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition on pages 18 through 39, which is incorporated herein
by reference.
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
information required
by this item is included in the 2006 verizon annual report to shareowners under the heading market risk on page 32, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
information required
by this item is included in the 2006 verizon annual report to shareowners on pages 40 through 79, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
item 9a.
controls and procedures
our chief executive
officer and chief financial officer have evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the securities exchange act of 1934), as of the end of the period
covered by this annual report, that ensure that information relating to the registrant which is required to be disclosed in this report is recorded, processed, summarized and reported, within required time periods. based on this evaluation, our
chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that the registrants disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of december31, 2006.   we completed the merger with mci on january6, 2006, at which time mci became a subsidiary of verizon. the company has
extended its section404 compliance program under the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 and the applicable rules and regulations under such act to include the merged entitys internal controls over financial reporting.   there were no changes in the registrants internal control over
financial reporting during the fourth quarter of 2006 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect the registrants internal control over financial reporting.   managements report on internal control over financial reporting and the
attestation report of verizons independent registered accounting firm is included in the 2006 verizon annual report to shareowners on pages 40 through 41 and is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
item 9b.other information
none.
part iii
item 10.directors, executive officers and corporate governance of the registrant
for information with
respect to our executive officers, see executive officers of the registrant at the end of part i of this report. for other information required by this item see the sections entitled election of directors, structure and
practices of the board and section 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance in the proxy statement for our 2007 annual meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation 14a, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 11.executive compensation
for information with
respect to executive compensation, see the section entitled executive compensation in the proxy statement for our 2007 annual meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation 14a, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
for information with
respect to the security ownership of the directors and executive officers and related stockholder matters, see the section entitled security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management in the proxy statement for our 2007 annual
meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation 14a, which is incorporated herein by reference. in addition, see the following table for other equity compensation plan information:
plan category
numberofsecuritiestobeissued upon exercise ofoutstandingoptions,warrantsand
rights
weightedaverageexercisepriceofoutstanding options, warrants andrights
numberofsecuritiesremainingavailableforfutureissuanceunderequitycompensation
plans
equity compensation plans approved by security holders
185,110,937
$47.55
128,833,578
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
45,337,060
41.90
9,900,616*
total
230,447,997
46.44
138,734,194
*
indicates the number of securities available for issuance under the verizon communications 2000 broad-based incentive plan, which provides for awards of
nonqualified stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units and other equity-based hypothetical stock units to employees of verizon and its subsidiaries.
item 13.certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
for information with
respect to certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence, see the structure and practices of the board section of the proxy statement for our 2007 annual meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation
14a, which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 14.principal accounting fees and services
for information with
respect to principal accounting fees and services, see the proxy statement for our 2007 annual meeting of shareholders filed pursuant to regulation 14a, which is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
part iv
item 15.exhibits, financial statement schedules
documents filed as part of this report:
page
(1)
report of management on internal control over financial reporting
*
(2)
report of independent registered public accounting firm on internal control over financial reporting
*
(3)
report of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statements
*
financial statements covered by report of independent registered public accounting firm:
consolidated statements of income
*
consolidated balance sheets
*
consolidated statements of cash flows
*
consolidated statements of changes in shareowners investment
*
notes to consolidated financial statements
*
*incorporated herein by reference to the appropriate portions of the registrants annual report
to shareowners for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006. (see part ii.)
(4)
financial statement schedule
ii  valuation and qualifying accounts
(5)
exhibits
table of contents
exhibit number
3a
restated certificate of incorporation of verizon communications inc. (verizon) (exhibit 3a to form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2005).
3b
bylaws of verizon, as amended and restated (exhibit 3b to form 10-q for the period ended september30, 2006).
no instrument which defines the rights of holders of long-term debt of verizon and its consolidated subsidiaries is filed herewith pursuant to regulation s-k, item
601(b)(4)(iii)(a). pursuant to this regulation, verizon hereby agrees to furnish a copy of any such instrument to the sec upon request.
10a
description of verizon deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors (exhibit 10a to form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2000).*
10a(i) description of amendment to plan (exhibit 10a(i) to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004).
10b
bell atlantic deferred compensation plan for outside directors, as amended and restated (exhibit 10a to form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
1998).*
10c
deferred compensation plan for non-employee members of the board of directors of gte, as amended (exhibit10-1 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
1997 and exhibit 10.1 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1998, file no. 1-2755).*
10d
gtes directors deferred stock unit plan (exhibit 10-8 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997, fileno.
1-2755).*
10e
description of plan for non-employee directors travel accident insurance (exhibit 10c to form 10-k for the year ended
december31,1999).*
10f
bell atlantic directors charitable giving program, as amended (exhibit 10p to form se dated march 29, 1990 and exhibit 10p to formse dated march 29,
1993).*
10g
gtes charitable awards program (exhibit 10-10 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1992, file
no. 1-2755).*
10h
nynex directors charitable award program (exhibit 10i to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000).*
10i
verizon communications 2000 broad-based incentive plan (exhibit 10h to form 10-q for the period ended september30, 2000).*
10j
verizon communications inc. long-term incentive plan (appendix b to verizons 2001 proxy statement filed march12, 2001).*
10j(i) performance stock unit agreement 2003-2005 award cycle (exhibit 10j(i) to form 10-k for the year ended december31,2005).*
10j(ii) performance stock unit agreement 2004-2006 award cycle (exhibit 10j(ii) to form 10-k for the year ended december31,2005).*
10j(iii) restricted stock unit agreement 2005-2007 award cycle (exhibit 10a to form 10-q for the period ended march31, 2005).*
10j(iv) performance stock unit agreement 2005-2007 award cycle (exhibit 10b to form 10-q for the period ended march31, 2005).*
10j(iv)(a) addendum to performance stock unit agreement 2005-2007 award cycle (exhibit 10j(iv)(a) to
form 10-k for the year ended december31,2005).*
10j(v) restricted stock unit agreement 2006-2008 award cycle (exhibit 10j(v) to form 10-k for the year ended december31,2005).*
10j(vi) performance stock unit agreement 2006-2008 award cycle (exhibit 10j(vi) to form 10-k for the year ended december31,2005).*
10k
gtes long-term incentive plan, as amended (exhibit b to gtes 1997 proxy statement and exhibit 10.5 to gtes 1998 form10-k for the year ended
december 31, 1998, file no. 1-2755); description of amendments (exhibit 10l to form10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000).*
10m
nynex 1995 stock option plan, as amended (exhibit no. 1 to nynexs proxy statement dated march 20, 1995, file no. 1-8608); description of amendments (exhibit 10n to
form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000).*
table of contents
10n
verizon communications inc. short-term incentive plan (appendix c to verizons 2001 proxy statement filed march12, 2001).*
10o
verizon communications inc. income deferral plan (exhibit 10f to form 10-q for the period ended june 30, 2002).*
10o(i) description of amendment to plan (exhibit 10o(i) to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004).*
10p
verizon communications inc. excess pension plan (exhibit 10p to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004).*
10p(i) description of amendment to plan (exhibit 10p(i) to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004).*
10q
gtes executive salary deferral plan, as amended (exhibit 10.10 to gtes form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1998, file
no.1-2755).*
10r
bell atlantic senior management long-term disability and survivor protection plan, as amended (exhibit 10h to formse filed on march 27, 1986 and exhibit 10b(ii) to
form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1997).*
10s
description of bell atlantic senior management estate management plan (exhibit 10rr to form 10-k for year ended december 31, 1997).*
10t
gtes executive retired life insurance plan, as amended (exhibits 10-6, 10-6 and 10-6 to gtes form 10-k for the years ended december 31, 1991, 1992 and 1993,
respectively, file no. 1-2755).*
10u
nynex supplemental life insurance plan (exhibit no. 10 iii 21 to nynexs form 10-q for the period ended june30, 1996, file no. 1-8608).*
10v
summary plan description of verizon executive deferral plan (exhibit 10(v) to form 10-k for the year ended december31,2005).*
10w
description of salary increase for ivan g. seidenberg (exhibit 10w to form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2004).*
10x
employment agreement between verizon and lawrence t. babbio (exhibit 10a to form 10-q for the period ended september 30, 2000).*
10y
employment agreement between verizon and marc c. reed (exhibit 10a to form 10-q for the period ended june30, 2004).*
10z
employment agreement between verizon and william p. barr (exhibit 10z to form 10-q for the period ended march31, 2003).*
10cc
employment agreement between verizon and doreen a. toben (exhibit 10d to form 10-q for the period ended june30, 2002).*
10dd
description of the split-dollar insurance arrangements (exhibit 10g to form 10-q for the period ended june 30,2002).*
10dd(i) description of changes to arrangements (exhibit 10dd(i) to form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2004).*
10ee
employment agreement between verizon and dennis f. strigl (exhibit 10f to form 10-q for the period ended september30, 2000).*
10ff
employment agreement between verizon and thomas j. tauke (exhibit 10b to form 10-q for the period ended june30, 2004).*
10gg
form of employment agreement between verizon and band 1 senior management employee (exhibit 10gg to the form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2004).*
10hh
nynex deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors (exhibit 10gg to nynexs registration statement no. 2-87850, file no. 1-8608).*
10hh(i) amendment to nynex corporation deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors (exhibit 10iii 5a to nynexs quarterly report on form 10-q for the period
ended june 30, 1996, file no. 1-8608).*
10ii
u.s. wireless agreement, dated september 21, 1999, among bell atlantic and vodafone airtouch plc, including the forms of amended and restated partnership agreement and the
investment agreement (exhibit 10 to form 10-q for the period ended september 30, 1999).
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges filed herewith.
portions of verizons annual report to shareowners for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2006. only the information incorporated by reference into this form 10-k is
included in the exhibit.
list of principal subsidiaries of verizon filed herewith.
table of contents
consent of ernst & young llp filed herewith.
31.1
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
31.2
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.1
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*
indicates management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
table of contents
schedule ii  valuation and qualifying accounts   verizon communications inc. and subsidiaries   for the years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
additions
(dollars in millions)
description
balance atbeginningofperiod
chargedtoexpenses
chargedtootheraccountsnote (a)
deductionsnote (b)
balanceatendof period
allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable:
year 2006
$1,100
$1,034
$1,627
$2,622
$1,139
year 2005
1,363
1,076
2,133
1,100
year 2004
2,382
1,234
3,143
1,363
valuation allowance for deferred tax assets:
year 2006
$815
$51
$2,234
$500
$2,600
year 2005
1,217
year 2004
1,463
1,217
discontinued businesses:
year 2006
$248
$
$
$11
$237
year 2005
year 2004
(a)
allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable includes: (1)amounts previously written off which were credited directly to this account when recovered,
and (2)accruals charged to accounts payable for anticipated uncollectible charges on purchases of accounts receivable from others which were billed by us. also includes amounts transferred from other accounts. the 2006 amounts charged to other
accounts for the allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable and valuation allowance for deferred tax assets were primarily due to the acquisition of mci.
(b)
amounts written off as uncollectible or transferred to other accounts or utilized.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the
requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.   verizon communications inc.
date:march1, 2007
by:
/s/ thomas a. bartlett
thomas a. bartlett
senior vice president and controller
pursuant to the
requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
principal executive officer:
/s/ivan g. seidenberg
chairman and chief executive officer
march 1, 2007
ivan g. seidenberg
principal financial officer:
/s/doreen a. toben
executive vice president and chief financial officer
march 1, 2007
doreen a. toben
principal accounting officer:
/s/thomas a. bartlett
senior vice president and controller
march 1, 2007
thomas a. bartlett
table of contents
signatures  continued
/s/ivan g. seidenberg
director
march1, 2007
ivan g. seidenberg
/s/james r. barker
director
march 1, 2007
james r. barker
/s/richard l. carrin
director
march 1, 2007
richard l. carrin
/s/m. frances keeth
director
march 1, 2007
m. frances keeth
/s/robert w. lane
director
march 1, 2007
robert w. lane
/s/sandra o. moose
director
march 1, 2007
sandra o. moose
/s/joseph neubauer
director
march 1, 2007
joseph neubauer
/s/donald t. nicolaisen
director
march 1, 2007
donald t. nicolaisen
/s/thomas h. obrien
director
march 1, 2007
thomas h. obrien
/s/clarence otis, jr.
director
march 1, 2007
clarence otis, jr.
/s/hugh b. price
director
march 1, 2007
hugh b. price
/s/walter v. shipley
director
march 1, 2007
walter v. shipley
/s/john w. snow
director
march 1, 2007
john w. snow
/s/john r. stafford
director
march 1, 2007
john r. stafford
/s/robert d. storey
director
march 1, 2007
robert d. storey
