10-k
y94774e10vk.htm
merck & co., inc.
merck & co., inc.
table of contents
as filed with the securities and
exchange commission on march10, 2004
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d. c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
[x]
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003
or
[]
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from to
commission file no.1-3305
merck & co., inc.
one merck drive
whitehouse station, n. j. 08889-0100
(908)423-1000
incorporated in new jersey
i.r.s. employer
identification no.22-1109110
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange
on which registered
common stock
($0.01 par value)
new york and philadelphia stock exchanges
number of shares of common stock ($0.01 par value) outstanding as of
february27, 2004: 2,224,326,514.
aggregate market value of common stock ($0.01 par value) held by
non-affiliates on june30, 2003 based on closing price on june30, 2003:
$135,610,000,000.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90days. yes [x] no
[]
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item
405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to
the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form10-k or any
amendment to this form10-k. []
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as
defined in exchange act rule12b-2). yes [x] no
[]
documents incorporated by reference:
document
part of form10-k
annual report to stockholders for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2003
proxy statement for the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april27, 2004
parts i and iipart
iii
table of contents
part i
item1. business
item2. properties
item3. legal proceedings
item4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6. selected financial data
item7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8. financial statements and supplementary data
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a. controls and procedures
part iii
item10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11. executive compensation
item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13. certain relationships and related transactions
item14. principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item15. exhibits, financial statement schedules, and reports on form8-k
signatures
deferral program (amended and restated 11/19/03)
deferred payment of directors' compensation plan
offer letter
computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
pages from the 2003 annual report to stockholders
code of conduct
list of subsidiaries
power of attorney
certified resolution of board of directors
certification of ceo
certification of cfo
certification of ceo
certification of cfo
table of contents
part i
item1. business.
merck & co., inc. (the company) is a global research-driven
pharmaceutical products company that discovers, develops, manufactures and
markets a broad range of innovative products to improve human and animal
health, directly and through its joint ventures. the company sells its
products primarily to drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals, clinics,
government agencies and managed health care providers such as health
maintenance organizations and other institutions. the companys professional
representatives communicate the effectiveness, safety and value of its products
to health care professionals in private practice, group practices and managed
care organizations.
in january2002, the company announced plans to establish medco health
solutions, inc. (medco health) as a separate, publicly-traded company. on
august19, 2003, the spin-off of medco health was effected by way of a pro rata
dividend to company stockholders of all the outstanding shares of common stock
of medco health. based on a letter ruling the company received from the u.s.
internal revenue service, receipt of medco health shares in the distribution
was tax-free for u.s. federal income tax purposes, but any cash received in
lieu of fractional shares was taxable.
product sales
sales1,2 by category of the companys products were as follows:
($ in millions)
atherosclerosis
$
5,077.9
$
5,552.1
$
5,433.3
hypertension/heart failure
3,421.6
3,477.8
3,584.3
anti-inflammatory/analgesics
2,677.3
2,587.2
2,391.1
osteoporosis
2,676.6
2,243.1
1,629.7
respiratory
2,009.4
1,489.8
1,260.3
vaccines/biologicals
1,056.1
1,028.3
1,022.5
anti-bacterial/anti-fungal
1,028.5
821.0
750.4
ophthalmologicals
675.1
621.5
644.5
urology
605.5
547.3
545.4
human immunodeficiency virus (hiv)
290.6
294.3
380.8
other
2,967.3
2,783.4
3,556.7
total
$
22,485.9
$
21,445.8
$
21,199.0
1following the spin-off, the companys prior period consolidated
statements of income and cash flows and related discussions have been
restated to present the results of medco health separately as
discontinued operations. as a result of the spin-off, product sales now
reflect sales to medco health as third-party sales based upon the net
selling price from the company to medco health. prior year amounts have
been restated to conform to the current year presentation.
2presented net of rebates and discounts.
the companys products include therapeutic and preventive agents,
generally sold by prescription, for the treatment of human disorders. among
these are atherosclerosis products, of which zocor (simvastatin)is the
largest-selling; hypertension/heart failure products, the most significant of
which are cozaar (losartan potassium), hyzaar (losartan potassium and
hydrochlorothiazide), and vasotec (enalapril maleate);
anti-inflammatory/analgesics, which include vioxx (rofecoxib)and arcoxia
(etoricoxib), agents that specifically inhibit the cox-2 enzyme, which is
responsible for pain and inflammation (coxibs); an osteoporosis product,
fosamax (alendronate sodium), for treatment and prevention of osteoporosis; a
respiratory product, singulair (montelukast sodium), a leukotriene receptor
antagonist for treatment of asthma and for relief of symptoms of seasonal
allergic rhinitis; vaccines/biologicals, of which m-m-r ii (measles, mumps and
rubella virus vaccine live), varivax (varicella virus vaccine live), a live
virus vaccine for the prevention of chickenpox, and recombivax hb (hepatitis b
vaccine [recombinant]) are the largest-selling; anti-bacterial/anti-fungal
products, which includes primaxin (imipenem and cilastatin sodium), as well as
newer products cancidas (caspofungin acetate) and invanz (ertapenem sodium);
ophthalmologicals, of which cosopt (dorzolamide hydrochloride and timolol
maleate ophthalmic solution) and
table of contents
trusopt (dorzolamide hydrochloride ophthalmic
solution) are the largest-selling; a urology product, proscar (finasteride),
for treatment of symptomatic benign prostate enlargement; and hiv products,
which include crixivan (indinavir sulfate) and stocrin (efavirenz), for the
treatment of human immunodeficiency viral infection in adults.
other primarily includes maxalt (rizatriptan benzoate), for the treatment
of acute migraine headaches in adults, propecia (finasteride), for the
treatment of male pattern hair loss, and other non-promoted products and
pharmaceutical and animal health supply sales to the companys joint ventures
and revenue from the companys relationship with astrazeneca lp, primarily
relating to sales of nexium (esomeprazole magnesium) and prilosec (omeprazole).
in january2003, the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) approved
cancidas, the companys once-daily intravenous anti-fungal medicine for the
treatment of candidemia (bloodstream infection) and the following candida
infections: intra-abdominal abscesses, peritonitis (infections within the
lining of the abdominal cavity) and pleural space infections (infections within
the lining of the lung). also in january2003, the company announced that the
fda approved singulair for the relief of symptoms of seasonal allergic rhinitis
in adults and children as young as 2years of age.
in march2003, the fda approved emend (aprepitant), the first member in a
new class of medicines, to be used in combination with other anti-vomiting
medicines to help prevent the acute and delayed nausea and vomiting associated
with initial and repeat courses of highly emetogenic cancer chemotherapy,
including high-dose cisplatin. also in march2003, the fda approved cozaar as
the first and only hypertension medicine indicated to reduce the risk of stroke
in patients with hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy (lvh). the
new indication is based on the landmark losartan intervention for endpoint
reduction in hypertension study (life). the life study, with cozaar, marks
the first time an antihypertensive treatment regimen has demonstrated a
reduction in the risk of stroke versus another antihypertensive treatment
regimen in hypertensive patients with lvh. in the life study, black patients
with hypertension and lvh had a lower risk of stroke on atenolol than on
cozaar.
in april2003, the fda approved changes to the prescribing information for
zocor to include results from the landmark heart protection study with zocor 40
mg, which is now recommended, along with diet, as the starting dose for zocor
for people with coronary heart disease or diabetes. zocor 40 mg is the first
and only cholesterol-lowering medication proven to reduce the risk of heart
attack and stroke in people with heart disease or diabetes regardless of
cholesterol level.
acquisitions
on february23, 2004, the company announced that it
had agreed to acquire aton pharma, inc., a privately held
biotechnology company focusing on the development of novel treatments
for cancer and other serious diseases. (see also page10.)
in january2003, the company, through its wholly owned
subsidiary, msd (japan) co., ltd., launched a tender offer to acquire, for an
estimated aggregate purchase price of $1.5billion, the remaining 49% of the
common shares of banyu pharmaceutical co., ltd. (banyu) that it did not
already own. in october2003, the company announced that at the close of the
final count of shares in its second tender offer for all remaining shares in
banyu, the company owned 99.4% of the outstanding shares of banyu common stock.
japan is the worlds second largest pharmaceutical market.
in july2001, the company acquired rosetta inpharmatics, inc., a
publicly-held washington based informational genomics company that designs and
develops unique technologies to efficiently analyze gene data to predict how
medical compounds will interact with different kinds of cells in the body.
joint ventures  in 1982, the company entered into an agreement with astra
ab (astra) to develop and market astra products in the united states. in
1994, the company and astra formed an equally owned joint venture that
developed and marketed most of astras new prescription medicines in the united
states including prilosec, the first of a class of medications known as proton
pump inhibitors, which slows the production of acid from the cells of the
stomach lining.
in 1998, the company and astra restructured the joint venture whereby the
company acquired astras interest in the joint venture, renamed kbi inc.
(kbi), and contributed kbis operating assets to a new u.s. limited
partnership named astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (the partnership), in which the
company maintains a limited partner interest. the partnership, renamed
astrazeneca lp, became the exclusive distributor of the products for
table of contents
which kbi
retained rights. the company earns certain partnership returns as well as
ongoing revenue based on sales of current and future kbi products. the
partnership returns include a priority return provided for in the partnership
agreement, variable returns based, in part, upon sales of certain former astra
usa, inc. products, and a preferential return representing the companys share
of undistributed partnership gaap earnings. in conjunction with the 1998
restructuring, for a payment of $443.0million, astra purchased an option to
buy the companys interest in the kbi products, excluding the companys
interest in the gastrointestinal medicines nexium and prilosec. the company
also granted astra an option (the shares option) to buy the companys common
stock interest in kbi, at an exercise price based on the net present value of
estimated future net sales of nexium and prilosec.
in april1999, astra merged with zeneca group plc, forming astrazeneca ab
(astrazeneca). as a result of the merger, in exchange for the companys
relinquishment of rights to future astra products with no existing or pending
u.s. patents at the time of the merger, astra paid $967.4million, which is
subject to a true-up calculation in 2008 that may require repayment of all or a
portion of this amount. the merger also triggers a partial redemption of the
companys limited partner interest in 2008. furthermore, as a result of the
merger, astrazenecas option to buy the companys interest in the kbi products
is exercisable in 2010 and the company has the right to require astrazeneca to
purchase such interest in 2008. in addition, the shares option is exercisable
two years after astras purchase of the companys interest in the kbi products.
in 1989, the company formed a joint venture with johnson & johnson to
develop, market and manufacture consumer health care products in the united
states. this 50% owned joint venture was expanded into europe in 1993, and into
canada in 1996. the european extension currently markets and sells
over-the-counter pharmaceutical products in france, germany, italy, spain and
the united kingdom. significant joint venture products are pepcid ac
(famotidine), an over-the-counter form of the companys ulcer medication pepcid
(famotidine), as well as pepcid complete, an over-the-counter product which
combines the companys ulcer medication with antacids (calcium carbonate and
magnesium hydroxide). on february27, 2004, the company announced its
intention to sell to johnson & johnson its interest in the european joint
venture which is discussed on page 8 under divestitures.
effective april1992, the company, through the merck vaccine division, and
connaught laboratories, inc. (now aventis pasteur), agreed to collaborate on
the development and marketing of combination pediatric vaccines and to promote
selected vaccines in the united states. the research and marketing
collaboration enables the companies to pool their resources to expedite the
development of vaccines combining several different antigens to protect
children against a variety of diseases, including haemophilus influenzae type
b, hepatitis b, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis and poliomyelitis. while
combination vaccine development efforts continue under this agreement, no
vaccines are currently being promoted.
in 1994, the company, through the merck vaccine division, and pasteur
mrieux connaught (now aventis pasteur) formed a joint venture to market human
vaccines in europe and to collaborate in the development of combination
vaccines for distribution in the then existing european union (eu) and the
european free trade association. the company and aventis pasteur contributed,
among other things, their european vaccine businesses for equal shares in the
joint venture, known as pasteur mrieux msd, s.n.c. (now aventis pasteur msd,
s.n.c.). the joint venture is subject to monitoring by the eu, to which the
partners made certain undertakings in return for an exemption from european
competition law, effective until december2006. the joint venture maintains a
presence, directly or through affiliates or branches in belgium, italy,
germany, spain, france, austria, ireland, sweden and the united kingdom, and
through distributors in the rest of europe.
in 1997, the company and rhne-poulenc s.a. combined their respective
animal health and poultry genetics businesses to form merial limited
(merial), a fully-integrated animal health company, which is a stand-alone
joint venture, equally owned by each party. merial provides a comprehensive
range of pharmaceuticals and vaccines to enhance the health, well-being and
performance of a wide range of animal species. in december1999, rhne-poulenc
s.a.s interest in merial was acquired by aventis s.a., a corporation
formed by the merger of rhne-poulenc s.a. and hoechst a.g.
table of contents
in 2000, the company and schering-plough corporation (schering-plough)
entered into agreements to create separate equally owned partnerships to
develop and market in the united states new prescription medicines in the
cholesterol-management and respiratory therapeutic areas. in december2001,
the company and schering-plough announced the worldwide expansion (excluding
japan) of the cholesterol-management partnership. in october2002,
merck/schering-plough pharmaceuticals (msp) announced the fda approval of
zetia (ezetimibe). the once-daily tablet of zetia 10 mg was approved for use
either by itself or together with a statin to reduce ldl cholesterol and total
cholesterol in patients with high cholesterol. marketing approval was received
in october2002 in germany under the brand name ezetrol for use alone and with
all marketed statins for the treatment of elevated cholesterol levels. in
2003, following the successful completion of the european union mutual
recognition procedure (mrp), ezetrol had been launched in five european
countries  germany, the united kingdom, switzerland, sweden and the
netherlands. with the completion of the mrp process, the 15 eu member states,
as well as iceland and norway, can grant national marketing authorization with
unified labeling for ezetrol. in the eu, ezetrol will be indicated in
co-administration with a statin as adjunctive therapy to diet for use in
patients with primary hypercholesterolemia who are not appropriately controlled
with a statin alone. ezetrol as monotherapy will be indicated as adjunctive
therapy to diet for use in patients with primary hypercholesterolemia in whom a
statin is considered inappropriate or is not tolerated. in addition, ezetrol
as monotherapy will be indicated as adjunctive therapy to diet for use in
patients with homozygous familial sitosterolemia and co-administered with a
statin for use in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. in
september2003, msp submitted to the fda for standard review a new drug
application (nda) for vytorin, an investigational cholesterol lowering
medicine, which contains the active ingredients of both zetia and zocor, as
adjunctive to diet, for the reduction of hypercholesterolemia (elevated
cholesterol levels). in november2003, the filing was accepted by the fda for
standard review. similar applications have been filed in other countries
outside the united states.
competition  the markets in which the companys pharmaceutical business
is conducted are highly competitive and often highly regulated. global efforts
toward health care cost containment continue to exert pressure on product
pricing and access.
such competition involves an intensive search for technological
innovations and the ability to market these innovations effectively. with its
long-standing emphasis on research and development, the company is well
prepared to compete in the search for technological innovations. additional
resources to meet competition include quality control, flexibility to meet
customer specifications, an efficient distribution system and a strong
technical information service. the company is active in acquiring and
marketing products through joint ventures and licenses and has been refining
its sales and marketing efforts to further address changing industry
conditions. to enhance its product portfolio, the company continues to pursue
external alliances, from early-stage to late-stage product opportunities,
including joint ventures and targeted acquisitions. however, the introduction
of new products and processes by competitors may result in price reductions and
product replacements, even for products protected by patents. for example, the
number of compounds available to treat diseases typically increases over time
and has resulted in slowing the growth in sales of certain of the companys
products.
in addition, particularly in the area of human pharmaceutical products,
legislation enacted in all states in the u.s. allows, encourages or, in a few
instances, in the absence of specific instructions from the prescribing
physician, mandates the use of generic products (those containing the same
active chemical as an innovators product) rather than brand-name products.
governmental and other pressures toward the dispensing of generic products have
significantly reduced the sales of certain of the companys products no longer
protected by patents, such as vasotec and vaseretic (enalapril maleate in
combination with hydrochlorothiazide), the u.s. rights to which have been sold,
prinivil (lisinopril) and prinzide (lisinopril in combination with hydrochlorothiazide),
pepcid and mevacor (lovastatin), and slowed the growth of certain other
products.
distribution  the company sells its human health products primarily to
drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals, clinics, government agencies and
managed health care providers such as health maintenance organizations and
other institutions. vaccines are also sold directly to physicians. the
companys professional representatives
table of contents
communicate the effectiveness, safety
and value of the companys products to health care professionals in private
practice, group practices and managed care organizations.
in the fourth quarter of 2003, the company implemented a new distribution
program for u.s. wholesalers to moderate the fluctuations in sales caused by
wholesaler investment buying and improve efficiencies in the distribution of
company pharmaceutical products. the new program has lowered previous limits
on average monthly purchases of company pharmaceutical products by u.s.
customers. overall, implementation of the new u.s. wholesaler distribution
program had an estimated $700.0 to $750.0million unfavorable impact on
consolidated revenues with an estimated $500.0million unfavorable effect on
zocor sales.
raw materials  raw materials and supplies are normally available in
quantities adequate to meet the needs of the companys business.
government regulation and investigation  the pharmaceutical industry is
subject to global regulation by regional, country, state and local agencies.
of particular importance is the fda in the united states, which administers
requirements covering the testing, approval, safety, effectiveness,
manufacturing, labeling and marketing of prescription pharmaceuticals. in many
cases, the fda requirements have increased the amount of time and money
necessary to develop new products and bring them to market in the united
states. in 1997, the food and drug administration modernization act was passed
and was the culmination of a comprehensive legislative reform effort designed
to streamline regulatory procedures within the fda and to improve the
regulation of drugs, medical devices and food. the legislation was principally
designed to ensure the timely availability of safe and effective drugs and
biologics by expediting the premarket review process for new products. a key
provision of the legislation is the re-authorization of the prescription drug
user fee act of 1992, which permits the continued collection of user fees from
prescription drug manufacturers to augment fda resources earmarked for the
review of human drug applications. this helps provide the resources necessary
to ensure the prompt approval of safe and effective new drugs.
in the united states, the government made significant progress in
expanding health care access by enacting the medicare prescription drug,
improvement and modernization act of 2003, which was signed into law in
december2003. this statute adds prescription drug coverage to medicare
beginning in 2006 and a voluntary drug discount card for medicare beneficiaries
effective in june2004. implementation of the new benefit will support the
companys goal of improving access to medicines by expanding insurance
coverage, while preserving market-based incentives for pharmaceutical
innovation. at the same time, the benefit is designed to assure that
prescription drug costs will be controlled by competitive pressures and by
encouraging the appropriate use of medicines. the company has taken a
leadership role in contributing to the success of the new medicare-endorsed
discount cards by offering to provide its medicines free during 2004 and 2005
for low-income medicare beneficiaries who exhaust their $600 transitional
assistance allowance in medicare-endorsed drug discount cards. this action is
consistent with the companys longstanding patient assistance program, which
provides free medicines to patients in the united states who lack drug coverage
and cannot afford their medicines.
in addressing cost containment outside of medicare, the company has made a
continuing effort to demonstrate that its medicines can help save costs in
overall patient health care. in addition, pricing flexibility across the
companys product portfolio has encouraged growing use of its medicines and
mitigated the effects of increasing cost pressures.
for many years, the pharmaceutical industry has been under federal and
state oversight with the approval process for new drugs, drug safety,
advertising and promotion, drug purchasing and reimbursement programs and
formularies variously under review. the company believes that it will continue
to be able to conduct its operations, including the introduction of new drugs
to the market, in this regulatory environment. one type of federal initiative
to contain federal health care spending is the prospective or capitated
payment system, first implemented to reduce the rate of growth in medicare
reimbursement to hospitals. such a system establishes in advance a flat rate
for reimbursement for health care for those patients for whom the payer is
fiscally responsible. this type of payment system and other cost containment
systems are now widely used by public and private payers and have caused
hospitals, health maintenance organizations and other customers of the company
to be more cost-conscious in their
table of contents
treatment decisions, including decisions
regarding the medicines to be made available to their patients. the company
continues to work with private and federal employers to slow increases in
health care costs. further, the companys efforts to demonstrate that its
medicines can help save costs in other areas, and pricing flexibility across
its product portfolio, have encouraged the use of the companys medicines and
have helped offset the effects of increasing cost pressures.
also, federal and state governments have pursued methods to directly
reduce the cost of drugs and vaccines for which they pay. for example, federal
laws require the company to pay specified rebates for medicines reimbursed by
medicaid, to provide discounts for outpatient medicines purchased by certain
public health service entities and disproportionate share hospitals
(hospitals meeting certain criteria), and to provide minimum discounts of 24%
off of a defined non-federal average manufacturer price for purchases by
certain components of the federal government such as the department of veterans
affairs and the department of defense.
initiatives in some states seek rebates beyond the minimum required by
medicaid legislation, in some cases for patients beyond those who are eligible
for medicaid. under the federal vaccines for children entitlement program, the
u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) funds and purchases
recommended pediatric vaccines at a public sector price for the immunization of
medicaid-eligible, uninsured, native american and certain underinsured
children. the company was awarded cdc contracts in 2003 for the supply of
$345.7million of pediatric vaccines for this program (and a monovalent
component of certain of such vaccines).
outside the united states, the company encounters similar regulatory and
legislative issues in most of the countries where it does business. there,
too, the primary thrust of governmental inquiry and action is toward
determining drug safety and effectiveness, often with mechanisms for
controlling the prices of prescription drugs and the profits of prescription
drug companies. the eu has adopted directives concerning the classification,
labeling, advertising, wholesale distribution and approval for marketing of
medicinal products for human use. the companys policies and procedures are
already consistent with the substance of these directives; consequently, it is
believed that they will not have any material effect on the companys business.
the company is subject to the jurisdiction of various regulatory agencies
and is, therefore, subject to potential administrative actions. such actions
may include seizures of products and other civil and criminal sanctions. under
certain circumstances, the company on its own may deem it advisable to initiate
product recalls. the company believes that it should be able to compete
effectively within this environment.
in addition, certain countries within the eu, recognizing the economic
importance of the research-based pharmaceutical industry and the value of
innovative medicines to society, are working with industry representatives and
the european commission on proposals to complete the single market in
pharmaceuticals and improve the competitive climate through a variety of means
including market deregulation.
there has been an increasing amount of focus on privacy issues in
countries around the world, including the united states and the eu. in the
united states, federal and state governments have pursued legislative and
regulatory initiatives regarding patient privacy, including federal and
recently issued state privacy regulations concerning health information, which
have affected the companys operations.
patents, trademarks and licenses  patent protection is considered, in the
aggregate, to be of material importance in the companys marketing of human
health products in the united states and in most major foreign markets.
patents may cover products per se, pharmaceutical formulations, processes for
or intermediates useful in the manufacture of products or the uses of products.
protection for individual products extends for varying periods in accordance
with the date of grant and the legal life of patents in the various countries.
the protection afforded, which may also vary from country to country, depends
upon the type of patent and its scope of coverage.
patent portfolios developed for products introduced by the company
normally provide market exclusivity. basic patents are in effect for the
following major products in the united states: arcoxia, cancidas, comvax
(haemophilus b conjugate and hepatitis b [recombinant] vaccine), cosopt,
cozaar, crixivan, emend, fosamax,
table of contents
hyzaar, invanz, maxalt, pedvaxhib
(haemophilus b conjugate vaccine), primaxin, propecia, proscar, recombivax hb,
singulair, timoptic-xe (timolol maleate ophthalmic gel forming solution),
trusopt, vioxx and zocor. a basic patent is also in effect in the united
states for zetia, which was developed by the merck/schering-plough
pharmaceuticals partnership. a basic patent is also in effect for
sustiva/stocrin (efavirenz). bristol-myers squibb, under an exclusive license
from the company, sells sustiva in the united states, canada and certain
european countries. the company markets stocrin in other countries throughout
the world. the basic patent for aggrastat (tirofiban hydrochloride) in the
united states was divested with the product in 2003. the company retains basic
patents for aggrastat outside the united states.
in 2003, zocor lost its basic patent protection in canada and certain
countries in europe, including the united kingdom and germany, and the company
experienced a decline in zocor sales in those countries. in 2006, zocor will
lose its market exclusivity in the united states and the company expects a
decline in u.s. zocor sales.
the fda modernization act of 1997 (the modernization act), includes a
pediatric exclusivity provision that may provide an additional six months of
market exclusivity in the united states for indications of new or currently
marketed drugs, if certain agreed upon pediatric studies are completed by the
applicant. these exclusivity provisions were re-authorized until october1,
2007 by the best pharmaceuticals for children act passed in january2002. in
2003, the fda granted an additional six months of market exclusivity in the
united states to fosamax until february2008, and fosamax once weekly until
january2019. in addition, in 2004, the fda granted an additional six months
of market exclusivity in the united states to trusopt until october2008 and to
vioxx for six months beyond its patent termination.
while the expiration of a product patent normally results in a loss of
market exclusivity for the covered pharmaceutical product, commercial benefits
may continue to be derived from: (i)later-granted patents on processes and
intermediates related to the most economical method of manufacture of the
active ingredient of such product; (ii)patents relating to the use of such
product; (iii)patents relating to novel compositions and formulations; and
(iv)in the united states, market exclusivity that may be available under
federal law. the effect of product patent expiration on pharmaceutical
products also depends upon many other factors such as the nature of the market
and the position of the product in it, the growth of the market, the
complexities and economics of the process for manufacture of the active
ingredient of the product and the requirements of new drug provisions of the
federal food, drug and cosmetic act or similar laws and regulations in other
countries.
additions to market exclusivity are sought in the united states and other
countries through all relevant laws, including laws increasing patent life.
some of the benefits of increases in patent life have been partially offset by
a general increase in the number of, incentives for and use of generic
products. additionally, improvements in intellectual property laws are sought
in the united states and other countries through reform of patent and other
relevant laws and implementation of international treaties.
worldwide, all of the companys important products are sold under
trademarks that are considered in the aggregate to be of material importance.
trademark protection continues in some countries as long as used; in other
countries, as long as registered. registration is for fixed terms and can be
renewed indefinitely.
royalties received during 2003 on patent and know-how licenses and other
rights amounted to $86.5million. the company also paid royalties amounting to
$757.7million in 2003 under patent and know-how licenses it holds.
divestitures  on february27, 2004, the company announced that it had
signed a definitive agreement with johnson & johnson for johnson & johnson to
buy the companys 50percent equity stake in their european non-prescription
pharmaceuticals joint venture.
in 2003, the company sold its u.s. rights in aggrastat (tirofiban
hydrochloride injection) to guilford pharmaceuticals inc. (guilford),
including the basic u.s. product patents (but not process patents) for the
product.
table of contents
in 2002, the company sold its u.s. rights in vasotec, vaseretic, and
vasotec i.v. injection (enalaprilat)to biovail laboratories incorporated
(biovail), a subsidiary of biovail corporation. at the same time, the
companys canadian subsidiary, merck frosst canada & co. (merck frosst) and
biovail entered into a supply agreement under which merck frosst agreed to
supply biovail for a minimum of five years with bulk tablets of formulated
enalapril maleate and enalapril maleate in combination with hydrochlorothiazide
for distribution by biovail in the united states as vasotec and vaseretic. the
basic product patents on vasotec and vaseretic had expired in the united states
prior to these transactions.
research and development
the companys business is characterized by the introduction of new
products or new uses for existing products through a strong research and
development program. approximately 12,800 people are employed in the companys
research activities. expenditures for the companys research and development
programs were $3.2billion in 2003, $2.7billion in 2002 and $2.5billion in
2001 and are estimated to increase at a low-teen percentage growth rate over
the full-year 2003 expense in 2004. the company maintains its ongoing
commitment to research over a broad range of therapeutic areas and clinical
development in support of new products. total expenditures for the period 1994
through 2003 exceeded $20.2billion with a compound annual growth rate of 10%.
the company maintains a number of long-term exploratory and fundamental
research programs in biology and chemistry as well as research programs
directed toward product development. projects related to human health are
being carried on in various fields such as bacterial, fungal, and viral infections,
cardiovascular disease and atherosclerosis, cancer, diabetes,
obesity, neurodegenerative disease, psychiatric disease, pain and
inflammation, immunology, respiratory diseases, ophthalmology,
respiratory diseases, osteoporosis and men/women health programs, endoparasitic and ectoparasitic diseases,
companion animal diseases, and
production improvement.
in the development of human health products, industry practice and
government regulations in the united states and most foreign countries provide
for the determination of effectiveness and safety of new chemical compounds
through preclinical tests and controlled clinical evaluation. before a new
drug may be marketed in the united states, recorded data on preclinical and
clinical experience are included in the nda or the biological product license
application (pla) to the fda for the required approval. the development of certain
other products is also subject to government regulations covering safety and
efficacy in the united states and many foreign countries. there can be no
assurance that a compound that is the result of any particular program will
obtain the regulatory approvals necessary for it to be marketed.
the companys late-stage pipeline candidates include novel vaccines for
human papillomavirus (hpv) and the pain associated with shingles, and
rotateq, a vaccine for rotavirus-a highly contagious virus that is the most
common cause of severe gastroenteritis in infants and young children. the
company expects to file plas with the fda for
these three novel vaccine candidates in the second half of 2005. there are
competing claims to intellectual property in the hpv field, but the company is
confident that the claims will not delay the companys program. the company
expects to submit a pla to the fda for its proquad vaccine, a pediatric
combination vaccine for measles, mumps, rubella and chickenpox, in the second
half of 2004.
the company is also studying a dp-iv inhibitor, a glucose-lowering
mechanism, used alone and in combination for the treatment of type ii diabetes.
the company plans to enter phase iii clinical trials with this investigational
compound in the second quarter of 2004 and expects to submit an nda to the fda
in 2006.
the companys early-stage pipeline includes candidates in each of the
following areas: diabetes, obesity, alzheimers disease, respiratory disease,
coronary heart disease, rheumatoid arthritis and vaccines.
the company supplements its internal research with an aggressive licensing
and external alliance strategy focused on the entire spectrum of collaborations
from early research to late-stage compounds, as well as new technologies. in
2003, the company completed 47 significant transactions, including research
collaborations, preclinical and clinical compounds, and technology
transactions. transactions completed in 2003 include agreements
table of contents
with the
following companies: genpath, for cancer; amrad, for respiratory disease;
neurogen, for pain; and actelion, for cardiovascular disease.
on february10, 2004, the company announced that it had entered into an
agreement with h. lundbeck a/s (lundbeck) to develop and commercialize in the
united states gaboxadol, a compound licensed to lundbeck by a third party that
is currently in phase iii development for the treatment of sleep disorders.
under the terms of the agreement, lundbeck will receive an initial payment of
$70.0million and up to $200.0million in additional milestone payments. the
company and lundbeck will jointly complete the ongoing phase iii clinical
program, with the company funding the majority of the remaining development
activities. the company anticipates that it will file an nda with the fda
between late 2006 and mid-2007. following fda approval, the companies plan to
co-promote gaboxadol in the united states. lundbeck will receive a share of
gaboxadol sales in the united states.
on february23, 2004, the company announced that it had agreed to acquire
aton pharma, inc. (aton), a privately held biotechnology company focusing on
the development of novel treatments for cancer and other serious diseases.
consideration for the acquisition will consist of upfront and contingent
payments based upon the regulatory filing, and approval and sales of products.
atons clinical pipeline of histone deacetylase inhibitors represents a class
of anti-tumor agents with potential for efficacy based on a novel mechanism of
action. atons lead product candidate, known as suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid, has been extensively studied in phase i clinical trials and is currently
in phase ii clinical trials for the treatment of cutaneous t-cell lymphoma.
the company expects to complete the acquisition of aton in the first quarter of
2004.
the chart below reflects the companys research pipeline as of march1,
2004. candidates shown in phase iii include specific products. candidates
shown in phase i and ii include the most advanced compound with a specific
mechanism in a given therapeutic area. back-up compounds, regardless of their
phase of development, additional indications in the same therapeutic areas and
additional line extensions or formulations for in-line products are not shown.
preclinical areas shown are those where the company has initiated good
laboratory practices (glp) studies in compounds with mechanisms distinct from
those in phase i and ii. the companys programs are generally designed to
focus on the development of novel medicines to address large, unmet medical
needs.
table of contents
preclinical
phase i
phase ii
phase iii
diabetes
diabetes
c-3347
obesity
vaccines
atherosclerosis
obesity
c-2735
pediatric combination
c-2624
alzheimers disease
vaccine
parkinsons disease
c-5093
c-9136
proquad
atherosclerosis
urinary incontinence
rotavirus
pain
c-8834
c-3048
rotateq
alzheimers disease
respiratory disease
shingles
anxiety
c-7617
c-3885
zoster vaccine
c-9138
post-operative nausea
human papillomavirus
osteoporosis
multiple sclerosis
and vomiting
hpv vaccine
c-6448
c-9280
cancer
pain
vaccines
diabetes
c-1246
pediatric combination
mk-0431 (2q04)
rheumatoid arthritis
psychiatric disease
c-9054
sleep disorders
glaucoma
respiratory disease
mk-0928 (gaboxadol)
c-3193
antibacterial
rheumatoid arthritis
c-4462
vaccines
c-5997
aids
c-2507
vaccines
hiv vaccine
2003 submissions
cardiovascular
arthritis / analgesia
vytorin
arcoxia
(ezetimibe / simvastatin)
(submitted 4q03)
(submitted 3q03)
in february2003, the company announced that it had discontinued phase ii
clinical trials for its lead gaba-a a2/a3 agonist compound for the treatment of
generalized anxiety. the company is continuing its research in the field of
anxiety through the ongoing study of other gaba agonist molecules. the timing
for the development of these other molecules is not certain.
in april2003, the company announced that it was discontinuing development
of its lead phosphodiesterase-4 (pde-4) inhibitor compound in phase ii clinical
trials for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(copd). the company is continuing its research in the field of asthma and copd
through the ongoing study of other pde-4 inhibitor molecules. the timing for
the development of these other molecules is not certain.
in august2003, the company announced it had put the phase i clinical
trials for its lead hiv integrase inhibitor compound on hold. the company is
also continuing its research in the field of integrase inhibitors through the
ongoing study of other integrase inhibitors. the timing for the development of
these other molecules is not certain.
in november2003, the company announced that it was discontinuing its
phase iii clinical development program for its substance p antagonist
investigational product, mk-0869, for the treatment of depression. the phase
iii clinical program was halted because the compound failed to demonstrate
efficacy for the treatment of depression. the company remains committed to its
neuroscience research programs.
also in november2003, the company announced that it was discontinuing its
phase iii clinical development program for its investigational product,
mk-0767, for the treatment of diabetes. the company was
table of contents
developing mk-0767 in collaboration with kyorin pharmaceutical co., ltd. the
clinical program was halted because recent findings in the companys long-term
safety assessment program identified a rare form of malignant tumors in mice.
the clinical relevance of these findings in humans is unknown. the company is
continuing its commitment to diabetes research and is currently studying a
dp-iv inhibitor for diabetes. the company plans to enter phase iii clinical
trials with this investigational compound in the second quarter of 2004.
on february21, 2003, banyu announced a change of timing with respect to
the filing in japan of an nda for rofecoxib (vioxx). in its press release,
banyu stated that after reviewing clinical data accumulated to date, and at the
recommendation of the organization of pharmaceutical safety and research, banyu
has agreed to conduct additional studies in japanese patients to further
support the nda filing. as a result of this decision, the nda filing which was
originally planned to take place by the end of march2003 has been delayed.
banyu further stated that it will conduct the additional studies as appropriate
in support of filing the product.
on december30, 2003, the company submitted an nda to the fda for arcoxia.
the companys nda seeks indications for arcoxia for the treatment of
osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, chronic low back pain, acute pain,
dysmenorrhea, acute gouty arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis (a painful
condition of the spine). as of january30, 2004, arcoxia has been launched in
41 countries worldwide in europe, latin america and the asia-pacific region.
the fda has informed the company that the fda considers january13, 2004 the
effective submission date for the nda because fiscal year 2003 fees for a
different medicine were not received by december31, 2003. the fda has
informed the company that unless the company is otherwise notified, the nda
will be accepted for filing on march12, 2004.
in november2003, the european unions committee for proprietary medicinal
products concluded its comprehensive review of the cox-2 selective inhibitor
class, which includes vioxx and arcoxia, and confirmed that the medicines have
a positive balance of benefits and risks. the french transparency commission,
whose responsibilities include recommending drug reimbursement levels in
france, after review has retained its assessment that vioxx provides a modest
level of improvement relative to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in terms
of safety.
all product or service marks appearing in type form different from that of
the surrounding text are trademarks or service marks owned by or licensed to
merck & co., inc., its subsidiaries or affiliates (including zetia, a trademark
owned by an entity of the merck/schering-plough pharmaceuticals partnership),
except as noted. cozaar and hyzaar are registered trademarks of e.i. du pont
de nemours and company, wilmington, de and prilosec and nexium are trademarks
of the astrazeneca group. the u.s. trademarks for vasotec and vaseretic are
owned by biovail laboratories incorporated. the u.s. trademark for aggrastat is
owned by guilford pharmaceuticals inc.
employees
at the end of 2003, the company had 63,200 employees worldwide, with
33,200 employed in the united states, including puerto rico. approximately 25%
of worldwide employees of the company are represented by various collective
bargaining groups.
in 2003, the company accelerated its efforts to fundamentally lower its
cost structure through company-wide initiatives. in october2003, the company
announced the reduction of 4,400 positions, which is expected to be completed
in 2004. when complete, the cost reductions are expected to generate annual
savings of payroll and benefits costs of $250.0 to $300.0million starting in 2005.
environmental matters
the company believes that it is in compliance in all material respects
with applicable environmental laws and regulations. in 2003, the company
incurred capital expenditures of approximately $41.8million for environmental
protection facilities. the company is also remediating environmental
contamination resulting from past industrial activity at certain of its sites.
expenditures for remediation and environmental liabilities were $31.3
table of contents
million
in 2003,
and are estimated at $87.0million for the years 2004 through 2008. these
amounts do not consider potential recoveries from insurers or other parties.
the company has taken an active role in identifying and providing for these
costs, and in managements opinion, the liabilities for all environmental
matters which are probable and reasonably estimable have been accrued.
although it is not possible to predict with certainty the outcome of these
environmental matters, or the ultimate costs of remediation, management does
not believe that any reasonably possible expenditures that may be incurred in
excess of those provided should result in a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, results of operations, liquidity or capital
resources.
cautionary factors that may affect future results
(cautionary statements under the private securities litigation reform act of
1995)
this report and other written reports and oral statements made from time
to time by the company may contain so-called forward-looking statements, all
of which are subject to risks and uncertainties. one can identify these
forward-looking statements by their use of words such as expects, plans,
will, estimates, forecasts, projects and other words of similar
meaning. one can also identify them by the fact that they do not relate
strictly to historical or current facts. these statements are likely to
address the companys growth strategy, financial results, product approvals and
development programs. one must carefully consider any such statement and
should understand that many factors could cause actual results to differ
materially from the companys forward-looking statements. these factors
include inaccurate assumptions and a broad variety of other risks and
uncertainties, including some that are known and some that are not. no
forward-looking statement can be guaranteed and actual future results may vary
materially. although it is not possible to predict or identify all such
factors, they may include the following:
generic competition as product patents for several products have recently expired in the united states and other countries,
including product patents for mevacor (u.s. - 2001),
prinivil and prinzide (u.s. - 2001) and vaseretic (u.s.
- 2001). in
2003, zocor lost its basic patent protection in canada and certain countries in europe, including the united kingdom and
germany, and the company experienced a decline in zocor sales in those countries. in 2006, zocor will lose its market
exclusivity in the united states and the company expects a decline in
u.s. zocor sales. in addition, the u.s. patent covering
omeprazole, the active ingredient in prilosec, which the company supplies exclusively to astrazeneca lp, expired in 2001,
and a trial court held in october2002 that one generic companys omeprazole product does not infringe the companys
formulation patents with respect to prilosec. under an agreement with astrazeneca, the company receives supply payments at
predetermined rates on the u.s. sales of certain products by astrazeneca, most notably prilosec and nexium.
increased brand competition in therapeutic areas important to the companys long-term business performance.
the difficulties and uncertainties inherent in new product development. the outcome of the lengthy and complex process of
new product development is inherently uncertain. a candidate can fail at any stage of the process and one or more
late-stage product candidates could fail to receive regulatory approval. new product candidates may appear promising in
development but fail to reach the market because of efficacy or safety concerns, the inability to obtain necessary
regulatory approvals, the difficulty or excessive cost to manufacture and/or the infringement of patents or intellectual
property rights of others. furthermore, the sales of new products may prove to be disappointing and fail to reach
anticipated levels.
pricing pressures, both in the united states and abroad, including rules and practices of managed care groups, judicial
decisions and governmental laws and regulations related to medicare, medicaid and health care reform, pharmaceutical
reimbursement and pricing in general.
as the company previously announced in the fourth quarter of 2003, it has taken actions to lower its cost structure
including the elimination of positions. those actions will continue in 2004.
changes in government laws and regulations and the enforcement thereof affecting the companys business.
efficacy or safety concerns with respect to marketed products, whether or not scientifically justified, leading to product
recalls, withdrawals or declining sales.
table of contents
legal factors, including product liability claims, antitrust litigation and governmental investigations, environmental
concerns and patent disputes with branded and generic competitors, any of which could preclude commercialization of
products or negatively affect the profitability of existing products.
lost market opportunity resulting from delays and uncertainties in the approval process of the fda and foreign regulatory
authorities.
increased focus on privacy issues in countries around the world, including the united states and the eu. in the united
states, federal and state governments have pursued legislative and regulatory initiatives regarding patient privacy,
including federal and recently issued state privacy regulations concerning health information, which have affected the
companys operations.
changes in tax laws including changes related to the taxation of foreign earnings, as well as the impact of legislation
capping and ultimately repealing section936 of the internal revenue code (relating to earnings from the companys puerto
rican operations).
changes in accounting pronouncements promulgated by standard-setting or regulatory bodies, including the financial
accounting standards board and the securities and exchange commission, that are adverse to the company.
economic factors over which the company has no control, including changes in inflation, interest rates and foreign currency
exchange rates.
this list should not be considered an exhaustive statement of all
potential risks and uncertainties.
geographic area and segment information
the companys operations are principally managed on a products basis with
one reportable segment: the merck pharmaceutical segment which includes
products marketed either directly or through joint ventures. merck
pharmaceutical products consist of therapeutic and preventive agents, sold by
prescription, for the treatment and prevention of human disorders.
the companys operations outside the united states are conducted primarily
through subsidiaries. sales worldwide by subsidiaries outside the united
states were 41% of sales in 2003, and 39% and 37% in 2002 and 2001,
respectively.
the companys worldwide business is subject to risks of currency
fluctuations, governmental actions and other governmental proceedings abroad.
the company does not regard these risks as a deterrent to further expansion of
its operations abroad. however, the company closely reviews its methods of
operations and adopts strategies responsive to changing economic and political
conditions.
in recent years, the company has been expanding its operations in
countries located in latin america, the middle east, africa, eastern europe and
asia pacific where changes in government policies and economic conditions are
making it possible for the company to earn fair returns. business in these
developing areas, while sometimes less stable, offers important opportunities
for growth over time.
financial information about geographic areas and operating segments of the
companys business is incorporated by reference to pages48 (beginning with the
caption segment reporting) and49 of the companys 2003 annual report to
stockholders.
available information
the companys internet website address is www.merck.com. the company will
make available, free of charge at the investor information portion of its
website, its annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q,
current reports on form 8-k, and all amendments to those reports filed or
furnished pursuant to section
table of contents
13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, as soon
as reasonably practicable after such reports are electronically filed with, or
furnished to, the securities and exchange commission.
the
company's corporate governance guidelines and the charters of the
board of directors' six standing committees are available on the
company's website at www.merck.com/about/corporategovernance
and all such information is available in print to any stockholder who
requests it from the company.
item2. properties.
the companys corporate headquarters is located in whitehouse station, new
jersey. the companys pharmaceutical business is conducted through divisional
headquarters located in upper gwynedd and west point, pennsylvania. principal
research facilities for human health products are located in rahway, new jersey
and west point. the company also has production facilities for human health
products at nine locations in the united states and puerto rico. branch
warehouses provide services throughout the country. outside the united states,
through subsidiaries, the company owns or has an interest in manufacturing
plants or other properties in australia, canada, japan, singapore,
south africa,
and other countries in western europe, central and south america, and asia.
capital expenditures for 2003 were $1,915.9million compared with $2,128.1
million for 2002. in the united states, these amounted to $1,307.8million for
2003 and $1,565.2million for 2002. abroad, such expenditures amounted to
$608.1million for 2003 and $562.9million for 2002.
the company and its subsidiaries own their principal facilities and
manufacturing plants under titles which they consider to be satisfactory. the
company considers that its properties are in good operating condition and that
its machinery and equipment have been well maintained. plants for the
manufacture of products are suitable for their intended purposes and have
capacities and projected capacities adequate for current and projected needs
for existing company products. some capacity of the plants is being converted,
with any needed modification, to the requirements of newly introduced and
future products.
item3. legal proceedings.
the company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings of a
nature considered normal to its business, including product liability,
intellectual property, and commercial litigation, as well as additional matters
such as antitrust actions.
beginning in 1993, the company was named in a number of antitrust suits,
certain of which were certified as class actions, instituted by most of the
nations retail pharmacies and consumers in several states, alleging antitrust
violations. in 1994, these actions, except for those pending in state courts,
were consolidated for pre-trial purposes in the federal court in chicago,
illinois. in 1996, the company and several other defendants settled the
federal class action, which represented the single largest group of claims.
since that time, the company has settled substantially all of the remaining
cases on satisfactory terms. the company has not engaged in any conspiracy and
no admission of wrongdoing was made nor was included in any settlement
agreements. while it is not feasible to predict the final outcome of the few
remaining cases, in the opinion of the company, these proceedings should not
ultimately result in any liability which would have a material adverse effect
on the companys financial position, results of operations or liquidity.
as previously disclosed, the company has been advised by the u.s.
department of justice that it is investigating marketing and selling activities
of the company and other pharmaceutical manufacturers. in connection with the
investigation, as previously disclosed, the government served a subpoena on the
company for the production of documents related to company marketing and sales
activities. the subpoena seeks substantially the same information as the
government has previously sought. the company will be working with the
government to respond appropriately to this subpoena and other informational
requests. the company has also received a civil investigative demand (cid)
from the attorney general of texas. the cid seeks the production of documents
and other information regarding the companys marketing and selling activities
relating to texas. the company is working with the texas attorney generals
office to respond appropriately to the cid.
as previously disclosed, the company was joined in ongoing litigation
alleging manipulation by pharmaceutical manufacturers of average wholesale
prices (awp), which are sometimes used in calculations that determine public
and private sector reimbursement levels. in 2002, the judicial panel on
multi-district litigation
table of contents
ordered the transfer and consolidation of all pending federal awp cases to
federal court in boston, massachusetts. plaintiffs filed one consolidated
class action complaint, which aggregated the claims previously filed in various
federal district court actions and also expanded the number of manufacturers to
include some which, like the company, had not been defendants in any prior
pending case. in may2003, the court granted the companys motion to dismiss
the consolidated class action and dismissed the company from the class action
case. subsequent to the companys dismissal, the plaintiffs filed an amended
consolidated class action complaint, which did not name the company as a
defendant. the company and thirty other pharmaceutical manufacturers remain
defendants in three similar complaints pending in federal court in
massachusetts filed by the new york counties of suffolk, rockland and
westchester. the company believes that these lawsuits are without merit and is
vigorously defending against them.
as previously disclosed, in january2003, the u.s. department of justice
notified the federal court in new orleans, louisiana that it was not going to
intervene in a pending federal false claims act case that was filed under seal
in december1999 against the company. the court issued an order unsealing the
complaint, which was filed by a physician in louisiana, and ordered that the
complaint be served. the complaint alleges that the companys discounting of
pepcid in certain louisiana hospitals led to increases in costs to medicaid.
the company believes that the complaint is without merit and will vigorously
defend against it.
federal and state lawsuits involving numerous individual claims, as well
as some putative class actions, have been filed against the company with
respect to vioxx. some of the lawsuits also name as a defendant pfizer inc.,
which markets a competing product. certain of the lawsuits include allegations
regarding gastrointestinal bleeding, cardiovascular events and kidney damage.
the lawsuits have been filed in federal courts as well as in a number of state
courts. while cases in other jurisdictions are proceeding separately, the
actions filed in the state courts of california and new jersey have been
transferred to a single judge in each state for coordinated proceedings. the
company anticipates that one or more of the lawsuits in various jurisdictions
may go to trial in the first half of 2004. litigation is inherently subject to
uncertainties and no assurance can be given on the outcome of any given trial.
however, the company believes that these lawsuits are without merit and will
vigorously defend against them.
a number of purported class action lawsuits have been filed by several
individual shareholders in the united states district court for the eastern
district of louisiana naming as defendants the company and several current or
former officers of the company, and alleging that the defendants made false and
misleading statements regarding the companys drug vioxx in violation of the
federal securities laws. the plaintiffs request certification of a class of
purchasers of the companys common stock between may22, 1999 and october22,
2003, and seek unspecified compensatory damages and the costs of suit,
including attorney fees. the company believes that these lawsuits are without
merit and will vigorously defend against them.
the company is a party in claims brought under the consumer protection act
of 1987 in the united kingdom, which allege that certain children suffer from a
variety of conditions as a result of being vaccinated with various bivalent
vaccines for measles and rubella and/or trivalent vaccines for measles, mumps
and rubella, including the companys m-m-r ii. other pharmaceutical companies
have also been sued. the claimants allege various adverse consequences,
including autism, with or without inflammatory bowel disease, epilepsy,
diabetes, encephalitis, encephalopathy and chronic fatigue syndrome. in
connection with those claims, eight lead cases had been selected for a trial
which was scheduled to commence in april2004: two against the company, and
six against other pharmaceutical companies. the trial of the eight cases is
initially limited to issues of causation and defect on the conditions of
autistic spectrum disorders, with or without inflammatory bowel disease. in
early september2003, the legal services commission announced its decision to
withdraw public funding of the litigation brought by the claimants. this
decision was confirmed on appeal by the funding review committee on september
30, 2003. the april2004 trial date has been vacated and the claims stayed
pending the outcome of a february2004 hearing on the judicial review of the
funding withdrawal decision. the company believes that these lawsuits are
without merit and will vigorously defend against them.
the company is also a party to individual and class action product
liability lawsuits and claims in the united
states involving pediatric vaccines (i.e., hepatitis b vaccine and
haemophilus influenza type b vaccine) that
table of contents
contained thimerosal, a preservative used in vaccines. other defendants
include vaccine manufacturers who produced pediatric vaccines containing
thimerosal as well as manufacturers of thimerosal. in these actions, the
plaintiffs allege, among other things, that they have suffered neurological and
other injuries as a result of having thimerosal introduced into their
developing bodies. the company has been successful in having many of these
cases either dismissed or stayed on the ground that the national vaccine injury
compensation program (nvicp) prohibits any person from filing or maintaining
a civil action seeking damages against a vaccine manufacturer for
vaccine-related injuries unless a petition is first filed in the united states
court of federal claims. a number of similar cases (m-m-r ii alone and/or
thimerosal-containing vaccines) have been filed in the united states court of
federal claims under the nvicp for a determination first on general causation
issues. the company believes that these lawsuits and claims are without merit
and will vigorously defend against them in the proceedings in which it is a
party.
from time to time, generic manufacturers of pharmaceutical products file
abbreviated new drug applications (andas) with the fda seeking to market
generic forms of company products prior to the expiration of relevant patents
owned by the company. generic pharmaceutical manufacturers have submitted
andas to the fda seeking to market in the united states a generic form of
fosamax, prilosec and vioxx prior to the expiration of the companys (and
astrazenecas in the case of prilosec) patents concerning these products. the
generic companies andas generally include allegations of non-infringement,
invalidity and unenforceability of the patents. generic manufacturers have
received fda approval to market a generic form of prilosec. the company has
filed patent infringement suits in federal court against companies filing andas
for generic alendronate and rofecoxib, and astrazeneca and the company have
filed patent infringement suits in federal court against companies filing andas
for generic omeprazole. similar patent challenges exist in certain foreign
jurisdictions. the company intends to vigorously defend its patents, which it
believes are valid, against infringement by generic companies attempting to
market products prior to the expiration dates of such patents. as with any
litigation, there can be no assurance of the outcomes, which, if adverse, could
result in significantly shortened periods of exclusivity for these products.
a trial in the united states with respect to the alendronate daily product
concluded in november 2001. in november 2002, a decision was issued by the
u.s. district court in delaware finding the companys patent valid and
infringed. on october30, 2003, the u.s. court of appeals for the federal
circuit affirmed the validity and infringement of the companys basic u.s.
patent covering the use of alendronate in any form. a request for rehearing
was denied. a trial in the united states involving the alendronate weekly
product was held in march 2003. on august28, 2003, the u.s. district court in
delaware, upheld the validity of the companys u.s. patent covering the weekly
administration of alendronate. as a result of the courts decision, the patent
is valid and infringed by teva pharmaceuticals usa, inc.s (teva) abbreviated
new drug application filing. the courts decision has been appealed by teva.
in january 2003, the high court of justice for england and wales held that
patents of the company protecting the alendronate daily and weekly products
were invalid in the united kingdom. on november6, 2003, the court of appeals
of england and wales affirmed the ruling by the high court of justice for
england and wales. protection against generic companies referencing the
companys data for weekly alendronate in the united kingdom may be available
under the provisions of the law which grant a period of exclusivity to the
original submitter of such data. a generic company has sought judicial review
of a decision by the licensing authority in the united kingdom that it cannot
rely upon the companys weekly alendronate data to seek approval of a generic
alendronate 70 mg product until ten years after approval of the companys
weekly alendronate product (which was granted in 2000). the company has been
served as an interested party and intends to take appropriate action to protect
its rights.
in the case of omeprazole, the trial court in the united states rendered
an opinion in october 2002 upholding the validity of the companys and
astrazenecas patents covering the stabilized formulation of omeprazole and
ruling that one defendants omeprazole product did not infringe those patents.
the other three defendants products were found to infringe the formulation
patents. in december 2003, the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit
affirmed the decision of the trial court. with respect to certain other
generic manufacturers omeprazole products, no trial date has yet been set.
table of contents
in the case of rofecoxib, an anda has been filed including allegations of
non-infringement, invalidity and unenforceability of the companys rofecoxib
patents. as previously disclosed, the company filed a patent infringement
lawsuit in the district court of delaware in august 2003. trial has been set
for october 2005.
as previously disclosed, the company has been named as a defendant in a
number of purported class action lawsuits, which have been consolidated before
a single judge and in a shareholder derivative action, both of which involve
claims related to the companys revenue recognition practice for retail
copayments paid by individuals to whom medco health provides pharmaceutical
benefits. the class action lawsuit was amended to add claims against the
company and medco health and certain of their officers and directors relating
to rebates received by medco health and medco healths independent status. the
shareholder derivative action was amended to add arthur andersen llp as a
defendant and to add certain new allegations, which relate to claims that
certain individual defendants breached their fiduciary duty by failing to
prevent the conduct at issue in the previously disclosed gruer cases, discussed
below, the antitrust claims pending in the northern district of illinois, and
the qui tam actions in which the u.s. attorneys office for the eastern
district of pennsylvania has intervened against medco health. the complaint
seeks monetary damages from those company directors who are defendants in the
lawsuit in an unspecified amount as well as injunctive and other relief. as
part of the spin-off of medco health, medco health assumed responsibility for a
portion of potential damages or settlement payments paid, if any, in connection
with this litigation. the company believes that these lawsuits are without
merit and will vigorously defend against them.
prior to the spin-off of medco health, the company and medco health agreed
to settle, on a class action basis, a series of lawsuits asserting violations
of the employee retirement income security act (erisa). the company, medco
health and certain plaintiffs counsel filed the settlement agreement with the
federal district court in new york, where cases commenced by a number of
plaintiffs, including participants in a number of pharmaceutical benefit plans
for which medco health is the pharmacy benefit manager, as well as trustees of
such plans, have been consolidated. the proposed class settlement has been
agreed to by plaintiffs in five of the cases (the gruer cases) filed against
medco health and the company. under the proposed settlement, the company and
medco health have agreed to pay a total of $42.5million, and medco health has
agreed to modify certain business practices or to continue certain specified
business practices for a period of five years. the financial compensation is
intended to benefit members of the settlement class, which includes erisa plans
for which medco health administered a pharmacy benefit at any time since
december17, 1994. in 2003, the court preliminarily approved the settlement
and has held a hearing to hear objections to the fairness of the proposed
settlement from class member representatives. currently, certain class member
plans have indicated that they will not participate in the settlement. the
court has not yet approved the settlement or determined the number of class
member plans that have properly elected not to participate in the settlement,
if approved. the settlement becomes final only if and when the district court
grants final approval and all appeals have been resolved. medco health and the
company agreed to the proposed settlement in order to avoid the significant
cost and distraction of protracted litigation.
the gruer cases, which are similar to claims pending against other
pharmaceutical benefit managers, alleged that medco health was an erisa
fiduciary and that the company was a party-in-interest within the meaning
of erisa. the plaintiffs asserted that the company and medco health had
breached duties and engaged in prohibited transactions as a result of filling
prescriptions with the companys drugs to increase the companys market share,
among other things. the plaintiffs demanded that medco health and the company
disgorge any unlawfully obtained profits and other relief.
in addition, among the cases consolidated in new york, one plaintiff has
also alleged, based on essentially the same factual allegations as the gruer
cases, that medco health and the company have violated federal and state
racketeering laws. a different plaintiff, seeking to represent california
citizens, has alleged that medco health and the company have violated
california unfair competition law. an attorney for one of the plaintiffs has
indicated that it may assert claims against medco health, the company and
others to allege violations of the sherman act, the clayton act and various
state antitrust laws based on alleged conspiracies to suppress price
competition and unlawful combinations allegedly resulting in higher
pharmaceutical prices.
table of contents
after the spin-off of medco health, medco health assumed substantially all
of the liability exposure for the matters discussed in the foregoing three
paragraphs. the company believes that these cases, which are being defended by
medco health, are without merit.
in december 2003, the virginia department of environmental quality
(vadeq) issued a notice of violation to the companys elkton, virginia
facility for air permit limit exceedances reported by the facility as a result
of performance testing of a process train. the company is currently in
discussions with vadeq and believes that its discussions will result in capital
improvements together with monetary sanctions which will be immaterial but will
exceed $100,000.
the company is a party to a number of proceedings brought under the
comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability act, commonly
known as superfund and other federal and state equivalents. these proceedings
seek to require the operators of hazardous waste disposal facilities,
transporters of waste to the sites and generators of hazardous waste disposed
of at the sites to clean up the sites or, to reimburse the government for
cleanup costs. the company has been made a party to these proceedings as an
alleged generator of waste disposed of at the sites. in each case, the
government alleges that the defendants are jointly and severally liable for the
cleanup costs. although joint and several liability is alleged, these
proceedings are frequently resolved so that the allocation of cleanup costs
among the parties more nearly reflects the relative contributions of the
parties to the site situation. the companys potential liability varies
greatly from site to site. for some sites the potential liability is de
minimis and for others the costs of cleanup have not yet been determined.
while it is not feasible to predict the outcome of many of these proceedings
brought by federal or state agencies or private litigants, in the opinion of
the company, such proceedings should not ultimately result in any liability
which would have a material adverse effect on the financial position, results
of operations, liquidity or capital resources of the company. the company has
taken an active role in identifying and providing for these costs and such
amounts do not include any reduction for anticipated recoveries of cleanup
costs from insurers, former site owners or operators or other recalcitrant
potentially responsible parties.
there are various other legal proceedings, principally product liability
and intellectual property suits involving the company, which are pending.
while it is not feasible to predict the outcome of these proceedings or the
proceedings discussed above, in the opinion of the company, all such
proceedings are either adequately covered by insurance or, if not so covered,
should not ultimately result in any liability that would have a material
adverse effect on the financial position, liquidity or results of operations of
the company. in addition, from time to time, federal or state regulators seek
information about practices in the pharmaceutical industry. while it is not
feasible to predict the outcome of any requests for information, the company
does not expect such inquiries to have a material adverse effect on the
financial position, liquidity or results of operations of the company.
item4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders.
not applicable.
table of contents
executive officers of the registrant (as of march9, 2004)
raymond v. gilmartin  age 63
june, 1994  chairman of the board (since november, 1994), president
and chief executive officer
david w. anstice  age 55
january, 2003  president, human health    responsible for the companys
prescription drug business in japan, latin america, canada, australia,
new zealand and the companys joint venture relationship with
schering-plough
march, 2001  president, the americas and u.s. human health  responsible
for one of the two prescription drug divisions comprising u.s. human
health, as well as the companys prescription drug business in canada
and latin america, and the companys joint venture relationship with
schering-plough
january, 1997  president, human health-the americas  responsible for the
companys human health business in the united states, canada and latin
america
marcia j. avedon  age 42
january, 2003  senior vice president, human resources
september, 2002  vice president, talent management and organization
effectiveness
prior to september, 2002, dr.avedon held several senior human
resources positions (1995 to 2002) at honeywell international
(diversified manufacturing and technology company)
richard t. clark  age 58
june, 2003  president, merck manufacturing division  responsible for
the companys manufacturing, information services and operational
excellence organizations worldwide
january, 2003  chairman, president and chief executive officer, medco
health solutions, inc. (medco health), formerly a wholly-owned
subsidiary of the company
january, 2000  president, medco health
june, 1997  executive vice president/chief operating officer, medco
health
celia a. colbert  age 47
january, 1997  vice president, secretary (since september, 1993) and
assistant general counsel (since november, 1993)
caroline dorsa  age 44
august, 2002  vice president and treasurer  responsible for the companys
treasury and tax functions, and for providing financial support for
the merck manufacturing and merck research laboratories divisions as
well as human resources
september, 1999  vice president and treasurer  responsible for the
companys treasury and tax functions and for providing financial
support for the asia pacific division
february,
1999  vice president and treasurer (since january,
1994)responsible for the companys treasury and tax functions
table of contents
kenneth c. frazier  age 49
december, 1999  senior vice president and general counsel  responsible
for legal and public affairs functions and the merck company
foundation (a not-for-profit charitable organization affiliated with
the company)
january, 1999  vice president and deputy general counsel
richard c. henriques jr.  age 48
august, 2002  vice president, controller  responsible for the corporate
controllers group and providing financial support for the human
health operations in the united states, canada, latin america, europe,
the middle east, africa, japan, and australia/new zealand and the
merck vaccine division (mvd)
november, 2000  vice president, controller  responsible for the corporate
controllers group and providing financial support for u.s. human
health, canada and latin america (the americas) and mvd
february,
1999  vice president, controller (since january, 1997)  responsible for the corporate
controllers group and providing financial support for the americas
peter s. kim  age 45
january, 2003  president, merck research laboratories (mrl)
february, 2001  executive vice president, research and development, mrl
prior to february, 2001, dr.kim served as member of the whitehead
institute (1985  2001), professor of biology at the massachusetts
institute of technology (1988  2001), and investigator of the howard
hughes medical institute (1990  2001)
judy c. lewent  age 55
january, 2003  executive vice president, chief financial officer and
president, human health asia  responsible for financial and corporate
development functions, internal auditing, corporate licensing, the
companys prescription drug business in asia north and asia south, the
companys joint venture relationships, and merck capital ventures,
llc, a subsidiary of the company
february,
2001  executive vice president and chief financial officer
responsible for financial and corporate development functions,
internal auditing, corporate licensing, the companys joint venture
relationships, and merck capital ventures, llc
november,
2000  senior vice president and chief financial officer
responsible for financial and corporate development functions,
internal auditing, corporate licensing, the companys joint venture
relationships, and merck capital ventures, llc
january, 1997  senior vice president (since january, 1993) and chief
financial officer (since april, 1990)   responsible for financial and
corporate development functions, internal auditing and the companys
joint venture relationships
adel mahmoud  age 62
may, 1999  president, merck vaccines
november, 1998  executive vice president, merck vaccines
table of contents
margaret g. mcglynn  age 44
january, 2003  president, u.s. human health  responsible for one of the
two prescription drug divisions (hospital and specialty product
franchises) comprising u.s. human health (ushh), and the managed care
group of ushh
august, 2001  executive vice president, customer marketing and sales, ushh
november, 1998  senior vice president, worldwide human health marketing
bradley t. sheares  age 47
january, 2003  president, u.s. human health  responsible for one of the
two prescription drug divisions (primary care product franchises)
comprising u.s. human health (ushh)
march, 2001  president, u.s. human health  responsible for one of the two
prescription drug divisions (hospital and specialty product
franchises) comprising ushh
july, 1998  vice president, hospital marketing and sales, ushh
joan e. wainwright  age 43
january, 2001  vice president, public affairs
june, 2000  vice president, corporate communications, public affairs
prior to june, 2000, ms.wainwright was deputy commissioner for
communications at the u.s. social security administration (1994
2000)
per wold-olsen  age 56
january,
1997  president, human health-europe, middle east & africa
responsible for the companys prescription drug business in europe,
the middle east and africa and worldwide human health marketing
all officers listed above serve at the pleasure of the board of
directors.
none of these officers was elected pursuant to any arrangement or
understanding between the officer and the board. there are no family
relationships among the officers listed above.
table of contents
part ii
item5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities.
the required information on market information and dividends is
incorporated by reference to page 29 of the companys 2003 annual report to
stockholders and the required information on the number of holders of the
companys common stock is incorporated by reference to page 52 of the companys
2003 annual report to stockholders.
item6. selected financial data.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to the
data for the last five fiscal years of the company included under results for
year and year-end position in the selected financial data table on page 52 of
the companys 2003 annual report to stockholders.
item7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to
pages 16 through 29 of the companys 2003 annual report to stockholders.
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to
pages 24 (beginning with the caption analysis of liquidity and capital
resources) to 26 of the companys 2003 annual report to stockholders.
item8. financial statements and supplementary data.
(a) financial statements
the consolidated balance sheet of merck & co., inc. and subsidiaries as of
december31, 2003 and 2002, and the related consolidated statements of income,
of retained earnings, of comprehensive income and of cash flows for each of the
three years in the period ended december31, 2003, and the report dated
february20, 2004 of pricewaterhousecoopers llp, independent auditors, are
incorporated by reference to pages 30 through 49 and page 50, respectively, of
the companys 2003 annual report to stockholders.
(b) supplementary data
selected quarterly financial data for 2003 and 2002 are incorporated by
reference to the data contained in the condensed interim financial data table
on page 29 of the companys 2003 annual report to stockholders.
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure.
not
applicable.
item9a. controls and procedures.
management of the company, with the participation of its chief executive
officer and chief financial officer, evaluated the effectiveness of the
companys disclosure controls and procedures. based on their evaluation, as of
the end of the period covered by this form10-k, the companys chief executive
officer and chief financial officer have concluded that the companys
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)
under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended) are effective.
there have been no significant changes in internal control over financial
reporting, for the period covered by this report, that have materially affected
or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys internal control
over financial reporting.
table of contents
part iii
item10. directors and executive officers of the registrant.
the required information on directors and nominees is incorporated by
reference to pages 8 through 11 of the companys proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held april27, 2004. information on executive
officers is set forth in part i of this document on pages 20 through 22.
the required information on the audit committee financial expert is
incorporated by reference to page 13 (under the heading financial expert on
audit committee) of the companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april27, 2004.
the required information on the identification of the audit committee is
incorporated by reference to pages 12 (under the caption board committees) to
13 of the companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to
be held april27, 2004.
the required information on compliance with section16(a) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 is incorporated by reference to page 41 (under
the caption section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance) of the
companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held
april27, 2004.
the
company has adopted a code of conduct  our values and standards
applicable to all employees, including the principal executive officer,
principal financial officer, and principal accounting officer. the code of
conduct is available on the companys website at
www.merck.com/about/corporategovernance and in print to any
stockholder who requests it. the company intends to post on this
website any amendments to, or waivers from, its code of conduct.
item11. executive compensation.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to
pages 16 (under the caption compensation of directors) to 17, 22 (under the
caption compensation of the chief executive officer), pages 23 to 25, 26
(beginning with the caption annual benefits payable under merck & co., inc.
retirement plans) to 29, and page 15 (under the caption compensation
committee interlocks and insider participation) of the companys proxy
statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april27, 2004.
item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.
information with respect to securities authorized for issuance under
equity compensation plans is incorporated by reference to pages 25 (beginning
with the caption equity compensation plan information) to 26 of the companys
proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april27,
2004. information with respect to security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management is incorporated by reference to pages 18 (under the
caption security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management) to 19
of the companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be
held april27, 2004.
item13. certain relationships and related transactions.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to
page 12 (under the caption relationships with outside firms) and page 29
(under the caption indebtedness of management) of the companys proxy
statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april27, 2004.
item14. principal accountant fees and services.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to
pages 31 (beginning with the caption pre-approval policy for services of
independent auditors) to 32 of the companys proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held april27, 2004.
table of contents
part iv
item15. exhibits, financial statement schedules, and reports on form8-k.
(a)documents filed as part of this form10-k
1.
financial statements
the following consolidated financial statements and report of independent
auditors are
incorporated herein by reference to the companys 2003 annual report
to stockholders, as noted on page 23 of this document:
consolidated statement of income for the years ended december31,
2003, 2002 and 2001
consolidated statement of retained earnings for the years ended
december31, 2003, 2002 and 2001
consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the years ended
december31, 2003, 2002 and 2001
consolidated balance sheet as of december31, 2003 and 2002
consolidated statement of cash flows for the years ended december31,
2003, 2002 and 2001
notes to consolidated financial statements
report of pricewaterhousecoopers llp, independent auditors
2.
financial statement schedules
schedules are omitted because they are either not required or not
applicable.
financial statements of affiliates carried on the equity basis have been
omitted because, considered individually or in the aggregate, such affiliates
do not constitute a significant subsidiary.
3.
exhibits
exhibit
number
description
2.1
master restructuring agreement dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab, merck &
co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises,
inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of
this exhibit are subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the commission)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
3.1
restated certificate
of incorporation of merck & co., inc. (september1, 2000)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
september30, 2000
3.2
by-laws of merck
& co., inc. (as amended effective february25, 1997)  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
march31, 1997
*10.1
executive incentive plan (as amended effective february27, 1996)  incorporated by
reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1995
*
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
*10.2
base salary deferral plan (as adopted on october22, 1996, effective january1, 1997)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 1996
*10.3
merck & co., inc. deferral program (amended and restated november19, 2003)
*10.4
1991 incentive stock plan (as amended effective february23, 1994)  incorporated by
reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*10.5
1996 incentive stock plan (as amended november24, 1998)  incorporated by
reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1999
*10.6
2001 incentive stock plan (amended and restated july22, 2003)  incorporated
by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended september30, 2003
*10.7
2004 incentive stock plan (amended july22, 2003)  incorporated by reference to
registration statement on forms-8 (no.333-109296)
*10.8
non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended and restated
february24, 1998)  incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the
fiscal year ended december31, 1997
*10.9
1996 non-employee
directors stock option plan (as amended april27, 1999)  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1999
*10.10
2001 non-employee
directors stock option plan (as amended april19, 2002)  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 2002
*10.11
supplemental retirement plan (as amended effective january1, 1995)  incorporated
by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*10.12
retirement plan for the directors of merck & co., inc. (amended and restated
june21, 1996)  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the
period ended june30, 1996
*10.13
plan for deferred payment of directors compensation (amended and restated
november19, 2003)
10.14
limited liability company agreement of merck capital ventures, llc (dated as of
november27, 2000)  incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the
fiscal year ended december31, 2000
*10.15
offer letter between merck & co., inc. and peter s. kim, dated december15, 2000
10.16
amended and restated license and option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between
astra ab and astra merck inc.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly
report for the period ended june30, 1998
*
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
10.17
kbi shares option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab, merck
& co., inc. and merck holdings, inc.  incorporated by reference to form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.18
kbi-e asset option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab, merck
& co., inc., astra merck inc. and astra merck enterprises inc.  incorporated by
reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.19
kbi supply agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra merck inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this exhibit are subject to a request for confidential
treatment filed with the commission)  incorporated by reference to form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.20
second amended and restated manufacturing agreement dated as of july1, 1998
among merck & co., inc., astra ab, astra merck inc. and astra
usa, inc.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
10.21
limited partnership agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between kb usa, l.p. and kbi
sub inc.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period
ended june30, 1998
10.22
distribution agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra merck enterprises inc.
and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly
report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.23
agreement to incorporate defined terms dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab,
merck & co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck
enterprises inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
2003 annual report to stockholders (only those portions incorporated by reference in
this document are deemed filed)
code of conduct  our values and standards
list of subsidiaries
consent of
independent accountants  contained on page 30 of this report
24.1
power of attorney
24.2
certified resolution of board of directors
31.1
rule13a  14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief executive officer
31.2
rule13a  14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief financial officer
32.1
section1350 certification of chief executive officer
32.2
section1350 certification of chief financial officer
table of contents
none of the instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt
of the company and its subsidiaries (exhibitnumber 4) are being filed since
the total amount of securities authorized under any of such instruments taken
individually does not exceed 10% of the total assets of the company and its
subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. the company agrees to furnish a copy of
such instruments to the commission upon request.
copies of the exhibits may be obtained by stockholders upon written
request directed to the stockholder services department, merck & co., inc.,
p.o. box 100ws 3ab-40, whitehouse station, new jersey 08889-0100 accompanied
by check in the amount of $5.00 payable to merck & co., inc. to cover
processing and mailing costs.
(b)reports on form8-k
during the three-month period ended december31, 2003, the company
furnished:
(1)
one current report on form8-k under item9  regulationfd
disclosure and item12   results of operations and financial
condition: report dated and furnished october22, 2003, regarding
earnings for third quarter 2003 and certain supplemental
information; and
(2)
three current reports on form8-k under item9
regulationfd disclosure:
(i)
report dated and furnished december3, 2003,
regarding financial guidance for 2004.
(ii)
report dated and furnished december9, 2003, regarding annual business briefing
presentations.
(iii)
report dated and furnished december9, 2003, regarding the companys annual business
briefing to analysts.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
merck & co., inc.
dated: march10, 2004
by raymond v. gilmartin
(chairman of the board,
president and chief executive officer)
by celia a. colbert
celia a. colbert
(attorney-in-fact)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this
report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signatures
title
date
raymond v. gilmartin
chairman of the board,
march10, 2004
president and chief executive
officer; principal executive
officer; director
judy c. lewent
executive vice president, chief
march10, 2004
financial officer and president, human
health asia; principal financial officer
richard c. henriques jr
vice president, controller;
principal accounting officer
march10, 2004
lawrence a. bossidy
director
march10, 2004
william g. bowen
director
march10, 2004
johnnetta b. cole
director
march10, 2004
william m. daley
director
march10, 2004
william b. harrison jr
director
march10, 2004
william n. kelley
director
march10, 2004
heidi g. miller
director
march10, 2004
thomas e. shenk
director
march10, 2004
samuel o. thier
director
march10, 2004
wendell p. weeks
director
march10, 2004
peter c. wendell
director
march10, 2004
celia a. colbert, by signing her name hereto, does hereby sign this
document pursuant to powers of attorney duly executed by the persons named,
filed with the securities and exchange commission as an exhibit to this
document, on behalf of such persons, all in the capacities and on the date
stated, such persons including a majority of the directors of the company.
by celia a. colbert
celia a. colbert
(attorney-in-fact)
table of contents
exhibit23
consent of independent accountants
we hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration
statements on forms-3 (nos. 33-39349, 33-60322, 33-51785, 33-57421, 333-17045,
333-36383, 333-77569, 333-72546 and 333-87034) and on forms-8 (nos. 33-21087,
33-21088, 33-40177, 33-51235, 33-53463, 33-64273, 33-64665, 333-91769,
333-30526, 333-31762, 333-40282, 333-53246, 333-56696, 333-72206, 333-65796,
333-101519 and 333-109296) of merck & co., inc. of our report dated february
20, 2004, relating to the consolidated financial statements, which appears in
the annual report to stockholders, which is incorporated in this annual report
on form10-k.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
florham park, new jersey
march10, 2004
table of contents
exhibit index
exhibit
number
description
2.1
master restructuring
agreement dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab, merck &
co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises,
inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of
this exhibit are subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the commission)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
3.1
restated certificate
of incorporation of merck & co., inc. (september1, 2000)  incorporated
by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
september30, 2000
3.2
by-laws of merck & co., inc. (as amended effective february25, 1997)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
march31, 1997
*10.1
executive incentive plan (as amended effective february27, 1996)  incorporated by
reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1995
*10.2
base salary deferral plan (as adopted on october22, 1996, effective january1, 1997)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 1996
*10.3
merck & co., inc. deferral program (amended and restated november19, 2003)
*10.4
1991 incentive stock plan (as amended effective february23, 1994)  incorporated by
reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*10.5
1996 incentive stock plan (as amended november24, 1998)  incorporated by
reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1999
*10.6
2001 incentive stock plan (amended and restated july22, 2003)  incorporated
by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended september30, 2003
*10.7
2004 incentive stock plan (amended july22, 2003)  incorporated by reference to
registration statement on forms-8 (no.333-109296)
*10.8
non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended and restated
february24, 1998)  incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the
fiscal year ended december31, 1997
*10.9
1996 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended april27, 1999)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1999
*10.10
2001 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended april19, 2002)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 2002
*10.11
supplemental retirement plan (as amended effective january1, 1995)  incorporated
by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
*10.12
retirement plan for the directors of merck & co., inc. (amended and restated
june21, 1996)  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the
period ended june30, 1996
*10.13
plan for deferred payment of directors compensation (amended and restated
november19, 2003)
10.14
limited liability company agreement of merck capital ventures, llc (dated as of
november27, 2000)  incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the
fiscal year ended december31, 2000
*10.15
offer letter between merck & co., inc. and peter s. kim, dated december15, 2000
10.16
amended and restated license and option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between
astra ab and astra merck inc.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly
report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.17
kbi shares option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab, merck
& co., inc. and merck holdings, inc.  incorporated by reference to form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.18
kbi-e asset option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab, merck
& co., inc., astra merck inc. and astra merck enterprises inc.  incorporated by
reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.19
kbi supply agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra merck inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this exhibit are subject to a request for confidential
treatment filed with the commission)  incorporated by reference to form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.20
second amended and restated manufacturing agreement dated as of july1, 1998
among merck & co., inc., astra ab, astra merck inc. and astra
usa, inc.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
10.21
limited partnership agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between kb usa, l.p. and kbi
sub inc.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period
ended june30, 1998
10.22
distribution agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra merck enterprises inc.
and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly
report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.23
agreement to incorporate defined terms dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab,
merck & co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck
enterprises inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
2003 annual report to stockholders (only those portions incorporated by reference in
this document are deemed filed)
code of conduct - our values and standards
*
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
list of subsidiaries
consent of
independent accountants  contained on page 30 of this report
24.1
power of attorney
24.2
certified resolution of board of directors
31.1
rule13a  14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief executive officer
31.2
rule13a  14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief financial officer
32.1
section1350 certification of chief executive officer
32.2
section1350 certification of chief financial officer
none of the instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt
of the company and its subsidiaries (exhibitnumber 4) are being filed since
the total amount of securities authorized under any of such instruments taken
individually does not exceed 10% of the total assets of the company and its
subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. the company agrees to furnish a copy of
such instruments to the commission upon request.
