10-k
y18212e10vk.htm
form 10-k
e10vk
table of contents
as filed with the securities and exchange commission on march13, 2006
united states securities and exchange commission
washington, d. c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2005
or
o
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file no.1-3305
merck & co., inc.
one merck drive
whitehouse station, n. j. 08889-0100
(908)423-1000
incorporated in new jersey
i.r.s. employer
identification no.22-1109110
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
name of each exchange
title of each class
on which registered
common stock
($0.01 par value)
new york and philadelphia stock exchanges
number of shares of common stock ($0.01 par value) outstanding as of february28, 2006:
2,187,042,320.
aggregate market value of common stock ($0.01 par value) held by non-affiliates on june30,
2005 based on closing price on june30, 2005: $67,643,000,000.
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule
405 of the securities act. yes  no o
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section
13 or section 15(d) of the act. yes o no
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed
by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days. yes  no o
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation
s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form 10-k
or any amendment to this form 10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated
filer, or a non-accelerated filer.
large accelerated filer   accelerated filer o  non-accelerated filer o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of
the exchange act).
yes o no
documents incorporated by reference:
document
part of form 10-k
annual report to stockholders for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2005
parts i and ii
proxy statement for the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april25, 2006
part iii
table of contents
part i
item1. business
item1a. risk factors
item1b. unresolved staff comments
item2. properties
item3. legal proceedings
item4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6. selected financial data
item7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8. financial statements and supplementary data
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a. controls and procedures
item9b. other information
part iii
item10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11. executive compensation
item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13. certain relationships and related transactions
item14. principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item15. exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
ex-12: computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
ex-13: portions of 2005 annual report to stockholders
ex-21: subsidiaries of merck & co., inc.
ex-24.1: power of attorney
ex-24.2: certified resolution of board of directors
ex-31.1: certification
ex-31.2: certification
ex-32.1: certification
ex-32.2: certification
table of contents
part i
item1. business.
merck & co., inc. (merck or the company) is a global research-driven pharmaceutical
company that discovers, develops, manufactures and markets a broad range of innovative products to
improve human and animal health, directly and through its joint ventures. the company sells its
products primarily to drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals, clinics, government agencies and
managed health care providers such as health maintenance organizations and other institutions. the
companys professional representatives communicate the effectiveness, safety and value of its
products to health care professionals in private practice, group practices and managed care
organizations.
overview  in december2005, merck unveiled a plan to reclaim its leadership position in the
pharmaceutical industry. as part of the strategy, merck is focusing on improving its research and
development (r&d) productivity by focusing on select therapeutic areas, implementing a new
commercial model that will deliver greater value to customers, and reducing its overall cost
structure companywide.
mercks new r&d model is designed to increase productivity and improve the probability of
success by prioritizing the companys r&d resources on nine priority disease areas  alzheimers
disease, atherosclerosis, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, novel vaccines, obesity, oncology,
pain and sleep disorders. these therapeutic areas were carefully chosen based on a set of
criteria including unmet medical needs, scientific opportunity and commercial opportunity. within
these therapeutic areas, merck will commit resources to achieve research breadth and depth and to
develop best-in-class targeted and differentiated products that are valued highly by patients,
payers and physicians.
the company will also make focused investments to pursue specific mechanisms in the following
selected disease areas: antibiotics, antifungals, antivirals (hepatitis c virus, human
immunodeficiency virus), asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, neurodegeneration,
ophthalmology, osteoporosis, schizophrenia and stroke. in addition, the company will capitalize
on selected opportunities outside these areas by continuing to commercialize attractive clinical
development candidates in the pipeline and by pursuing appropriate external licensing
opportunities.
mercks late-stage pipeline is showing strong progress with three biologics license
application (bla)submissions to the u.s. food and
drug administration (fda)in 2005, one new drug
application (nda)already filed with the fda in 2006, two additional fda filings anticipated in
2006, and an expected five programs in phase iii by the first quarter of 2006.
the
three fda bla submissions in 2005 include gardasil, a breakthrough vaccine to help prevent
cervical cancer, the second leading cause of cancer deaths in women worldwide; zostavax, a vaccine
to reduce the incidence of shingles; and rotateq, a pediatric vaccine to prevent rotavirus
gastroenteritis, a leading cause of diarrhea in infants and young children, which leads to nearly
500,000 deaths worldwide each year. on february3, 2006, merck announced the approval by the fda
of rotateq. in addition, on february7, 2006, merck announced that the fda has accepted the bla
for gardasil and granted the vaccine priority review
designation. the fda's review of zostavax is expected to be
completed by late may 2006.
on february15, 2006, merck announced that the nda filed with the fda for januvia (the
proposed trademark for the compound known as mk-0431), a novel mechanism for the treatment of type
2 diabetes, was accepted for standard review. merck also anticipates two additional fda filings
in 2006: vorinostat (the generic name for the suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid compound), a
histone deacetylase inhibitor for cancer; and mk-0517, an intravenous prodrug of aprepitant to
treat chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
to improve its commercial selling model, merck will continue to streamline and restructure
its marketing and sales operations worldwide to improve their effectiveness and generate greater
efficiencies. in the united states, the company already has reduced the number of sales
representatives promoting the same product by 50
percent versus historical levels. in addition, merck will place more emphasis on active
engagement with key
table of contents
opinion leaders to accelerate the development and diffusion of scientific
information and devote additional resources to utilizing technology and demonstrating product
value to physicians, as well as payers and consumers who have increasing influence on prescription
decisions. in the united states, this approach has already resulted in considerable productivity
improvements in pilot programs and is expected to lower the companys spending per brand by 15 to
20percent by 2010, while maximizing sales performance. to provide additional support to its
upcoming vaccine launches, in the united states merck is redeploying 1,500 sales representatives
who currently promote its major in-line products to support the launch of new vaccines.
in november2005, the company announced the first phase of a global restructuring program
designed to reduce the companys cost structure, increase efficiency, and enhance competitiveness.
the initial steps will include the implementation of a new supply strategy by the merck
manufacturing division, which is intended to create a leaner, more cost-effective and
customer-focused manufacturing model over the next three years. as part of this program, merck
plans to sell or close five manufacturing sites and two preclinical sites by the end of 2008, and
eliminate approximately 7,000 positions company-wide. as of december31, 2005, approximately 1,100
positions throughout the company had been eliminated. merck incurred $401.2million in costs
associated with the global restructuring program which were comprised of $205.4million of
separation costs and $195.8million of accelerated depreciation and asset impairment costs.
the manufacturing facilities included in this action are: ponders end, united kingdom;
okazaki, japan; kirkland, canada; albany, georgia and danville, pennsylvania. the two preclinical
sites are in okazaki and menuma, japan. the company will incur significantly larger accelerated
depreciation charges during 2006 associated with these actions. the asset impairment charge was
associated with the abandonment of certain fixed assets that will no longer be used in the business
as a result of these restructuring actions. the company also plans to close its basic research
center in terlings park, united kingdom, and incurred additional accelerated depreciation costs of
$103.1million during 2005 with respect to this site.
additional charges of approximately $800million to $1billion are expected to be recorded
during 2006, based on estimated time of completion, as the sales/closures of the facilities
previously discussed occur. merck expects its cost reduction program to yield cumulative pre-tax
savings of $4.5 to $5.0billion from 2006 through 2010.
the american jobs creation act (ajca), signed into law in october2004, created temporary
incentives through december31, 2005 for u.s. multinationals to repatriate accumulated income
earned outside of the united states as of december31, 2002. in connection with the ajca, the
company repatriated $15.9billion during 2005, and as a result, recorded an income tax charge of
$766.5million. this charge was partially offset by a $100million benefit associated with the
decision to implement certain tax planning strategies.
as previously disclosed, on september30, 2004, merck announced a voluntary worldwide
withdrawal of vioxx, its arthritis and acute pain medication. as a result, the company recorded a
charge to pre-tax income of $726.2million, or $552.6million after tax adjustment to net income,
in the third quarter 2004. this did not include charges for future legal defense costs. the vioxx
withdrawal process was completed during 2005 and the costs associated with the withdrawal were in
line with the original amounts recorded by the company in 2004.
as of december31, 2004, the company had established a reserve of $675million solely for its
future vioxx legal defense costs. during 2005, the company spent $285million in the aggregate in
vioxx legal defense costs worldwide. in the fourth quarter of 2005, the company recorded a charge
of $295million to increase the reserve solely for its future legal defense costs related to vioxx
to $685million at december31, 2005. this reserve is based on certain assumptions and is the best
estimate of the amount that the company believes, at this time, it can reasonably estimate will be
spent through 2007.
earnings per common share assuming dilution for 2005 were $2.10, including the impact of the
global
restructuring program of $0.12 per share, the net tax charge primarily associated with the
ajca of $0.31 per share and additional reserves established solely for future legal defense costs
for vioxx litigation (as discussed above).
table of contents
product sales
sales1  of the companys products were as follows:
($ in millions)
zocor
$
4,381.7
$
5,196.5
$
5,011.4
fosamax
3,191.2
3,159.7
2,676.6
cozaar/hyzaar
3,037.2
2,823.7
2,486.0
singulair
2,975.6
2,622.0
2,009.4
proscar
741.4
733.1
605.5
primaxin
739.6
640.6
628.9
vasotec/vaseretic
623.1
719.2
763.7
cosopt/trusopt
617.2
558.8
484.4
cancidas
570.0
430.0
275.7
maxalt
348.4
309.9
324.2
propecia
291.9
270.2
239.0
vioxx
1,489.3
2,548.8
vaccines/biologicals
1,103.3
1,036.1
1,056.1
other
3,391.3
2,949.5
3,376.2
total
$
22,011.9
$
22,938.6
$
22,485.9
1 presented net of discounts and returns.
the companys products include therapeutic and preventive agents, generally sold by
prescription, for the treatment of human disorders. among these are zocor (simvastatin), mercks
largest-selling atherosclerosis product; fosamax (alendronate sodium) and fosamax plus d
(alendronate sodium/cholecalciferol), mercks osteoporosis products for treatment and, in the case
of fosamax, prevention of osteoporosis; cozaar (losartan potassium)/hyzaar (losartan potassium and
hydrochlorothiazide) and vasotec (enalapril maleate), the companys most significant
hypertension/heart failure products; singulair (montelukast sodium), a leukotriene receptor
antagonist respiratory product for the treatment of chronic asthma and for the relief of symptoms
of allergic rhinitis; proscar (finasteride), a urology product for the treatment of symptomatic
benign prostate enlargement; primaxin (imipenem and cilastatin sodium) and cancidas (caspofungin
acetate), anti-bacterial/anti-fungal products; cosopt (dorzolamide hydrochloride and timolol
maleate ophthalmic solution) and trusopt (dorzolamide hydrochloride ophthalmic solution), the
largest-selling ophthalmological products; maxalt (rizatriptan benzoate), an acute migraine
product; propecia (finasteride), a product for the treatment of male pattern hair loss; and
vaccines/biologicals, which include varivax (varicella virus vaccine live [oka/merck]), a live
virus vaccine for the prevention of chickenpox, m-m-r ii (measles, mumps and rubella virus vaccine
live), a pediatric vaccine for the prevention of measles, mumps and rubella, pneumovax (pneumococcal vaccine
polyvalent), a vaccine for the prevention of pneumococcal disease and recombivax hb (hepatitis b
vaccine [recombinant]), a vaccine for the prevention of hepatitis b.
other primarily includes sales of other human pharmaceuticals, pharmaceutical and animal
health supply sales to the companys joint ventures and revenue from the companys relationship
with astrazeneca lp, primarily relating to sales of nexium (esomeprazole magnesium) and prilosec
(omeprazole).
product approvals  in august2005, the company announced that the fda had approved singulair for the symptoms of perennial allergic rhinitis, or
year-round allergies, in adults and children six months of age and older.
in september2005, the fda approved proquad [measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella
(oka/merck) virus vaccine live]. proquad is a combination vaccine for simultaneous vaccination
against measles, mumps, rubella and varicella in children 12months to 12years of age.
table of contents
on february3, 2006, merck announced the approval by the fda of rotateq, a pediatric vaccine
to prevent rotavirus gastroenteritis. rotateq is an oral pentavalent three-dose liquid vaccine
that contains five human serotypes: g1, g2, g3, g4 and p1. merck has also submitted applications
for licensure of rotateq in more than 50countries
including australia, canada and countries in asia and latin america and,
through the sanofi pasteur msd joint venture, in the european union
(eu). rotateq also received regulatory approval in
mexico in november 2005.
voluntary
withdrawal of vioxx  on september30, 2004, merck announced a voluntary worldwide
withdrawal of vioxx, its arthritis and acute pain medication. the companys decision, which was
effective immediately, was based on new three-year data from a prospective, randomized,
placebo-controlled clinical trial, approve (adenomatous polyp prevention on vioxx).
the trial, which was stopped, was designed to evaluate the efficacy of vioxx 25 mg in
preventing the recurrence of colorectal polyps in patients with a history of colorectal adenomas
and to further assess the cardiovascular safety of vioxx. in this study, there was an increased
relative risk for confirmed cardiovascular events, such as heart attack and stroke, beginning after
18months of treatment in the patients taking vioxx compared to those taking placebo. the results
for the first 18months of the approve study did not show any increased risk of confirmed
cardiovascular events on vioxx, and in this respect, were similar to the results of two
placebo-controlled studies described in the most recent u.s. labeling for vioxx.
the company estimates that there were 105million u.s. prescriptions written for vioxx from
may1999 through august2004. based on this estimate, the company estimates that the number of
patients who have taken vioxx in the united states since its 1999 launch is approximately 20
million. the number of patients outside the united states who have taken vioxx is undetermined at
this time.
in october2004, the company received a letter from senator charles grassley, chairman of the
senate committee on finance, requesting certain documents and information related to vioxx. the
company also received requests for information from other congressional committees. the company
intends to cooperate with these inquiries so that the company can continue to describe the reasons
for the companys voluntary withdrawal of vioxx and to answer any questions related to the
companys development and extensive testing of the medicine and its disclosures of the results of
its studies.
on february16-18, 2005, the fda held a joint meeting of the arthritis advisory committee and
the drug safety and risk management advisory committee. the committees discussed the overall
benefit-to-risk considerations (including cardiovascular and gastrointestinal safety concerns) for
cox-2 selective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and related agents. on february18, 2005, the
members of the committees were asked to vote on whether the overall risk versus benefit profile for
vioxx supports marketing in the united states. the members of the committees voted 17 to 15 in
support of the marketing of vioxx in the united states. the company looks forward to further
discussions with the fda and other regulatory authorities about vioxx.
as previously announced, the board of directors of the company appointed a special committee
to review the companys actions prior to its voluntary withdrawal of vioxx, to act for the board in
responding to shareholder litigation matters related to the withdrawal of vioxx and to advise the
board with respect to any action that should be taken as a result of the review. that review is
ongoing.
arcoxia
arcoxia has been launched in 56 countries in europe, latin america, asia and africa.
in october, 2004, the company received an approvable letter from the fda for the companys nda for arcoxia. the fda informed the company in the letter that before
approval of the nda can be issued, additional safety and efficacy data for arcoxia are required.
on november28, 2005, the european commission adopted a binding decision on cox-2 inhibitor
products, including arcoxia, marketed in the eu. the decision resulted from a review by the
committee for medicinal products for human use (chmp) of the
table of contents
european medicines evaluation
authority (emea), which considered all aspects of the cardiovascular safety of cox-2 inhibitors,
including thrombotic and cardio-renal events, following the voluntary withdrawal of vioxx. the
decision adopted the opinion of the emea issued on june27, 2005, which recommended new
cardiovascular contraindications and warnings for inclusion in the labeling of cox-2 inhibitors,
including arcoxia, in the eu. the chmp concluded that the available data show an increased risk of
cardiovascular adverse events for cox-2 inhibitors as a class relative to placebo and some nsaids
and that the data suggested an association between duration of use and dose and the probability of
suffering a cardiovascular event. label modifications included in the emeas opinion reflected
that use of the lowest effective dose of cox-2 inhibitors for the shortest possible duration of
treatment was recommended. further, a contra-indication for all cox-2 inhibitors in patients with
ischemic heart disease or stroke and a contra-indication for certain patients having higher classes
of congestive heart failure were included. specifically with respect to arcoxia, label changes
included a contra-indication in patients with hypertension whose blood pressure is not under
control and that arcoxia may be associated with more frequent and severe effects on blood pressure,
particularly at higher doses, than some other cox-2 inhibitors, and recommended monitoring of blood
pressure for all patients taking arcoxia. additional warnings regarding hypersensitivity and
serious skin reactions were also included in the labeling for all cox-2 inhibitors in the eu.
regulatory agencies in other countries where arcoxia is approved have made modifications to
the product labeling of arcoxia, as well as other cox-2 inhibitors, relative to cardiovascular
risks and patient usage. in september2005, the venezuelan ministry of health ordered the market
withdrawal of all cox-2 inhibitors, including arcoxia. in mexico, sales of arcoxia 120 mg were
temporarily suspended, but the suspension has been lifted.
acquisitions  in march2004, the company acquired aton pharma, inc. (aton), a
privately held biotechnology company focusing on the development of novel treatments for cancer and
other serious diseases. atons clinical pipeline of histone deacetylase inhibitors represents a
class of anti-tumor agents with potential for efficacy based on a novel mechanism of action. the
lead product candidate, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, known as vorinostat, is currently in phase
ii clinical trials for the treatment of cutaneous t-cell lymphoma.
in 2003, the company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, msd (japan) co., ltd., completed
tender offers to acquire the remaining 49% of the common shares of banyu pharmaceutical co., ltd.
(banyu) that it did not already own for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $1.5
billion. on march30, 2004, merck completed its acquisition of banyu. full ownership of banyu
strengthens mercks position in japan, the worlds second-largest pharmaceutical market.
joint ventures  in 2000, the company and schering-plough corporation
(schering-plough) entered into agreements to create separate equally-owned partnerships to
develop and market in the united states new prescription medicines in the cholesterol-management
and respiratory therapeutic areas. in december2001, the cholesterol-management partnership
agreements were expanded to include all the countries of the world, excluding japan. in october
2002, zetia (ezetimibe) (marketed as ezetrol outside the united states), the first in a new class
of cholesterol-lowering agents, was launched in the united states. in july2004, vytorin
(ezetimibe/simvastatin) (marketed as inegy outside the united states), a combination product
containing the active ingredients of both zetia and zocor, was approved in the united states.
in november2005, the merck/schering-plough partnership announced the commencement of patient
enrollment in its large-scale, clinical outcomes trial, improve-it (improved reduction of outcomes:
vytorin efficacy international trial). this trial will evaluate the effectiveness of vytorin
compared to zocor alone in
treating approximately 10,000 high risk patients with coronary artery disease presenting with
acute coronary syndromes. clinical trial sites are opening throughout north america and europe.
in 1982, the company entered into an agreement with astra ab (astra) to develop and market
astra products in the united states. in 1994, the company and astra formed an equally owned joint
venture that developed and marketed most of astras new prescription medicines in the united states
including prilosec, the
table of contents
first in a class of medications known as proton pump inhibitors, which
slows the production of acid from the cells of the stomach lining.
in 1998, the company and astra restructured the joint venture whereby the company acquired
astras interest in the joint venture, renamed kbi inc. (kbi), and contributed kbis operating
assets to a new u.s. limited partnership named astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (the partnership), in
which the company maintains a limited partner interest. the partnership, renamed astrazeneca lp,
became the exclusive distributor of the products for which kbi retained rights. the company earns
certain partnership returns as well as ongoing revenue based on sales of current and future kbi
products. the partnership returns include a priority return provided for in the partnership
agreement, variable returns based, in part, upon sales of certain former astra usa, inc. products,
and a preferential return representing the companys share of undistributed partnership gaap
earnings. in conjunction with the 1998 restructuring, for a payment of $443.0million, astra
purchased an option to buy the companys interest in the kbi products, excluding the companys
interest in the gastrointestinal medicines nexium and prilosec. the company also granted astra an
option (the shares option) to buy the companys common stock interest in kbi, at an exercise
price based on the present value of estimated future net sales of nexium and prilosec.
in april1999, astra merged with zeneca group plc, forming astrazeneca ab (astrazeneca). as
a result of the merger, in exchange for the companys relinquishment of rights to future astra
products with no existing or pending u.s. patents at the time of the merger, astra paid $967.4
million, which is subject to a true-up calculation in 2008 that may require repayment of all or a
portion of this amount. the merger also triggers a partial redemption of the companys limited
partner interest in 2008. furthermore, as a result of the merger, astrazenecas option to buy the
companys interest in the kbi products is exercisable in 2010 and the company has the right to
require astrazeneca to purchase such interest in 2008. in addition, the shares option is
exercisable two years after astras purchase of the companys interest in the kbi products. the
exercise of this option by astra is also provided for in the year 2017 or if combined annual sales
of the two products fall below a minimum amount provided, in each case, only so long as either the
merck option in 2008 or astrazenecas option in 2010 has been exercised. the exercise price is
based on the present value of estimated future net sales of nexium and prilosec as determined
at the time of exercise.
in 1989, the company formed a joint venture with johnson & johnson to develop and market a
broad range of nonprescription medicines for u.s. consumers. this 50% owned joint venture was
expanded into europe in 1993, and into canada in 1996. significant joint venture products are
pepcid ac (famotidine), an over-the-counter form of the companys ulcer medication pepcid
(famotidine), as well as pepcid complete, an over-the-counter product which combines the companys
ulcer medication with antacids (calcium carbonate and magnesium hydroxide). in march2004, the
company sold to johnson & johnson its interest in the european joint venture which is discussed
further on page 12 under divestitures.
effective april1992, the company, through the merck vaccine division, and connaught
laboratories, inc. (now sanofi pasteur s.a.), agreed to collaborate on the development and
marketing of combination pediatric vaccines and to promote selected vaccines in the united states.
the research and marketing collaboration enables the companies to pool their resources to expedite
the development of vaccines combining several different antigens to protect children against a
variety of diseases, including haemophilus influenzae type b, hepatitis b,
diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis and poliomyelitis. while combination vaccine development efforts
continue under this agreement, no vaccines are currently being promoted.
in 1994, the company, through the merck vaccine division, and pasteur mrieux connaught (now
sanofi pasteur s.a.) formed a joint venture to market human vaccines in europe and to collaborate
in the development of combination vaccines for distribution in the then existing eu and the
european free trade association. the company and sanofi pasteur contributed, among other things,
their european vaccine businesses for equal shares in the joint venture, known as pasteur mrieux
msd, s.n.c. (now sanofi pasteur msd, s.n.c.). the joint venture is subject to monitoring by the
eu, to which the partners made certain undertakings in return for an exemption from european
competition law, effective until december2006. the joint venture maintains a presence, directly
or
table of contents
through affiliates or branches in belgium, italy, germany, spain, france, austria, ireland,
sweden, portugal, the netherlands, switzerland and the united kingdom, and through distributors in the rest of its territory.
in september, sanofi pasteur msd (spmsd), mercks vaccine joint venture with sanofi pasteur,
entered into a letter of undertaking (lou)with the emea due to
emeas concerns regarding the long-term efficacy of the hepatitis b component of hexavac. the
hepatitis b component of hexavac is manufactured by merck. the lou requires, in relevant part (1)
suspension of the eu hexavac license; (2)suspension of hexavac distribution; (3)a recall of
hexavac product in the eu; (4)a recall of hexavac in a number of non-eu countries; and (5)a
surveillance program and possible future revaccination. spmsd, which markets and sells hexavac in
part of the eu, has notified merck that it is reserving any rights that it may have to seek damages
from merck and to be defended, indemnified and held harmless by merck in the event of third party
claims.
in september2005, the emea also initiated a formal review of the long-term efficacy of the
hepatitis b vaccine, hbvaxpro, and of the hepatitis b component of the hepatitis b/hib combination
vaccine, procomvax. both products are marketed and sold by spmsd in its european territory, and
are sold elsewhere, under different names, by merck. an assessment report prepared for the chmpand mercks response were considered at a
chmp meeting in february2006. it is expected that the chmp will conclude its review in april
2006.
in 1997, the company and rhne-poulenc s.a. (now sanofi-aventis s.a.) combined their
respective animal health and poultry genetics businesses to form merial limited (merial), a fully
integrated animal health company, which is a stand-alone joint venture, equally owned by each
party. merial provides a comprehensive range of pharmaceuticals and vaccines to enhance the
health, well-being and performance of a wide range of animal species.
merial divested its entire poultry
genetics business in three segments. the domestic turkey and layer segments were divested in 2004
and 2003, respectively, and the broiler and foreign turkey segments were sold in 2005.
competition  the markets in which the companys pharmaceutical business is conducted
are highly competitive and often highly regulated. global efforts toward health care cost
containment continue to exert pressure on product pricing and access.
such competition involves an intensive search for technological innovations and the ability to
market these innovations effectively. with its long-standing emphasis on research and development,
the company is well prepared to compete in the search for technological innovations. additional
resources to meet competition include quality control, flexibility to meet customer specifications,
an efficient distribution system and a strong technical information service. the company is active
in acquiring and marketing products through joint ventures and licenses and has been refining its
sales and marketing efforts to further address changing industry conditions. to enhance its
product portfolio, the company continues to pursue external alliances, from early-stage to
late-stage product opportunities, including joint ventures and targeted acquisitions. however, the
introduction of new products and processes by competitors may result in price reductions and
product replacements, even for products protected by patents. for example, the number of compounds
available to treat diseases typically increases over time and has resulted in slowing the growth in
sales of certain of the companys products.
legislation enacted in all states in the united states, particularly in the area of human
pharmaceutical products, allows, encourages or, in a few instances, in the absence of specific
instructions from the prescribing physician, mandates the use of generic products (those
containing the same active chemical as an innovators product) rather than brand-name products.
governmental and other pressures toward the dispensing of generic products have significantly
reduced the sales of certain of the companys products no longer protected by patents, such as
vasotec and vaseretic (enalapril maleate in combination with hydrochlorothiazide), the u.s. rights
to which have been sold. in addition, zocor has lost patent protection in certain countries
outside the united states and the company has experienced a decline in zocor sales in those
countries.
table of contents
distribution  the company sells its human health products primarily to drug wholesalers
and retailers, hospitals, clinics, government agencies and managed health care providers such as
health maintenance organizations and other institutions. vaccines are also sold directly to
physicians. the companys professional representatives communicate the effectiveness, safety and
value of the companys products to health care professionals in private practice, group practices
and managed care organizations.
in the fourth quarter of 2003, the company implemented a new distribution program for u.s.
wholesalers to moderate the fluctuations in sales caused by wholesaler investment buying and
improve efficiencies in the distribution of company pharmaceutical products. the new program
lowered previous limits on average monthly purchases of company pharmaceutical products by u.s.
customers. following the implementation of the program, fluctuations in sales caused by wholesaler
investment buying significantly moderated.
raw materials  raw materials and supplies, which are generally available from multiple
sources, are purchased worldwide and are normally available in quantities adequate to meet the
needs of the companys business.
government regulation and investigation  the pharmaceutical industry is subject to
global regulation by regional, country, state and local agencies. of particular importance is the
fda in the united states, which administers requirements covering the testing, approval, safety,
effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling and marketing of prescription pharmaceuticals. in many
cases, the fda requirements have increased the amount of time and money necessary to develop new
products and bring them to market in the united states. in 1997, the food and drug administration
modernization act (the fda modernization act) was passed and was the culmination of a
comprehensive legislative reform effort designed to streamline regulatory procedures within the fda
and to improve the regulation of drugs, medical devices and food. the legislation was principally
designed to ensure the timely availability of safe and effective drugs and biologics by expediting
the premarket review process for new products. a key provision of the legislation is the
re-authorization of the prescription drug user fee act of 1992, which permits the continued
collection of user fees from prescription drug manufacturers to augment fda resources earmarked for
the review of human drug applications. this helps provide the resources necessary to ensure the
prompt approval of safe and effective new drugs.
in the united states, the government expanded health care access by enacting the medicare
prescription drug improvement and modernization act of 2003, which was signed into law in december
2003. prescription drug coverage began on january1, 2006. this new benefit supports the
companys goal of improving access to medicines by expanding insurance coverage, while preserving
market-based incentives for pharmaceutical innovation. at the same time, the benefit will ensure
that prescription drug costs will be controlled by competitive pressures and by encouraging the
appropriate use of medicines. in addressing cost-containment pressure, the company has made a continuing effort to
demonstrate that its medicines can help save costs in overall patient health care.
for many years, the pharmaceutical industry has been under federal and state oversight with
the approval process for new drugs, drug safety, advertising and promotion, drug purchasing and
reimbursement programs and formularies variously under review. the company believes that it will
continue to be able to conduct its operations, including the introduction of new drugs to the
market, in this regulatory environment. one type of federal initiative to contain federal health
care spending is the prospective or capitated payment system, first implemented to reduce the
rate of growth in medicare reimbursement to hospitals. such a system establishes in advance a flat
rate for reimbursement for health care for those patients for whom the payor is fiscally
responsible. this type of payment system and other cost containment systems are now widely used by
public and private payors and have caused hospitals, health maintenance organizations and other
customers of the company to be more cost-conscious in their treatment decisions, including
decisions regarding the medicines to be made available to their patients. the company continues to
work with private and federal employers to slow increases in health care costs. further, the
companys efforts to demonstrate that its medicines can help save costs in other areas
table of contents
have encouraged the use of the companys medicines and
have helped offset the effects of increasing cost pressures.
also, federal and state governments have pursued methods to directly reduce the cost of drugs
and vaccines for which they pay. for example, federal laws require the company to pay specified
rebates for medicines reimbursed by medicaid, to provide discounts for outpatient medicines
purchased by certain public health service entities and disproportionate share hospitals
(hospitals meeting certain criteria), and to provide minimum discounts of 24% off of a defined
non-federal average manufacturer price for purchases by certain components of the federal
government such as the department of veterans affairs and the department of defense.
initiatives in some states seek rebates beyond the minimum required by medicaid legislation,
in some cases for patients beyond those who are eligible for medicaid. under the federal vaccines
for children entitlement program, the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) funds
and purchases recommended pediatric vaccines at a public sector price for the immunization of
medicaid-eligible, uninsured, native american and certain underinsured children. the company was
awarded a cdc contract in 2005 for the supply of $340million of pediatric vaccines for the
vaccines for children program. as of january1, 2006, patients previously eligible for medicaid
who are also medicare beneficiaries (65years and older or disabled) will leave the
state-administered medicaid system to be covered by the new medicare prescription drug benefit.
outside the united states, the company encounters similar regulatory and legislative issues in
most of the countries where it does business. there, too, the primary thrust of governmental
inquiry and action is toward determining drug safety and effectiveness, often with mechanisms for
controlling the prices of prescription drugs and the profits of prescription drug companies. the
eu has adopted directives concerning the classification, labeling, advertising, wholesale
distribution and approval for marketing of medicinal products for human use. the companys
policies and procedures are already consistent with the substance of these directives;
consequently, it is believed that they will not have any material effect on the companys business.
the company is subject to the jurisdiction of various regulatory agencies and is, therefore,
subject to potential administrative actions. such actions may include seizures of products and
other civil and criminal sanctions. under certain circumstances, the company on its own may deem
it advisable to initiate product recalls. the company believes that it should be able to compete
effectively within this environment.
in addition, certain countries within the eu, recognizing the economic importance of the
research-based pharmaceutical industry and the value of innovative medicines to society, are
working with industry representatives and the european commission on proposals to complete the
single market in pharmaceuticals and improve the competitive climate through a variety of means
including market deregulation.
there has been an increasing amount of focus on privacy issues in countries around the world,
including the united states and the eu. in the united states and the eu, governments have pursued
legislative and
regulatory initiatives regarding privacy, including federal privacy regulations and recently
enacted state privacy laws concerning health and other personal information, which have affected
the companys operations.
patents, trademarks and licenses  patent protection is considered, in the aggregate, to
be of material importance in the companys marketing of human health products in the united states
and in most major foreign markets. patents may cover products per se, pharmaceutical formulations,
processes for or intermediates useful in the manufacture of products or the uses of products.
protection for individual products extends for varying periods in accordance with the date of grant
and the legal life of patents in the various countries. the protection afforded, which may also
vary from country to country, depends upon the type of patent and its scope of coverage.
patent portfolios developed for products introduced by the company normally provide market
exclusivity. basic patents are in effect for the following major products in the united states:
cancidas, comvax (haemophilus b conjugate and hepatitis b [recombinant] vaccine), cosopt,
cozaar, crixivan, emend (aprepitant), fosamax,
hyzaar, invanz (ertapenem sodium), maxalt,
primaxin, propecia (finasteride), proscar, recombivax hb,
table of contents
singulair, timoptic-xe (timolol maleate
ophthalmic gel forming solution), trusopt, and zocor. basic patents are also in effect in the
united states for zetia and vytorin, which were developed by the merck/schering-plough partnership.
a basic patent is also in effect for sustiva/stocrin
(efavirenz). bristol-myers squibb (bms), under an exclusive
license from the company, sells sustiva in the united states, canada and certain european
countries. the company markets stocrin in other countries throughout the world. the basic patent
for aggrastat (tirofiban hydrochloride) in the united states was divested with the product in 2003.
the company retains basic patents for aggrastat outside the united states.
the fda modernization act includes a pediatric exclusivity provision that may provide an
additional six months of market exclusivity in the united states for indications of new or
currently marketed drugs if certain agreed upon pediatric studies are completed by the applicant.
these exclusivity provisions were re-authorized until october1, 2007 by the best pharmaceuticals
for children act passed in january2002. in 2005, the fda granted an additional six months of
market exclusivity in the united states to invanz until august2013. in 2004, the fda granted an
additional six months of market exclusivity in the united states to trusopt until october2008. in
2002, the fda granted an additional six months of market exclusivity in the united states to
cozaar/hyzaar until february2010. in 2005, the fda granted an additional six months of market
exclusivity in the united states to singulair until
august2012. for further information with respect to the
companys patents, see patent litigation on
page31.
while the expiration of a product patent normally results in a loss of market exclusivity for
the covered pharmaceutical product, commercial benefits may continue to be derived from: (i)
later-granted patents on processes and intermediates related to the most economical method of
manufacture of the active ingredient of such product; (ii)patents relating to the use of such
product; (iii)patents relating to novel compositions and formulations; and (iv)in the united
states, market exclusivity that may be available under federal law. the effect of product patent
expiration on pharmaceutical products also depends upon many other factors such as the nature of
the market and the position of the product in it, the growth of the market, the complexities and
economics of the process for manufacture of the active ingredient of the product and the
requirements of new drug provisions of the federal food, drug and cosmetic act or similar laws and
regulations in other countries.
additions to market exclusivity are sought in the united states and other countries through
all relevant laws, including laws increasing patent life. some of the benefits of increases in
patent life have been partially offset by a general increase in the number of, incentives for and
use of generic products. additionally, improvements in intellectual property laws are sought in
the united states and other countries through reform of patent and other relevant laws and
implementation of international treaties.
in june2006, zocor will lose its market exclusivity in the united states and the company
expects a significant decline in u.s. zocor sales after that time.
in june2006, the basic patent in the united states covering proscar will expire. as a
result, the company expects a significant decline in u.s. proscar sales after that time. the basic
patent for proscar also covers propecia; however, propecia is protected by additional patents which
expire in october2013.
in 2003, the fda granted an additional six months of market exclusivity in the united states
to fosamax until february2008, and fosamax once weekly until january2019. however, on january
28, 2005, the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit in washington, d.c. found the companys
patent claims for once-weekly administration of fosamax to be invalid. the company exhausted all
options to appeal this decision in 2005. based on the court of appeals decision, fosamax will
lose its market exclusivity in the united states in february2008 and the company expects a
significant decline in u.s. fosamax sales after that time.
worldwide, all of the companys important products are sold under trademarks that are
considered in the aggregate to be of material importance. trademark protection continues in some
countries as long as used; in other countries, as long as registered. registration is for fixed
terms and can be renewed indefinitely.
table of contents
royalties received during 2005 on patent and know-how licenses and other rights amounted to
$113.7million. the company also paid royalties amounting to $789.6million in 2005 under patent
and know-how licenses it holds.
discontinued operations  on august19, 2003, the company completed the spin-off of
medco health solutions, inc. (medco health) as a separate, publicly-traded company. the spin-off
was effected by way of a pro rata dividend to company stockholders of all the outstanding shares of
common stock of medco health. based on a letter ruling the company received from the u.s. internal
revenue service, receipt of medco health shares in the distribution was tax-free for u.s. federal
income tax purposes, but any cash received in lieu of fractional shares was taxable.
divestitures  in march2004, the company completed the sale to johnson & johnson of the
companys 50% equity stake in its european non-prescription pharmaceuticals joint venture with
johnson & johnson.
in 2003, the company sold its u.s. rights in aggrastat to
guilford pharmaceuticals inc., including the basic u.s. product patents (but not process patents)
for the product.
in 2002, the company sold its u.s. rights in vasotec, vaseretic and vasotec i.v. injection
(enalaprilat)to biovail laboratories incorporated (biovail), a subsidiary of biovail
corporation. at the same time, the companys canadian subsidiary, merck frosst canada & co.
(merck frosst) and biovail entered into a supply agreement under which merck frosst agreed to
supply biovail for a minimum of five years with bulk tablets of formulated enalapril maleate and
enalapril maleate in combination with hydrochlorothiazide for distribution by biovail in the united
states as vasotec and vaseretic. the basic product patents on vasotec and vaseretic had expired in
the united states prior to these transactions.
research and development
the companys business is characterized by the introduction of new products or new uses for
existing products through a strong research and development program. approximately 12,400 people
are employed in the companys research activities. expenditures for the companys research and
development programs were $3.8billion in 2005, $4.0billion in 2004 and $3.2billion in 2003 and
are estimated to continue at the same level as the full-year 2005 expense in 2006. the company
maintains its ongoing commitment to research over a broad range of therapeutic areas and clinical
development in support of new products. total expenditures for the period 1996 through 2005
exceeded $25.6billion with a compound annual growth rate of 11%.
the company maintains a number of long-term exploratory and fundamental research programs in
biology and chemistry as well as research programs directed toward product development. mercks
new r&d
model is designed to increase productivity and improve the probability of success by
prioritizing the companys r&d resources on nine priority disease areas  alzheimers disease,
atherosclerosis, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, novel vaccines, obesity, oncology, pain and
sleep disorders. these therapeutic areas were carefully chosen based on a set of criteria
including unmet medical needs, scientific opportunity and commercial opportunity. within these
therapeutic areas, merck will commit resources to achieve research breadth and depth and to develop
best-in-class targeted and differentiated products that are valued highly by patients, payers and
physicians.
the company will also make focused investments to pursue specific mechanisms in the following
selected disease areas: antibiotics, antifungals, antivirals (hepatitis c virus, human
immunodeficiency virus), asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, neurodegeneration,
ophthalmology, osteoporosis, schizophrenia and stroke. in addition, the company will capitalize on
selected opportunities outside these areas by continuing to commercialize attractive clinical
development candidates in the pipeline and by pursuing appropriate external licensing
opportunities.
in the development of human health products, industry practice and government regulations in
the united states and most foreign countries provide for the determination of effectiveness and
safety of new chemical compounds through preclinical tests and controlled clinical evaluation.
before a new drug may be marketed in the
table of contents
united states, recorded data on preclinical and clinical
experience are included in the nda or the bla to the fda
for the required approval. the development of certain other products is also subject to government
regulations covering safety and efficacy in the united states and many foreign countries.
once the companys scientists discover a new compound that they believe has promise to treat a
medical condition, the company commences preclinical testing with that compound. preclinical
testing includes laboratory testing and animal safety studies to gather data on chemistry,
pharmacology and toxicology. pending acceptable preclinical data, the company will initiate
clinical testing in accordance with established regulatory requirements. the clinical testing
begins with phase i studies, which are designed to assess safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics,
and preliminary pharmacodynamic activity of the compound in humans. if favorable, additional,
larger phase ii studies are initiated to determine the efficacy of the compound in the affected
population, define appropriate dosing for the compound, as well as identify any adverse effects
that could limit the compounds usefulness. if the results from the phase ii trials are
satisfactory, the company commences large-scale phase iii trials to confirm the compounds efficacy
and safety. upon completion of those trials, if satisfactory, the company submits regulatory
filings with the appropriate regulatory agencies around the world to have the product candidate
approved for marketing. there can be no assurance that a compound that is the result of any
particular program will obtain the regulatory approvals necessary for it to be marketed.
in the united states, the fda approval process begins once a complete nda is submitted and
received by the fda. pursuant to the prescription drug user fee act, the fda review period targets
for ndas or supplemental ndas is either six months, for priority review, or ten months, for a
standard review. within 60days after receipt of an nda, the fda determines if the application is
sufficiently complete to permit a substantive review. the fda also assesses, at that time, whether
the application will be granted a priority review or standard review. once the review timelines
are defined, the fda will act upon the application within those timelines, unless a major amendment
has been submitted (either at the companys own initiative or the fdas request) to the pending
application. if this occurs, the fda may extend the review period to allow for review of the new
information, but by no more than 180days. extensions to the review period are communicated to the
company. based on fda statistics, drug development time from initiation of preclinical testing to
nda approval can range from 5 to 20years with an average of 8.5years.
in
june2005, the fda accepted for standard review the bla for zostavax, mercks investigational vaccine for the prevention of herpes zoster, commonly known
as shingles in adults 60years of age or older. sanofi pasteur msd has submitted an application
for licensure of zostavax in the
eu, and merck has also submitted applications for licensure of zostavax in australia, canada and in
countries in asia and latin america. in february 2006, the fda
extended its review of zostavax by three
months until late may.
in september2005, merck presented two studies of phase ii data on the companys dpp-4
inhibitor, januvia, the proposed trademark for mk-0431 (sitagliptin), a potential new approach in
the treatment of type 2 diabetes, at the 41st annual meeting of the european association
for the study of diabetes. on february15, 2006, merck announced that the nda for januvia was
accepted for standard review by the fda. merck expects fda action on the nda by mid-october2006.
in december2005, merck submitted a bla to the fda for gardasil [quadrivalent human
papillomavirus (types 6, 11, 16, 18) recombinant vaccine], the companys vaccine to protect against
four types of human papillomavirus (hpv): types 16 and 18, which account for an estimated 70% of
cervical cancer cases, and types 6 and 11, which account for an estimated 90% of genital warts
cases. on february7, 2006, merck announced that the fda accepted the bla for gardasil and that
the investigational cervical cancer vaccine will be given priority review by the agency. a
priority designation is intended for products that address unmet medical needs. under the
prescription drug user fee act, for blas filed in 2005, the fdas goal is to review and act on blas
designated as priority review within six months of receipt. the fda has informed merck that the
review goal date is june8, 2006. since the submission to the fda in december, merck has also
submitted applications for gardasil to
table of contents
additional regulatory agencies including those in the eu,
australia, mexico, brazil, argentina, taiwan and singapore.
the companys
early-stage clinical pipeline includes candidates in each of the
following areas: arthritis, atherosclerosis, cancer,cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, endocrine disorders, glaucoma,
infectious diseases, insomnia, neurodegenerative disease, obesity, osteoporosis, psychiatric
disease, pain, respiratory disease,
urogenital disorders and vaccines. the company supplements its internal research with an
aggressive licensing and external alliance strategy focused on the entire spectrum of
collaborations from early research to late-stage compounds, as well as new technologies. the
company completed 44 transactions in 2005, including research collaborations, preclinical and
clinical compounds, and technology transactions (across a broad range of therapeutic categories
including neuroscience, obesity and oncology).
in may2005, merck and bioxell entered into an agreement to develop new treatments for sepsis
and other inflammatory disorders.
in june2005, vical incorporated (vical) exercised three options under a 2003 amendment to
an existing research collaboration and licensing agreement, granting merck rights to use vicals
patented non-viral gene delivery technology in cancer vaccine applications.
merck and vertex pharmaceuticals incorporated announced in june2005 the initiation of an
additional phase i clinical study with vx-680, a small molecule inhibitor of aurora kinases.
aurora kinases are implicated in the onset and progression of human leukemias.
dainippon sumitomo pharma co., ltd. (formerly known as sumitomo pharmaceuticals co., ltd.)
(sumitomo) and merck signed an agreement in june2005 to collaborate on sm13496 (lurasidone), an
atypical antipsychotic compound currently in phase ii development for the treatment of
schizophrenia, one of the most chronic and disabling of the severe mental illnesses. under the
agreement, sumitomo has granted merck, through an affiliate, an exclusive license for sm13496 in
all parts of the world except for japan, china, korea and taiwan.
in june2005, merck announced an agreement with metabasis therapeutics to research, develop
and commercialize novel small molecule therapeutics with the potential to treat several diseases,
including type 2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia and obesity, by activation of an enzyme in the liver
called amp-activated protein kinase.
in july2005, merck and geron corporation announced an agreement to develop a cancer vaccine
against telomerase. telomerase is an enzyme, active in most cancer cells, that maintains telomere
length at the ends of chromosomes. this activity allows the cancer to grow and metastasize over
long periods of time.
in september2005,
foxhollow technologies, inc. and merck announced the formation of a novel
pharmacogenomics collaboration. the collaboration will focus on analyzing atherosclerotic plaque
removed from patient arteries as a means of identifying new biomarkers of atherosclerotic disease
progression for use in the development of cardiovascular compounds in mercks pipeline. the
agreement includes a research collaboration of up to three years.
in october2005, agensys, inc. (agensys), a cancer biotechnology company, and merck
announced that they have formed a global alliance to jointly develop and commercialize ags-psca,
agensys fully human monoclonal antibody to prostate stem cell antigen (psca). the agreement
grants merck worldwide rights to ags-psca and an exclusive license to psca, a proprietary target,
as well as rights to other therapeutic and diagnostic products developed under the alliance.
also in october2005,
merck and bms jointly announced that they have
signed separate license agreements with the international partnership for microbicides to develop
new antiretroviral compounds as potential microbicides to protect women from hiv. the compounds
are part of a new class of anti-
table of contents
retrovirals known as entry inhibitors. some of the
compounds bind directly to hiv; others bind to the ccr5 receptor. they are designed to prevent hiv
from efficiently entering host cells, thus preventing infection.
the company and bms reported in october2005 that the fda issued an approvable letter for
pargluva, bmss investigational oral medicine for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. the fda
requested additional safety information from ongoing trials, or those completed since the safety
data from the last formal regulatory submission, to address more fully the cardiovascular safety
profile of pargluva. this data requirement may cause a significant delay in the products launch.
as a result, bms and the company terminated the collaborative agreement for pargluva, with all
rights to pargluva and a back up compound to pargluva returning to bms as of december21, 2005.
the chart below reflects the companys current research pipeline as of february15, 2006.
candidates shown in phase iii include specific products. candidates shown in phase i and ii
include the most advanced compound with a specific mechanism in a given therapeutic area. back-up
compounds, regardless of their phase of development, additional indications in the same therapeutic
area and additional line extensions or formulations for in-line products are not shown. the
companys programs are generally designed to focus on the development of novel medicines to address
large, unmet medical needs.
phase i
phase i
phase ii
phase iii
under
review
alzheimers disease
diabetes
arthritis
aids
hpv and related
mk-0752
mk-0941
mk-0686
mk-0518
cervical cancer and
mk-0952
mk-0893
cancer (ctcl)
atherosclerosis
genital warts
arthritis
mk-0533
vorinostat*
mk-0524b
gardasil**
mk-0822
endocrine
endocrine
mk-0524a
atherosclerosis
mk-0974
mk-0677
cinv
shingles
mk-0354*
flu vaccine
hiv vaccine
mk-0517
zostavax
mk-0859
glaucoma
hpv vaccine**
diabetes
mk-0633
mk-0994
hypertension
mk-0431a
diabetes
cancer
insomnia
mk-0736
insomnia
januvia
mk-0429
mk-0454
obesity
gaboxadol*
mk-0752
obesity
mk-0364
approvable
agensys*
nastech pyy3-36***
mk-0493
arthritis/pain
mk-0731
osteoporosis
osteoporosis
arcoxia
vx-680*
mk-0773
mk-0822
mk-0646*
pain
pain
2005 u.s. approvals
cancer vaccine
neurogen*
mk-0686
osteoporosis
cardiovascular
parkinsons disease
mk-0759
fosamax
plusd
mk-0448
mk-0657
mk-0974
pediatric vaccine
psychiatric disease
pediatric vaccine*
proquad
mk-0249
psychiatric disease
respiratory disease
mk-0364
2006 u.s. approvals
mk-0633
lurasidone*
rotavirus
s. aureus vaccine
stroke
gastroenteritis
ono 2506***
rotateq
urinary incontinence
mk-0634
mk-0594
*
licensed, alliance, or acquisition (pipeline)
**
multiple licenses, including csl, ltd.
***
merck is in discussions with its licensing partner regarding further plans for this
compound.
on march1, 2006, merck terminated its agreement with nastech pharmaceutical company inc.
with respect to pyy3-36.
all product or service marks appearing in type form different from that of the surrounding
text are trademarks or service marks owned by or licensed to merck, its subsidiaries or affiliates
(including zetia and vytorin, trademarks owned by entities of the merck/schering-plough
partnership), except as noted. cozaar and hyzaar are registered trademarks of e.i. du pont de
nemours and company, wilmington, de and prilosec and nexium are trademarks of the astrazeneca
group. the u.s. trademarks for vasotec and vaseretic are owned by
table of contents
biovail laboratories
incorporated. the u.s. trademark for aggrastat is owned by guilford pharmaceuticals inc. the
trademark for pargluva is owned by bms.
employees
at the end of 2005, the company had approximately 61,500 employees worldwide, with
approximately 31,900 employed in the united states, including puerto rico. approximately 20% of
worldwide employees of the company are represented by various collective bargaining groups.
as part of a cost-reduction initiative announced in october2003 and completed at the end of
2004, the company had eliminated 5,100 positions. the company completed a similar program in 2005
with 900 positions being eliminated through december31, 2005.
on november28, 2005, the company announced the first phase of a global restructuring program
designed to reduce the companys cost structure, increase efficiency, and enhance competitiveness.
the initial steps will include the implementation of a new supply strategy by the merck
manufacturing division, which is intended to create a leaner, more cost-effective and
customer-focused manufacturing model over the next three years.
as a result, merck will incur certain costs associated with exit or disposal activities. as
part of the global restructuring program, the company expects to eliminate approximately 7,000
positions in manufacturing and other divisions worldwide, representing about 11% of its global work
force, by the end of 2008. about half of the position reductions are expected to occur in the
united states, with the remainder in other countries. merck intends to sell or close five of its
31 manufacturing facilities worldwide and to reduce operations at a number of other sites. the
company also expects to close one basic research site and two preclinical development sites. the
sites identified for closure are expected to be closed by the end of 2008, subject to compliance
with legal obligations.
the pretax costs of the restructuring were $401.2million in 2005 and are expected to be $800
million to $1billion in 2006. through the end of 2008, when the initial phase of the
restructuring program is substantially complete, the cumulative pretax costs of the restructuring
activities announced on november28, 2005 are expected to range from $1.8billion to $2.2billion.
approximately 70% of the cumulative pretax costs are non-cash, relating primarily to accelerated
depreciation for those facilities scheduled for closure.
environmental matters
the company believes that it is in compliance in all material respects with applicable
environmental laws and regulations. in 2005, the company incurred capital expenditures of
approximately $35.5million for environmental protection facilities. the company is also
remediating environmental contamination resulting from past industrial activity at certain of its
sites. expenditures for remediation and environmental liabilities were $31.3million in 2005, and
are estimated at $53.5million for the years 2006 through 2010. these amounts do not consider
potential recoveries from insurers or other parties. the company has taken an active role in
identifying and providing for these costs, and in managements opinion, the liabilities for all
environmental matters which are probable and reasonably estimable have been accrued. although it
is not possible to predict with certainty the outcome of these environmental matters, or the
ultimate costs of remediation, management does not believe that any reasonably possible
expenditures that may be incurred in excess of those provided should result in a material adverse
effect on the companys financial position, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.
geographic area and segment information
the companys operations are principally managed on a products basis with one reportable
segment: the merck pharmaceutical segment which includes products marketed either directly or
through joint ventures. merck pharmaceutical products consist of therapeutic and preventive
agents, sold by prescription, for the treatment and prevention of human disorders.
table of contents
the companys operations outside the united states are conducted primarily through
subsidiaries. sales worldwide by subsidiaries outside the united states were 42% of sales in 2005,
41% of sales in 2004 and 41% of sales in 2003.
the companys worldwide business is subject to risks of currency fluctuations, governmental
actions and other governmental proceedings abroad. the company does not regard these risks as a
deterrent to further expansion of its operations abroad. however, the company closely reviews its
methods of operations and adopts strategies responsive to changing economic and political
conditions.
in recent years, the company has been expanding its operations in countries located in latin
america, the middle east, africa, eastern europe and asia pacific where changes in government
policies and economic conditions are making it possible for the company to earn fair returns.
business in these developing areas, while sometimes less stable, offers important opportunities for
growth over time.
financial information about geographic areas and operating segments of the companys business
is incorporated by reference to pages 64 (beginning with the caption segment reporting) and 65 of
the companys 2005 annual report to stockholders.
available information
the
companys internet website address is www.merck.com. the company will make available,
free of charge at the investor information portion of its website, its annual report on form
10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k, and all amendments to those
reports filed or furnished pursuant to section 13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934, as amended, as soon as reasonably practicable after such reports are electronically filed
with, or furnished to, the securities and exchange commission
(sec).
the companys corporate governance guidelines and the charters of the board of directors
seven standing committees are available on the companys website at
www.merck.com/about/corporategovernance and all such information is available in print to any
stockholder who requests it from the company.
item1a. risk factors.
you should carefully
consider all of the information set forth in this form 10-k, including
the following risk factors, before deciding to invest in any of the companys securities. the
risks below are not the only ones the company faces. additional risks not currently known to the
company or that the company presently deems immaterial may also impair its business operations.
the companys business, financial condition, results of operations or prospects could be materially
adversely affected by any of these risks. this form 10-k also contains forward-looking statements
that involve risks and uncertainties. the companys results could materially differ from those
anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including the risks
it faces as described below and elsewhere. see cautionary factors that may affect future results
on page 22.
the company faces significant litigation related to vioxx.
on september30, 2004,
the company voluntarily withdrew vioxx, its arthritis and acute pain
medication, from the market worldwide. as of december31, 2005,
approximately 9,650 product
liability lawsuits, involving approximately 19,100 plaintiff groups, alleging personal injuries resulting
from the use of vioxx, have been filed against the company in state and federal courts in the
united states. the company is also a defendant in purported class actions related to the use of
vioxx. (all
of these suits are referred to as the vioxx product
liability lawsuits). in addition to the
vioxx product liability lawsuits, a number of purported class actions have been brought against the
company and several current and former officers and directors of the company alleging that the
company made false and misleading statements regarding vioxx in violation of the federal securities
laws (all of these suits are referred to as the vioxx securities lawsuits) and the employee
retirement income security act (erisa) (all of these suits are referred to as the vioxx erisa
lawsuits). in addition, a number of shareholders have filed derivative suits and one shareholder
table of contents
has filed a demand asserting claims against the board members
and company officers. (all of these
suits are referred to as the vioxx derivative
lawsuits and, together with the vioxx securities
lawsuits and the vioxx erisa lawsuits, the vioxx shareholder lawsuits). the company has also
been named as a defendant in actions in various countries outside the united states. (all of these
suits are referred to as the vioxx foreign
lawsuits). the company has also been sued by four states with
respect to the marketing of vioxx. the company anticipates that additional
lawsuits relating to vioxx will be filed against it and/or certain of its current and former
officers and directors in the future.
the sec is conducting a formal investigation of the
company concerning vioxx. the u.s. department of justice has issued a subpoena requesting
information relating to the companys research, marketing and selling activities with respect to
vioxx in a federal health care investigation under criminal statutes. there are also ongoing
investigations by certain congressional committees and local authorities in europe. a group of
attorneys general from thirty-one states and the district of columbia are conducting an
investigation of the companys sales and marketing of vioxx. the company is cooperating with
authorities in all of these investigations. (all of these investigations are referred to as the
vioxx investigations). the company can not predict the outcome of any of these investigations;
however, they could result in potential civil and/or criminal liability.
three vioxx product
liability lawsuits in the u.s. have gone to trial and resulted in
jury verdicts.
on august19, 2005, in a trial in state court in texas, the jury in ernst vs. merck reached a
verdict in favor of the plaintiff and purported to award her a total of $253million in
compensatory and punitive damages. under texas law, the maximum amount that could be awarded to
the plaintiff is capped at approximately $26million. the company intends to appeal this verdict
after the completion of post-trial proceedings in the trial court and believes that it has strong
points to raise on appeal. since the company believes that the potential for an unfavorable
outcome is not probable, the company has not established a reserve with respect to the verdict.
on november3, 2005, in the second vioxx personal injury case to go to trial, frederick and
mary jackson humeston vs. merck & co., inc., in the superior court of new jersey, law division,
atlantic county, a jury returned a verdict in favor of the company on all counts. the jury found,
by an 8 to 1 vote, that the company did not fail to provide an adequate warning to prescribing
physicians of an association between vioxx and an increased risk of serious cardiovascular events
prior to mr.humestons heart attack. the jury also unanimously found that the company did not
violate the new jersey consumer fraud act in marketing the drug to prescribing physicians.
on february17, 2006, in a re-trial of a case in federal court in new orleans brought by
evelyn irvin plunkett, on behalf of her late husband, richard irvin, jr., who died from an apparent
heart attack, the jury returned a verdict in favor of merck on all counts.
the
outcomes of these first
three vioxx product liability trials should not be interpreted to indicate any trend
or what outcome may be likely in future vioxx trials.
the company currently anticipates that a number of vioxx product liability lawsuits will be
tried in 2006. the company cannot predict the timing of any trials with respect to the vioxx
shareholder lawsuits. the company believes that it has meritorious defenses to the vioxx product
liability lawsuits, vioxx shareholder lawsuits and vioxx foreign lawsuits (collectively, the vioxx
lawsuits) and will vigorously defend against them. the company believes that its insurance
coverage with respect to the vioxx lawsuits will not be adequate to cover its defensive costs and
any losses.
during 2005, the company spent $285million in the aggregate in legal defense costs worldwide
related to (i)the vioxx product liability lawsuits,
(ii)the vioxx shareholder lawsuits, (iii)the
vioxx foreign lawsuits, and (iv)the vioxx investigations (collectively, the vioxx litigation).
in the fourth quarter of 2005, the company recorded a charge of $295million to increase the
reserve solely for its future legal defense costs related to the vioxx litigation from $675million
at december31, 2004 to $685million at december31, 2005. this reserve is based on certain
assumptions, described below under legal proceedings, and is the best estimate of the amount that
the
table of contents
company believes, at this time, it can reasonably estimate will be spent through 2007.
the company is not currently able to estimate any amount of damages that it may be required to
pay in connection with the vioxx lawsuits or vioxx investigations. these proceedings, which are
expected to continue for years, are currently at a very early stage and the company has very little
information as to the course they will take. in view of the inherent difficulty of predicting the
outcome of litigation, particularly where there are many claimants and the claimants seek
indeterminate damages, the company is unable to predict the outcome of these matters, and at this
time cannot reasonably estimate the possible loss or range of loss with respect to the vioxx
lawsuits. the company has not established any reserves for any potential liability relating to the
vioxx lawsuits or the vioxx investigations.
a series of unfavorable outcomes in the vioxx lawsuits or the vioxx investigations, resulting
in the payment of substantial damages or fines or resulting in criminal penalties, could have a
material adverse effect on the companys business, cash flow, results of operations, financial
position and prospects.
certain of the companys major products are going to lose patent protection in the near future
and, when that occurs, the company expects a significant decline in sales of those products.
the company depends upon patents to provide it with exclusive marketing rights for its
products for some period of time. as product patents for several of the companys products have
recently expired, or are about to expire, in the united states and in other countries, the company
faces strong competition from lower price generic drugs. loss of patent protection for one of the
companys products typically leads to a rapid loss of sales for that product, as lower priced
generic versions of that drug become available. in the case of products that contribute
significantly to the companys sales, the loss of patent protection can have a material adverse
effect on the companys results of operations.
in 2003, zocor, the companys statin for modifying cholesterol and currently its largest
revenue-producing product, lost its basic patent protection in canada and certain countries in
europe, including the united kingdom and germany, and the company experienced a decline in zocor
sales in those countries as the result of the availability of a generic version. worldwide sales
of zocor were $4.4billion in 2005, compared to $5.2billion in 2004. in june2006, zocor will
lose its market exclusivity in the united states, and the company expects a significant decline in
zocor sales after that time.
in august2004, the opposition division of the european patent office rendered a decision to
revoke the companys patent in europe that covers the weekly administration of alendronate. that
decision has been appealed and a hearing is scheduled for march14 and 15. decisions in such
proceedings are typically rendered at the end of the hearing. if the decision is upheld, the
company will not be entitled to market exclusivity for fosamax in most major european markets after
2007. moreover, mercks basic patent covering the use of alendronate has been challenged in
several european countries and if the company is unsuccessful in those countries the company could
lose exclusivity rights to fosamax before 2007 in such countries. the company would expect a
significant decline in european sales of fosamax after loss of exclusivity. sales of fosamax
outside the united states in 2005 have already been adversely affected by the availability of
generic products in some markets, including the united kingdom, canada and germany. nonetheless,
global sales of fosamax grew 1% in 2005 to $3.2billion, as a result of strong sales in the united
states.
on january28, 2005, the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit in washington, d.c.
found the companys patent claims for once-weekly administration of fosamax to be invalid. the
company exhausted all options to appeal this decision in 2005. based on the court of appeals
decision, fosamax will lose its market exclusivity in the united states in february2008, and the
company expects a significant decline in fosamax sales after that time.
table of contents
the companys research and development efforts may not succeed in developing commercially
successful products and the company may not be able to acquire commercially successful products in
other ways; in consequence, the company may not be able to replace sales of successful products
that have lost patent protection.
like other major pharmaceutical companies, in order to remain competitive, the company must
continue to launch new products each year. declines in sales of products such as zocor and fosamax
mean that the companys future success is dependent on its pipeline of new products, including new
products which it develops through joint ventures and products which it is able to obtain through
license or acquisition. to accomplish this, the company commits substantial effort, funds and
other resources to research and development, both through its own dedicated resources, and through
various collaborations with third parties. to support its research and development efforts the
company must make ongoing, substantial expenditures, without any assurance that the efforts it is
funding will result in a commercially successful product. the company must also commit substantial
efforts, funds and other resources to recruiting and retaining high quality scientists and other
personnel with pharmaceutical research and development expertise.
based on fda statistics, drug development time from initiation of preclinical testing to nda
approval can range from 5 to 20years with an average of 8.5years. for a description of the
research and development process, see research and development. each phase of testing is highly
regulated, and during each phase there is a substantial risk that the company will encounter
serious obstacles or will not achieve its goals, and accordingly the company may abandon a product
in which it has invested substantial amounts of time and money. some of the risks encountered in
the research and development process include the following: pre-clinical testing of a new compound
may yield disappointing results; clinical trials of a new drug may not be successful; a new drug
may not be effective or may have harmful side effects; a new drug may not be approved by the fda
for its intended use; it may not be possible to obtain a patent for a new drug; or sales of a new
product may be disappointing.
the company cannot state with certainty when or whether any of its products now under
development will be launched; whether it will be able to develop, license or otherwise acquire
compounds, product candidates or products; or whether any products, once launched, will be
commercially successful. the company must maintain a continuous flow of successful new products
and successful new indications or brand extensions for existing products sufficient both to cover
its substantial research and development costs and to replace sales that are lost as profitable
products, such as zocor and fosamax, lose patent protection or are displaced by competing products
or therapies. failure to do so in the short term or long term would have a material adverse effect
on the companys business, results of operations, cash flow, financial position and prospects.
the companys products, including products in development, can not be marketed unless the
company obtains and maintains regulatory approval.
the companys activities, including research, preclinical testing, clinical trials and
manufacturing and marketing its products, are subject to extensive regulation by numerous federal,
state and local governmental authorities in the united states, including the fda, and by foreign
regulatory authorities, including the european commission. in the united states, the fda is of
particular importance to the company, as it administers requirements covering the testing,
approval, safety, effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling and marketing of prescription
pharmaceuticals. in many cases, the fda requirements have increased the amount of time and money
necessary to develop new products and bring them to market in the united states. regulation
outside the united states also is primarily focused on drug safety and effectiveness and, in many
cases, cost reduction. the fda and foreign regulatory authorities have substantial discretion to
require additional testing, to delay or withhold registration and marketing approval and to mandate
product withdrawals.
even if the company is successful in developing new products, it will not be able to market
any of those products unless and until it has obtained all required regulatory approvals in each
jurisdiction where it proposes to market the new products. once obtained, the company must
maintain approval as long as it plans to market its new products in each jurisdiction where
approval is required. the companys failure to obtain approval, significant
table of contents
delays in the approval
process, or its failure to maintain approval in any jurisdiction will prevent it from selling the
new products in that jurisdiction until approval is obtained, if ever. the company would not be
able to realize revenues for those new products in any jurisdiction where it does not have
approval.
the company is dependent on its patent rights, and if its patent rights are invalidated or
circumvented, its business would be adversely affected.
patent protection is considered, in the aggregate, to be of material importance in the
companys marketing of human health products in the united states and in most major foreign
markets. patents covering products that it has introduced normally provide market exclusivity,
which is important for the successful marketing and sale of its products. the company seeks
patents covering each of its products in each of the markets where it intends to sell the products
and where meaningful patent protection is available.
even if the company succeeds in obtaining patents covering its products, third parties may
challenge or seek to invalidate or circumvent its patents and patent applications. it is important
for the companys business to defend successfully the patent rights that provide market exclusivity
for its products. the company is often involved in patent disputes relating to challenges to its
patents or infringement and similar claims against the company. the company aggressively defends
its important patents both within and outside the united states, including by filing claims of
infringement against other parties. see legal proceedings  patent litigation. in particular,
manufacturers of generic pharmaceutical products from time to time file abbreviated new drug
applications (anda) with the fda seeking to market generic forms of the companys products prior to the
expiration of relevant patents owned by the company. the company normally responds by vigorously
defending its patent, including by filing lawsuits alleging patent infringement. patent litigation
and other challenges to the companys patents are costly and unpredictable and may deprive the
company of market exclusivity for a patented product or, in some cases, third party patents may
prevent the company from marketing and selling a product in a particular geographic area.
if one or more important products lose patent protection in profitable markets, sales of those
products are likely to decline significantly as a result of generic versions of those products
becoming available. the companys results of operations may be adversely affected by the lost
sales unless and until the company has successfully launched commercially successful replacement
products.
the company faces intense competition from lower-cost generic products.
in general, the company faces increasing competition from lower-cost generic products. the
patent rights that protect its products are of varying strengths and durations. in addition, in
some countries, patent protection is significantly weaker than in the
united states or the eu. in the united states, political pressures to reduce spending on
prescription drugs has led to legislation which encourages the use of generic products.
although it is the companys policy to actively protect its patent rights, generic challenges to
the companys products can arise at any time, and it may not be able to prevent the emergence of
generic competition for its products.
loss of patent protection for a product typically is followed promptly by generic substitutes,
reducing the companys sales of that product. availability of generic substitutes for the
companys drugs may adversely affect its results of operations and cash flow. in addition,
proposals emerge from time to time in the united states and other countries for legislation to
further encourage the early and rapid approval of generic drugs. any such proposal that is enacted
into law could worsen this substantial negative effect on the companys sales and, potentially, its
results of operations and cash flow.
the company faces intense competition from new products.
the companys products face intense competition from competitors products. this competition
may increase as new products enter the market. in such an event, the competitors products may be
safer or more
table of contents
effective or more effectively marketed and sold than the companys products.
alternatively, in the case of generic competition, they may be equally safe and effective products
which are sold at a substantially lower price than the companys products. as a result, if the
company fails to maintain its competitive position, this could have a material adverse effect on
its business and results of operations.
cautionary factors that may affect future results
(cautionary statements under the private securities litigation reform act of 1995)
this report and other written reports and oral statements made from time to time by the
company may contain so-called forward-looking statements, all of which are based on managements
current expectations and are subject to risks and uncertainties which may cause results to differ
materially from those set forth in the statements. one can identify these forward-looking
statements by their use of words such as expects, plans, will, estimates, forecasts,
projects and other words of similar meaning. one can also identify them by the fact that they do
not relate strictly to historical or current facts. these statements are likely to address the
companys growth strategy, financial results, product development, product approvals, product
potential, and development programs. one must carefully consider any such statement and should
understand that many factors could cause actual results to differ materially from the companys
forward-looking statements. these factors include inaccurate assumptions and a broad variety of
other risks and uncertainties, including some that are known and some that are not. no
forward-looking statement can be guaranteed and actual future results may vary materially. the
company cautions you not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. although it
is not possible to predict or identify all such factors, they may include the following:
significant litigation related to vioxx.
competition from generic products as the companys products lose patent protection.
increased brand competition in therapeutic areas important to the companys long-term business performance.
the difficulties and uncertainties inherent in new product development. the outcome of the lengthy and complex process
of new product development is inherently uncertain. a candidate can fail at any stage of the process and one or more
late-stage product candidates could fail to receive regulatory approval. new product candidates may appear promising
in development but fail to reach the market because of efficacy or safety concerns, the inability to obtain necessary
regulatory approvals, the difficulty or excessive cost to manufacture and/or the infringement of patents or
intellectual property rights of others. furthermore, the sales of new products may prove to be disappointing and fail
to reach anticipated levels.
pricing pressures, both in the united states and abroad, including rules and practices of managed care groups, judicial
decisions and governmental laws and regulations related to medicare, medicaid and health care reform, pharmaceutical
reimbursement and pricing in general.
changes in government laws and regulations and the enforcement thereof affecting the companys business.
table of contents
efficacy or safety concerns with respect to marketed products, whether or not scientifically justified, leading to
product recalls, withdrawals or declining sales.
legal factors, including product liability claims, antitrust litigation and governmental investigations, including tax
disputes, environmental concerns and patent disputes with branded and generic competitors, any of which could preclude
commercialization of products or negatively affect the profitability of existing products.
lost market opportunity resulting from delays and uncertainties in the approval process of the fda and foreign
regulatory authorities.
increased focus on privacy issues in countries around the world, including the united states and the eu. in the united
states, federal and state governments have pursued legislative and regulatory initiatives regarding patient privacy,
including federal and recently issued state privacy regulations concerning health information, which have affected the
companys operations.
changes in tax laws including changes related to the taxation of foreign earnings.
changes in accounting pronouncements promulgated by standard-setting or regulatory bodies, including the financial
accounting standards board and the sec, that are adverse to the company.
economic factors over which the company has no control, including changes in inflation, interest rates and foreign
currency exchange rates.
this list should not be considered an exhaustive statement of all potential risks and
uncertainties. see risk factors on page 17.
item1b. unresolved staff comments.
none
item2. properties.
the companys corporate headquarters is located in whitehouse station, new jersey. the
companys u.s. pharmaceutical business is conducted through divisional headquarters located in
upper gwynedd and west point, pennsylvania. the companys vaccines business is conducted through
divisional headquarters located in west point. principal research facilities for human health
products are located in rahway, new jersey and west point. the company also has production
facilities for human health products at nine locations in the united states and puerto rico.
branch warehouses provide services throughout the country. outside the united states, through
subsidiaries, the company owns or has an interest in manufacturing plants or other properties in
australia, canada, japan, singapore, south africa, and other countries in western europe, central
and south america, and asia.
capital
expenditures for 2005 were $1.4billion compared with $1.7billion for 2004.
in the united states, these amounted to $938.7million for 2005
and $1.1billion for 2004.
abroad, such expenditures amounted to $464.0million for 2005 and $582.5million for 2004.
the company and its subsidiaries own their principal facilities and manufacturing plants under
titles which they consider to be satisfactory. the company considers that its properties are in
good operating condition and that its machinery and equipment have been well maintained. plants
for the manufacture of products are suitable for their intended purposes and have capacities and
projected capacities adequate for current and projected needs for
table of contents
existing company products. some
capacity of the plants is being converted, with any needed modification, to the requirements of
newly introduced and future products.
item3. legal proceedings.
the company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings of a nature considered normal
to its business, including product liability, intellectual property, and commercial litigation, as
well as additional matters such as antitrust actions.
vioxx
litigation
product liability lawsuits
as previously disclosed, federal and state product liability lawsuits involving individual
claims, as well as putative class actions, have been filed against the company with respect to
vioxx. as of december31, 2005, the company has been served or is aware that it has been named
as a defendant in approximately 9,650 lawsuits, which include approximately 19,100 plaintiff
groups, alleging personal injuries resulting from the use of vioxx. of these lawsuits,
approximately 4,350 lawsuits representing approximately 12,075 plaintiff groups are or are slated
to be in the federal mdl (discussed below) and approximately 4,200 lawsuits representing
approximately 4,200 plaintiff groups are included in a coordinated proceeding in new jersey
superior court before judge carol e. higbee. certain of these lawsuits include allegations
regarding gastrointestinal bleeding, cardiovascular events, thrombotic events or kidney damage.
the company has also been named as a defendant in approximately 190 putative class actions
alleging personal injuries or seeking (i)medical monitoring as a result of the putative class
members use of vioxx, (ii)disgorgement of certain profits under common law unjust enrichment
theories, and/or (iii)various remedies under state consumer fraud and fair business practice
statutes, including recovering the cost of vioxx purchased by individuals and third-party payors
such as union health plans (all of the actions discussed in this paragraph are collectively
referred to as the vioxx product liability lawsuits). the actions filed in the state courts of
california, texas, new jersey, and philadelphia, pennsylvania, respectively, have been
transferred to a single judge in each state for coordinated proceedings.
on february16, 2005, the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation (the jpml)
transferred all vioxx product liability lawsuits pending in federal courts nationwide into one
multidistrict litigation (mdl) for coordinated pre-trial proceedings. the mdl has been
transferred to the united states district court for the eastern district of louisiana before
district judge eldon e. fallon.
judge fallon has indicated that he intends to try a series of cases during the period
november2005 through 2006, in the following categories: (i)heart attack with short term use;
(ii)heart attack with long term use; (iii)stroke; and (iv)cardiovascular injury involving a
prescription written after april2002 when the labeling for vioxx was revised to include the
results of the vigor trial. in november and december2005, the case brought by evelyn irvin
plunkett, on behalf of her late husband richard irvin, jr., who died from an apparent heart
attack, was tried in houston, texas. plaintiff alleged that mr.irvin took vioxx for
approximately one month and, thus, the action fell within the category of heart attack with short
term use. after deliberating for two and one-half days, the court found that the jury was
deadlocked and declared a mistrial. federal court rules require a unanimous verdict. the
retrial of the case commenced on february6, 2006 in new orleans, louisiana. on february17, the
jury returned a verdict in favor of merck on all counts.
the next scheduled mdl trial is diaz v. merck, a case in which plaintiffs claim a heart
attack with long term use, which is scheduled for june (it was previously scheduled for may). in
addition to the diaz case and the garza case discussed below, other vioxx product liability
lawsuits are currently scheduled for trial in 2006. the company intends to provide a list of
such trials at its website at www.merck.com which it will periodically update as appropriate.
the company has included its website address only as an inactive textual reference and does not
intend it to be an active link to its website nor does it incorporate by reference the
information contained therein.
table of contents
merck has entered into a tolling agreement (the tolling agreement) with the mdl
plaintiffs steering committee that establishes a procedure to halt the running of the statute of
limitations (tolling)as to certain categories of claims allegedly arising from the use of vioxx
by non-new jersey citizens. the tolling agreement applies to individuals who have not filed
lawsuits and may or may not eventually file lawsuits and only to those claimants who seek to toll
claims alleging injuries resulting from a thrombotic cardiovascular event that results in a
myocardial infarction or ischemic stroke. the tolling agreement provides counsel additional time
to evaluate potential claims. the tolling agreement requires any tolled claims to be filed in
federal court. as of december31, 2005, approximately 3,800 claimants had entered into tolling
agreements.
as previously disclosed, on august19, 2005, in a trial in state court in texas, the jury in
ernst vs. merck reached a verdict in favor of the plaintiff and purported to award her a total of
$253million in compensatory and punitive damages. under texas law, the maximum amount that
could be awarded to the plaintiff is capped at approximately $26million. the company intends to
appeal this verdict after the completion of post-trial proceedings in the trial court. the
company believes that it has strong points to raise on appeal and is hopeful that the appeals
process will correct the verdict. since the company believes that the potential for an
unfavorable outcome is not probable, it has not established a reserve with respect to the
verdict.
on
november3, 2005, in the case of frederick and mary jackson humeston vs. merck, superior court of new jersey, law division, atlantic county, a jury returned a verdict in
favor of merck on all counts. the case was the second vioxx personal injury case to go to trial.
mr.humeston, a 60-year old united states postal employee from idaho, alleged that he suffered a
heart attack in september2001 as a result of taking vioxx. he sought compensatory and punitive
damages. the jury found, by an 8 to 1 vote, that merck did not fail to provide an adequate
warning to prescribing physicians of an association between vioxx and an increased risk of
serious cardiovascular events prior to mr.humestons heart attack. the jury also unanimously
found that merck did not violate the new jersey consumer fraud act in marketing the drug to
prescribing physicians.
the trial of garza v. heart clinic, evans, posada and merck, began on january
24, 2006, in the 229th judicial district court of starr county, texas. the company
believes the evidence in this case will show that vioxx did not cause the heart attack of leonel
garza, sr. mr.garza, 71, died of a heart attack on april21, 2001, following 23years of
cardiovascular disease and a prior heart attack. approximately one month before his death, the
company maintains that mr.garza was given a one-week supply of vioxx 25 mg samples for pain.
in addition, trial proceedings in the consolidated trial of cona v. merck and mcdarby v.
merck began on february27, 2006 in the new jersey superior
court, law division, atlantic county
before judge higbee. the company believes the evidence will show that vioxx did not cause either
mr.mcdarby, 77, or mr.cona, 59, to have a heart attack.
other lawsuits
as previously disclosed, on july29, 2005, a new jersey state trial court certified a
nationwide class of third-party payors (such as unions and health insurance plans) that paid in
whole or in part for the vioxx used by their plan members or insureds. the named plaintiff in
that case seeks recovery of certain vioxx purchase costs (plus penalties) based on allegations
that the purported class members paid more for vioxx than they would have had they known of the
products alleged risks. merck believes that the class was improperly certified. the trial
courts ruling is procedural only; it does not address the merits of plaintiffs allegations,
which the company intends to defend vigorously. the new jersey state superior court, appellate
division, has accepted mercks appeal of the class certification order on an expedited basis.
as previously reported, the company has also been named as a defendant in separate lawsuits
brought by the attorneys general of louisiana, mississippi, and texas. the attorney general of
alaska has also recently filed a lawsuit. these actions allege that the company misrepresented
the safety of vioxx and seek (i)recovery of the cost of vioxx purchased or reimbursed by the
state and its agencies; (ii)reimbursement of all sums paid by the state and its agencies for
medical services for the treatment of persons injured by vioxx; (iii)damages under various
common law theories; and/or (iv)remedies under various state statutory theories, including state
table of contents
consumer fraud and/or fair business practices or medicaid fraud statutes, including civil
penalties.
shareholder lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the vioxx product liability lawsuits, the company,
along with various current and former officers and directors of the company, are defendants in a
number of putative class actions and individual lawsuits filed in (or removed to) federal court
by shareholders under the federal securities laws (the vioxx securities lawsuits), all of which
have been transferred by the jpml, along with related lawsuits discussed below, to the united
states district court for the district of new jersey before district judge stanley r. chesler for
inclusion in a nationwide mdl for coordinated pretrial proceedings (the shareholder mdl).
judge chesler has consolidated the vioxx securities lawsuits for all purposes. on june9, 2005,
plaintiffs in the vioxx securities lawsuits filed a fourth consolidated and amended classaction
complaint superseding prior complaints in the various cases (the complaint). plaintiffs
request certification of a class of purchasers of company stock between may21, 1999 and october
29, 2004. the complaint alleges that the defendants made false and misleading statements
regarding vioxx in violation of sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934,
and seeks unspecified compensatory damages and the costs of suit, including attorneys fees. the
complaint also asserts a claim under section20a of the securities and exchange act against
certain defendants relating to their sales of merck stock. in addition, the complaint includes
allegations under sections11, 12 and 15 of the securities act of 1933 that certain defendants
made incomplete and misleading statements in a registration statement and certain prospectuses
filed in connection with the merck stock investment plan, a dividend reinvestment plan.
defendants have filed a motion to dismiss the complaint, which is pending.
as previously disclosed, on august15, 2005, a complaint was filed in oregon state court by
the state of oregon through the oregon state treasurer on behalf of the oregon public employee
retirement fund against the company and certain current and former officers and directors. the
complaint, which was brought under oregon securities law, alleges that plaintiff has suffered
damages in connection with its purchases of merck common stock at artificially inflated prices
due to the companys alleged violations of law related to disclosures about vioxx. the company
removed this lawsuit to the u.s. district court for the district of oregon, however, plaintiff
moved to remand the case to state court, which motion was granted.
as previously disclosed, a number of shareholder derivative actions have been filed in
federal court and in new jersey superior court naming the company as a nominal defendant and
certain members of the board (past and present), together with certain executive officers, as
defendants. the complaints arise out of substantially the same factual allegations that are made
in the vioxx securities lawsuits. the derivative suits, which are purportedly brought to assert
rights of the company, assert claims against the board members and officers for breach of
fiduciary duty, waste of corporate assets, unjust enrichment, abuse of control and gross
mismanagement. all of the actions discussed in this paragraph are collectively referred to as
the vioxx derivative lawsuits. the jpml has transferred the vioxx derivative lawsuits pending
in federal court to the shareholder mdl. judge chesler has consolidated the vioxx derivative
lawsuits for all purposes. on june20, 2005, the federal derivative plaintiffs filed a verified
consolidated shareholders derivative complaint superseding prior complaints in the various
cases. defendants have filed a motion to dismiss this complaint, which is pending. in addition,
the vioxx derivative lawsuits pending in new jersey superior court were consolidated and
transferred to judge higbee in atlantic county, and on april29, 2005, state plaintiffs filed a
superseding verified consolidated amended shareholder derivative complaint. on january19, 2006,
these two shareholder derivative cases were dismissed without prejudice. the cases were
dismissed when the court granted defendants motion to stay the cases. the courts order permits
plaintiffs to re-file their complaints once the consolidated federal shareholder derivative case
has been resolved.
as previously disclosed, on october29, 2004, two individual shareholders made a demand on
the board to take legal action against mr.raymond gilmartin, former chairman, president and
chief executive officer and other individuals for allegedly causing damage to the company with
respect to the allegedly improper marketing of vioxx. in response to that demand letter, the
board of directors determined at its november23, 2004 meeting that the board would take the
shareholders request under consideration and it remains under consideration.
table of contents
in addition, as previously disclosed, a number of putative class actions have been filed
against the company and certain current and former officers and directors of the company in
federal court (the vioxx erisa lawsuits and, together with the vioxx securities lawsuits and
the vioxx derivative lawsuits, the vioxx shareholder lawsuits) on behalf of certain of the
companys current and former employees who are participants in certain of the companys
retirement plans asserting claims under the employee retirement income security act (erisa).
the lawsuits make similar allegations to the allegations contained in the vioxx securities
lawsuits and claim that the defendants breached their duties as plan fiduciaries. the jpml has
transferred all vioxx erisa lawsuits to the shareholder mdl. judge chesler has consolidated the
vioxx erisa lawsuits for all purposes. a consolidated and amended complaint was filed in the
vioxx erisa lawsuits on august2, 2005. defendants have filed a motion to dismiss this
complaint, which is pending.
international lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the lawsuits discussed above, the company has been
named as a defendant in litigation relating to vioxx in various countries (collectively, the
vioxx foreign lawsuits) in europe, canada, brazil, australia, turkey, and israel.
additional lawsuits
based on media reports and other sources, the company anticipates that additional vioxx
product liability lawsuits, vioxx shareholder lawsuits and vioxx foreign lawsuits (collectively,
the vioxx lawsuits) will be filed against it and/or certain of its current and former officers
and directors in the future.
insurance
as previously disclosed, the company has product liability insurance for claims brought in
the vioxx product liability lawsuits with stated upper limits of approximately $630million after
deductibles and co-insurance. this insurance provides coverage for legal defense costs and
potential damage amounts that have been or will be incurred in connection with the vioxx product
liability lawsuits. the company believes that this insurance coverage extends to additional
vioxx product liability lawsuits that may be filed in the future. the company has directors and
officers insurance coverage applicable to the vioxx securities lawsuits and vioxx derivative
lawsuits with stated upper limits of approximately $190million. the company has fiduciary and
other insurance for the vioxx erisa lawsuits with stated upper limits of approximately $275
million. additional insurance coverage for these claims may also be available under upper-level
excess policies that provide coverage for a variety of risks. there are disputes with certain
insurers about the availability of some or all of this insurance coverage and there are likely to
be additional disputes. at this time, the company believes that its insurance coverage with
respect to the vioxx lawsuits will not be adequate to cover its defense costs and any losses.
as previously disclosed, the companys upper level excess insurers (which provide excess
insurance potentially applicable to all of the vioxx lawsuits) have commenced an arbitration
seeking, among other things, to cancel those policies, to void all of their obligations under
those policies and to raise other coverage issues with respect to the vioxx lawsuits. a second
arbitration against one of the companys upper level excess insurers has also been commenced.
merck intends to contest vigorously the insurers claims and will attempt to enforce its rights
under applicable insurance policies. the amounts actually recovered under the policies discussed
in this section may be less than the amounts specified in the preceding paragraph.
investigations
as
previously disclosed, in november2004, the company was advised by the staff of the sec that it was commencing an informal inquiry
concerning vioxx. on january28, 2005, the company announced that it received notice that the
sec issued a formal notice of investigation. also, the company received a subpoena from the u.s.
department of justice (the doj) requesting information related to the companys research,
marketing and selling activities with respect to vioxx in a federal health care investigation
under criminal statutes. there are also ongoing investigations by certain congressional
committees. as previously disclosed, the companys u.k. subsidiary has been notified by the
medicines and healthcare
table of contents
products regulatory agency in the united kingdom (the mhra) of an
investigation by the mhra of compliance by the company with eu adverse
experience reporting requirements in connection with vioxx. in addition, as previously
disclosed, investigations are being conducted by local authorities in certain cities in europe in
order to determine whether any criminal charges should be brought concerning vioxx. the company
is cooperating with these governmental entities in their respective investigations (the vioxx
investigations). the company cannot predict the outcome of these inquiries; however, they could
result in potential civil and/or criminal dispositions.
as
previously disclosed, the company has received a civil investigative
demand (cid) from a group
of attorneys general from 31 states and the district of columbia who are investigating whether
the company violated state consumer protection laws when marketing vioxx. the company is
cooperating with the attorneys general in responding to the cid.
reserves
the company currently anticipates that a number of vioxx product liability lawsuits will be
tried in 2006. the company cannot predict the timing of any trials with respect to the vioxx
shareholder lawsuits. the company believes that it has meritorious defenses to the vioxx
lawsuits and will vigorously defend against them. in view of the inherent difficulty of
predicting the outcome of litigation, particularly where there are many claimants and the
claimants seek indeterminate damages, the company is unable to predict the outcome of these
matters, and at this time cannot reasonably estimate the possible loss or range of loss with
respect to the vioxx lawsuits. the company has not established any reserves for any potential
liability relating to the vioxx lawsuits or the vioxx
investigations.
legal defense costs expected to be incurred in connection with a loss contingency are
accrued when probable and reasonably estimable. as of december31, 2004, the company had
established a reserve of $675million solely for its future legal defense costs related to the
vioxx litigation.
during 2005, the company spent $285million in the aggregate in legal defense costs
worldwide related to (i)the vioxx product liability lawsuits, (ii)the vioxx shareholder
lawsuits, (iii)the vioxx foreign lawsuits, and (iv)the vioxx investigations (collectively, the
vioxx litigation). in the fourth quarter, the company recorded a charge of $295million to
increase the reserve solely for its future legal defense costs related to the vioxx litigation to
$685million at december31, 2005. this reserve is based on certain assumptions and is the best
estimate of the amount that the company believes, at this time, it can reasonably estimate will
be spent through 2007. some of the significant factors considered in the establishment and
ongoing review of the reserve for the vioxx legal defense costs were as follows: the actual
costs incurred by the company up to that time; the development of the companys legal defense
strategy and structure in light of the scope of the vioxx litigation; the number of cases being
brought against the company; the costs and outcomes of completed trials and the anticipated
timing, progression, and related costs of pre-trial activities and trials in the vioxx product
liability lawsuits. events such as scheduled trials, that are expected to occur throughout 2006
and into 2007, and the inherent inability to predict the ultimate outcomes of such trials, limit
the companys ability to reasonably estimate its legal costs beyond the end of 2007. the
company will continue to monitor its legal defense costs and review the adequacy of the
associated reserves. unfavorable outcomes in the vioxx litigation could have a material adverse
effect on the companys financial position, liquidity and results of operations.
commercial litigation
beginning in 1993, the company was named in a number of antitrust suits, certain of which
were certified as class actions, instituted by most of the nations retail pharmacies and
consumers in several states. the company settled the federal class action, which represented the
single largest group of claims and has settled substantially all of the remaining cases on
satisfactory terms. the few remaining cases have been inactive for several years. the company
has not engaged in any conspiracy and no admission of wrongdoing was made or included in any
settlement agreements.
as previously disclosed, the company was joined in ongoing litigation alleging manipulation
by
table of contents
pharmaceutical manufacturers of average wholesale prices (awp), which are sometimes used in
calculations that determine public and private sector reimbursement levels. in 2002, the jpml
ordered the transfer and consolidation of all pending federal awp cases to federal court in
boston, massachusetts. plaintiffs filed one consolidated class action complaint, which
aggregated the claims previously filed in various federal district court actions and also
expanded the number of manufacturers to include some which, like the company, had not been
defendants in any prior pending case. in may2003, the court granted the companys motion to
dismiss the consolidated class action and dismissed the company from the class action case.
subsequent to the companys dismissal, the plaintiffs filed an amended consolidated class action
complaint, which did not name the company as a defendant. the company and many other
pharmaceutical manufacturers are defendants in similar complaints pending in federal and state
court brought individually by a number of counties in the state of new york. the company and the
other defendants are awaiting the final ruling on their motion to dismiss in the suffolk county
case, which was the first of the new york county cases to be filed. in addition, as of december
31, 2005, the company was a defendant in state cases brought by the attorneys general of
kentucky, illinois, alabama, wisconsin, mississippi, and arizona, all of which are being
vigorously defended. the company has also received a letter inquiry from the attorney general of
idaho.
as previously disclosed, the company has been named as a defendant in antitrust cases in
federal court in minnesota and in state court in california, each alleging an unlawful conspiracy
among different sets of pharmaceutical manufacturers to protect high prices in the united states
by impeding importation into the united states of lower-priced pharmaceuticals from canada. the
court dismissed the federal claims in the minnesota case with prejudice and the plaintiffs have
filed a notice of appeal. the state claims in that action were dismissed without prejudice.
as previously disclosed, a suit in federal court in alabama by two providers of health
services to needy patients alleges that 15 pharmaceutical companies overcharged the plaintiffs
and a class of those similarly situated, for pharmaceuticals purchased by the plaintiffs under
the program established by section340b of the public health service act. the company and the
other defendants filed a motion to dismiss the complaint on numerous grounds which was recently
denied by the court.
as previously disclosed, in january2003, the doj notified the federal court in new orleans,
louisiana that it was not going to intervene at that time in a pending federal false claims act
case that was filed under seal in december1999 against the company. the court issued an order
unsealing the complaint, which was filed by a physician in louisiana, and ordered that the
complaint be served. the complaint, which alleged that the companys discounting of pepcid in
certain louisiana hospitals led to increases in costs to medicaid, was dismissed. an amended
complaint was filed under seal and the case has been administratively closed by the court until
the seal is lifted. the state of louisiana has filed its own amended complaint, incorporating the
allegations contained in the sealed amended complaint. the allegations contained in the sealed
amended complaint are unknown.
in april2005, the company was named in a qui tam lawsuit under the nevada false claims act.
the suit, in which the nevada attorney general has intervened, alleges that the company
inappropriately offered nominal pricing and other marketing and pricing inducements to certain
customers and also failed to comply with its obligations under the medicaid best price scheme
related to such arrangements. the company is vigorously defending against this lawsuit.
governmental proceedings
as previously disclosed, the company has received a subpoena from the doj in connection with
its investigation of the companys marketing and selling activities, including nominal pricing
programs and samples. the company has also reported that it has received a cid from the attorney general of texas regarding the companys marketing and selling
activities relating to texas. as previously disclosed, the company received another cid from the
attorney general of texas asking for additional information regarding the companys marketing and
selling activities related to texas, including with respect to certain of its nominal pricing
programs and samples. in april2004, the company received a subpoena from the
table of contents
office of the
inspector general for the district of columbia in connection with an investigation of the
companys interactions with physicians in the district of columbia, maryland, and virginia. in
november2004, the company received a letter request from the doj in connection with its
investigation of the companys pricing of pepcid. in september2005, the company received a
subpoena from the illinois attorney general. the subpoena seeks information related to
repackaging of prescription drugs.
as previously disclosed, the company has received a letter from the doj advising it of the
existence of a qui tam complaint alleging that the company violated certain rules related to its
calculations of best price and other federal pricing benchmark calculations, certain of which may
affect the companys medicaid rebate obligation.
the company is cooperating with all of these investigations. the company cannot predict the
outcome of these investigations; however, it is possible that unfavorable outcomes could have a
material adverse effect on the companys financial position, liquidity and results of operations.
in addition, from time to time, other federal, state or foreign regulators or authorities may
seek information about practices in the pharmaceutical industry or the companys business
practices in inquiries other than the investigations discussed in this section. it is not
feasible to predict the outcome of any such inquiries.
on february23, 2004, the italian antitrust authorities adopted a measure commencing a
formal investigation of merck sharp & dohme (italia) s.p.a. (msd italy) and the company under
article14 of the italian competition law and article82 ec to ascertain whether the company and
msd italy committed an abuse of a dominant position by virtue of the companys refusal to grant
to acs dobfar s.p.a. (dobfar), an italian company, a voluntary license, pursuant to domestic
legislation passed in 2002, to permit dobfar to manufacture tienam (imipenem and cilastatin) in
italy for sale outside italy, in countries where patent protection under the applicable domestic
rules has expired or never existed. the company has a supplementary protection certificate
(spc) which provides the company certain rights with respect to the manufacture and sale of
tienam in italy which expired in january2006. a hearing before the italian antitrust
authorities was held on may2, 2005. on june17, 2005, the italian antitrust authority (ica)
issued an order imposing interim measures requiring the company to grant a license to manufacture
tienam in italy. pursuant to the icas order, the license granted to dobfar will be limited to
the right to only manufacture and build supply stock of tienam and will not allow dobfar to
export tienam outside of italy or to sell their tienam product within italy prior to the expiry
of the spc. on november16, 2005, the italian administrative court denied the companys appeal
of the icas order. proceedings before the ica are ongoing.
vaccine litigation
as previously disclosed, the company is a party in claims brought under the consumer
protection act of 1987 in the united kingdom, which allege that certain children suffer from a
variety of conditions as a result of being vaccinated with various bivalent vaccines for measles
and rubella and/or trivalent vaccines for measles, mumps and rubella, including the companys
m-m-r ii. the conditions include autism, with or without inflammatory bowel disease, epilepsy,
encephalitis, encephalopathy, guillain-barre syndrome and transverse myelitis. there are now 26
claimants proceeding or, to the companys knowledge, intending to proceed against the company.
the company will vigorously defend against these lawsuits.
as previously disclosed, the company is also a party to individual and class action product
liability lawsuits and claims in the united states involving pediatric vaccines (e.g., hepatitis
b vaccine) that contained thimerosal, a preservative used in vaccines. merck has not distributed
thimerosal-containing pediatric vaccines in the united states since the fall of 2001. as of
december31, 2005, there were approximately 275 active thimerosal related lawsuits with
approximately 775 plaintiffs. other defendants include other vaccine manufacturers who produced
pediatric vaccines containing thimerosal as well as manufacturers of thimerosal. in these
actions, the plaintiffs allege, among other things, that they have suffered neurological injuries
as a result of exposure to thimerosal from pediatric vaccines. two state court cases and two
federal district court cases were scheduled for trial in 2005. all of these cases have been
dismissed. one case set for trial in 2006 was also dismissed. certain of the dismissals have
been appealed. the company will vigorously defend against these
table of contents
lawsuits; however, it is
possible that unfavorable outcomes could have a material adverse effect on the companys
financial position, liquidity and results of operations.
the company has been successful in having cases of this type either dismissed or stayed on
the ground that the action is prohibited under the national childhood vaccine injury act (the
vaccine act). the vaccine act prohibits any person from filing or maintaining a civil action
(in state or federal court) seeking damages against a vaccine manufacturer for vaccine-related
injuries unless a petition is first filed in the united states court of federal claims
(hereinafter the vaccine court). under the vaccine act, before filing a civil action against a
vaccine manufacturer, the petitioner must either (a)pursue his or her petition to conclusion in
vaccine court and then timely file an election to proceed with a civil action in lieu of
accepting the vaccine courts adjudication of the petition or (b)timely exercise a right to
withdraw the petition prior to vaccine court adjudication in accordance with certain statutorily
prescribed time periods. the company is aware that there are numerous cases pending in vaccine
court involving allegations that thimerosal-containing vaccines and/or the m-m-r ii vaccine cause
autism spectrum disorders. all of the cases referred to in the preceding paragraph as having
been dismissed have been brought by plaintiffs who claim to have made a timely withdrawal of
their vaccine court petition. the company is not a party to the vaccine court proceedings
because the petitions are brought against the department of health and human services.
patent litigation
from
time to time, generic manufacturers of pharmaceutical products file andas with the fda seeking to market generic forms of the companys
products prior to the expiration of relevant patents owned by the company. generic
pharmaceutical manufacturers have submitted andas to the fda seeking to market in the united
states a generic form of fosamax, prilosec, nexium, propecia, trusopt and cosopt prior to the
expiration of the companys (and astrazenecas in the case of prilosec and nexium) patents
concerning these products. the generic companies andas generally include allegations of
non-infringement, invalidity and unenforceability of the patents. generic manufacturers have
received fda approval to market a generic form of prilosec. the company has filed patent
infringement suits in federal court against companies filing andas for generic alendronate
(fosamax), finasteride (propecia), dorzolamide (trusopt) and dorzolamide/timolol (cosopt), and
astrazeneca and the company have filed patent infringement suits in federal court against
companies filing andas for generic omeprazole (prilosec) and esomeprazole (nexium). similar
patent challenges exist in certain foreign jurisdictions. the company intends to vigorously
defend its patents, which it believes are valid, against infringement by generic companies
attempting to market products prior to the expiration dates of such patents. as with any
litigation, there can be no assurance of the outcomes, which, if adverse, could result in
significantly shortened periods of exclusivity for these products.
as previously disclosed, on january28, 2005, the u.s. court of appeals for the federal
circuit in washington, d.c. found the companys patent claims for once-weekly administration of
fosamax to be invalid. the company exhausted all options to appeal this decision in 2005. based
on the court of appeals decision, fosamax will lose its market exclusivity in the united states
in february2008 and the company expects a significant decline in u.s. fosamax sales after that
time.
in may2005, the federal court of canada trial division issued a decision refusing to bar
the approval of generic alendronate on the ground that mercks patent for weekly alendronate was
likely invalid. this decision cannot be appealed and generic alendronate was launched in canada
in june2005. in july2005, merck was sued in the federal court of canada by apotex seeking
damages for lost sales of generic weekly alendronate due to the patent proceeding.
in january2003, the high court of justice for england and wales held that patents of the
company protecting the alendronate daily and weekly products were invalid in the united kingdom.
on november6, 2003, the court of appeals of england and wales affirmed the ruling by the high
court of justice for england and wales.
table of contents
european countries permit companies seeking approval of a generic product to reference data
of the innovative product in certain circumstances under data exclusivity regulations. the high
court of justice has affirmed the decision of the uk regulatory authority that its data for
weekly alendronate may be referenced by companies seeking approval of generic weekly alendronate
products. the company has filed for leave to appeal a judgment of a swedish administration court
affirming a grant by the swedish regulatory authority of approval of generic weekly alendronate
products which referenced the companys data on weekly alendronate for their approval. the
company has filed similar cases in other countries.
as previously announced by the company, on july20, 2004, the opposition division (the
opposition division) of the european patent office (the epo) rendered an oral decision to
revoke the companys patent in europe that covers the once-weekly administration of alendronate.
on august19, 2004, the written opinion was issued confirming the oral decision revoking the
companys patent. on september16, 2004, the company filed an appeal of this decision. the
hearing on the appeal is scheduled for march14 and 15, 2006. decisions in such proceedings are
typically rendered at the end of the hearing. if the decision is upheld, the company will not be entitled to market exclusivity for fosamax in most major european markets after2007. in addition, mercks basic patent covering the use of alendronate has been challenged in several european countries and if the company is unsuccessful in those countries the company could lose exclusivity rights to fosamax before 2007 in such
countries. the company is defending the alendronate weekly
product in other major european markets based on other patents.
on october5, 2004, in an action in australia challenging the validity of the companys
australian patent for the once-weekly administration of alendronate, the patent was found to be
invalid. the company has appealed the decision.
in addition, as previously disclosed, in japan a proceeding has been filed challenging the
validity of the companys japanese patent for the once-weekly administration of alendronate.
on
january18, 2006, the company sued hi-tech pharmacal co., inc.
(hi-tech) of amityville, new york
for patent infringement in response to hi-techs application to the fda seeking approval of a
generic version of mercks ophthalmic drugs trusopt and cosopt, which are used for treating
elevated intraocular pressure in people with ocular hypertension or glaucoma. in the lawsuit,
merck sued to enforce a patent covering an active ingredient dorzolamide, which is present in
both trusopt and cosopt. merck has elected not to enforce two u.s. patents listed with the fda
which cover the combination of dorzolamide and timolol, the two active ingredients in cosopt.
this lawsuit will automatically stay fda approval of hi-techs andas for 30months or until an
adverse court decision, whichever may occur earlier. the patent covering dorzolamide provides
exclusivity for trusopt and cosopt until october2008 (including six months of pediatric
exclusivity). after such time, the company expects sales of these products to decline.
in the case of omeprazole, the trial court in the united states rendered an opinion in
october2002 upholding the validity of the companys and astrazenecas patents covering the
stabilized formulation of omeprazole and ruling that one defendants omeprazole product did not
infringe those patents. the other three defendants products were found to infringe the
formulation patents. in december2003, the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit
affirmed the decision of the trial court. with respect to the companys patent infringement
claims against certain other generic manufacturers omeprazole products, trial is scheduled for
march2006.
the company and astrazeneca received notice in october2005 that ranbaxy laboratories
limited (ranbaxy) has filed an anda for esomeprazole magnesium. the anda contains paragraphiv
challenges to patents on nexium. on november21, 2005, the company and astrazeneca sued ranbaxy
in the united states district court in new jersey. accordingly, fda approval of ranbaxys anda
is stayed for 30months until april2008 or until an adverse court decision, if any, whichever
may occur earlier.
in the case of finasteride, an anda has been filed seeking approval of a generic version of
propecia and alleging invalidity of the companys patents. the company filed a patent
infringement lawsuit in the district court of delaware in september2004. a trial is scheduled
for june2006.
table of contents
in europe, the company is aware of various companies seeking registration for generic
losartan (the active ingredient for cozaar). the company has patent rights to losartan via
license from e.i. du pont de nemours and company (du pont). the company and du pont have filed
patent infringement proceedings against various companies in portugal.
other litigation
on july27, 2005, merck was served with a further shareholder derivative suit filed in the
new jersey superior court for hunterdon county against the company and certain current and former
officers and directors. this lawsuit seeks to recover or cancel compensation awarded to the
companys executive officers in 2004, and asserts claims for breach of fiduciary duty, waste and
unjust enrichment.
in november2005, an individual shareholder delivered a letter to the board alleging that
the company had sustained damages through the companys adoption of its change in control
separation benefits plan (the cic plan) in november2004. the shareholder made a demand on the
board to take legal action against the boards current or former members for allegedly causing
damage to the company with respect to the adoption of the cic plan. in response to that demand
letter, the independent members of the board determined at the november22, 2005 board meeting
that the board would take the shareholders request under consideration and it remains under
consideration.
as previously disclosed, on july6, 2004, the united states district court for the district
of new jersey granted a motion by the company, medco health solutions, inc. (medco health) and
certain officers and directors to dismiss a purported class action complaint involving claims
related to the companys revenue recognition practice for retail co-payments paid by individuals
to whom medco health provides pharmaceutical benefits as well as other allegations. the
complaint was dismissed with prejudice. on august20, 2004, the same court granted the companys
motion to dismiss with prejudice a related shareholder derivative action. plaintiffs in both
actions appealed the decisions. on december15, 2005, the u.s. court of appeals for the third
circuit upheld the district courts decision dismissing the class action complaint. in a
separate decision issued the same day, the court of appeals upheld most of the district courts
decision dismissing the shareholder derivative suit, and sent the issue of whether the companys
board of directors properly refused the shareholder demand relating to the companys treatment of
retail co-payments back to the district court for reconsideration under a different legal
standard.
as previously disclosed, prior to the spin-off of medco health, the company and medco health
agreed to settle, on a class action basis, a series of lawsuits asserting violations of erisa
(the gruer cases). the company, medco health and certain plaintiffs counsel filed the
settlement agreement with the federal district court in new york, where cases commenced by a
number of plaintiffs, including participants in a number of pharmaceutical benefit plans for
which medco health is the pharmacy benefit manager, as well as trustees of such plans, have been
consolidated. medco health and the company agreed to the proposed settlement in order to avoid
the significant cost and distraction of prolonged litigation. the proposed class settlement has
been agreed to by plaintiffs in five of the cases filed against medco health and the company.
under the proposed settlement, the company and medco health have agreed to pay a total of $42.5
million, and medco health has agreed to modify certain business practices or to continue certain
specified business practices for a period of five years. the financial compensation is intended
to benefit members of the settlement class, which includes erisa plans for which medco health
administered a pharmacy benefit at any time since december17, 1994. the district court held
hearings to hear objections to the fairness of the proposed settlement and approved the
settlement in 2004, but has not yet determined the number of class member plans that have
properly elected not to participate in the settlement. the settlement becomes final only if and
when all appeals have been resolved. certain class member plans have indicated that they will
not participate in the settlement. cases initiated by three such plans and two individuals
remain pending in the southern district of new york. plaintiffs in these cases have asserted
claims based on erisa as well as other federal and state laws that are the same as or similar to
the claims that had been asserted by settling class members in the gruer cases. the company and
medco health are named as defendants in these cases.
table of contents
three notices of appeal were filed and the appellate court heard oral argument in may2005.
on december8, 2005, the appellate court issued a decision vacating the district courts judgment
and remanding the cases to the district court to allow the district court to resolve certain
jurisdictional issues. a hearing was held to address such issues on february24, 2006.
after the spin-off of medco health, medco health assumed substantially all of the liability
exposure for the matters discussed in the foregoing two paragraphs. these cases are being
defended by medco health.
there are various other legal proceedings, principally product liability and intellectual
property suits involving the company, which are pending. while it is not feasible to predict the
outcome of such proceedings or the proceedings discussed in this note, in the opinion of the
company, all such proceedings are either adequately covered by insurance or, if not so covered,
should not ultimately result in any liability that would have a material adverse effect on the
financial position, liquidity or results of operations of the company, other than proceedings for
which a separate assessment is provided in this note.
environmental
matters
the company is a party to a number of proceedings brought under the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act, commonly
known as superfund, and other
federal and state equivalents. these proceedings seek to require the operators of hazardous
waste disposal facilities, transporters of waste to the sites and generators of hazardous waste
disposed of at the sites to clean up the sites or to reimburse the government for cleanup costs.
the company has been made a party to these proceedings as an alleged generator of waste disposed
of at the sites. in each case, the government alleges that the defendants are jointly and
severally liable for the cleanup costs. although joint and several liability is alleged, these
proceedings are frequently resolved so that the allocation of cleanup costs among the parties
more nearly reflects the relative contributions of the parties to the site situation. the
companys potential liability varies greatly from site to site. for some sites the potential
liability is de minimis and for others the costs of cleanup have not yet been determined. while
it is not feasible to predict the outcome of many of these proceedings brought by federal or
state agencies or private litigants, in the opinion of the company, such proceedings should not
ultimately result in any liability which would have a material adverse effect on the financial
position, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources of the company. the company has
taken an active role in identifying and providing for these costs and such amounts do not include
any reduction for anticipated recoveries of cleanup costs from insurers, former site owners or
operators or other recalcitrant potentially responsible parties.
as previously disclosed, in december2003, the virginia department of environmental quality
(vadeq) issued a notice of violation of the companys elkton, virginia facility for air permit
limit exceedances reported by the facility as a result of performance testing of a process train.
in 2005, the company settled this matter with vadeq by agreeing (i)to make $3.1million in
capital improvements at the site, (ii)to pay vadeq a $200,000 fine, and (iii)to perform a
supplemental environmental project for $300,000.
on december21, 2005, the company settled claims brought by the new jersey department of
environmental protection for alleged damages to natural resources at four new jersey merck
remediation sites. in the settlement, the company agreed to pay $2.38million, donate 10
acres of land adjacent to the rahway river and fund a $30,000 restoration project in the passaic
river watershed for groundwater contamination found at the companys sites.
item4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders.
not applicable.
table of contents
executive
officers of the registrant (ages as of february1, 2006)
richard t. clark  age 59
may, 2005  chief executive officer and president
june, 2003  president, merck manufacturing division  responsible for the companys
manufacturing, information services and operational excellence organizations worldwide
january, 2003  chairman, president and chief executive officer, medco health solutions,
inc. (medco health), formerly a wholly-owned subsidiary of the company
january, 2000  president, medco health
david w. anstice  age 57
august, 2005  president, human health-asia pacific  responsible for the companys
prescription drug business in the asia pacific region, japan, australia, new zealand and
the companys joint venture relationship with schering-plough
january, 2003  president, human health    responsible for the companys prescription drug
business in japan, latin america, canada, australia, new zealand and the companys joint
venture relationship with schering-plough
march, 2001  president, the americas and u.s. human health  responsible for one of the
two prescription drug divisions comprising u.s. human health, as well as the companys
prescription drug business in canada and latin america, and the companys joint venture
relationship with schering-plough
january, 1997  president, human health
the americas  responsible for the companys human health business in the united states, canada and latin america
celia a. colbert  age 49
january, 1997  vice president, secretary (since september, 1993) and assistant general
counsel (since november, 1993)
willie a. deese   age 50
may, 2005  president, merck manufacturing division  responsible for the companys
global manufacturing, procurement, and operational excellence functions
january, 2004  senior vice president, global procurement
prior to january, 2004, mr.deese was senior vice president, global procurement and
logistics (2001 to 2003) for glaxosmithkline plc
caroline dorsa  age 46
august, 2002  vice president and treasurer  responsible for the companys treasury and
tax functions, and for providing financial support for the merck manufacturing and merck
research laboratories divisions as well as human resources
september, 1999  vice president and treasurer  responsible for the companys treasury and
tax functions and for providing financial support for the asia pacific division
table of contents
kenneth c. frazier  age 51
december, 1999  senior vice president and general counsel  responsible for legal and
public affairs functions and the merck company foundation (a not-for-profit charitable
organization affiliated with the company)
richard c. henriques jr.  age 50
august, 2002  vice president, controller  responsible for the corporate controllers
group and providing financial support for the human health operations in the united
states, canada, latin america, europe, the middle east, africa, japan, and australia/new
zealand and the merck vaccine division (mvd)
november, 2000  vice president, controller (since february, 1999)  responsible for the
corporate controllers group and providing financial support for u.s. human health,
canada and latin america (the americas) and mvd
peter s. kim  age 47
january, 2003  president, merck research laboratories (mrl)
february, 2001  executive vice president, research and development, mrl
judy c. lewent  age 57
august, 2005  executive vice president and chief financial officer  responsible for the
companys strategic planning, financial and corporate development functions, internal
auditing, corporate licensing, the companys joint venture relationships, and merck
capital ventures, llc, a subsidiary of the company
january, 2003  executive vice president, chief financial officer and president, human
health asia  responsible for financial and corporate development functions, internal
auditing, corporate licensing, the companys prescription drug business in asia north
and asia south, the companys joint venture relationships, and merck capital ventures,
llc
february, 2001  executive vice president and chief financial officer (since april, 1990)
responsible for financial and corporate development functions, internal auditing,
corporate licensing, the companys joint venture relationships, and merck capital
ventures, llc
adel mahmoud  age 64
september, 2005  chief medical advisor, vaccines and infectious diseases  responsible for
representing the company in external medical, policy and government forums on matters of
infectious diseases and vaccines
may, 1999  president, merck vaccines
margaret g. mcglynn  age 46
august, 2005  president, merck vaccines  global responsibilities for the vaccines business
including the companys sanofi-aventis joint venture
january, 2003  president, u.s. human health  responsible for one of the two prescription
drug divisions (hospital and specialty product franchises) comprising u.s. human health
(ushh), and the managed care group of ushh
august, 2001  executive vice president, customer marketing and sales, ushh
november, 1998  senior vice president, worldwide human health marketing
table of contents
j. chris scalet  age 47
january, 2006  senior vice president, global process and services, and chief information
officer (cio)  responsible for global shared services across the human resources,
finance, site services and information services function; and the enterprise business
process redesign initiative
march, 2003
senior vice president, information services, and cio
responsible for all areas of information technology and services including application
development, technical support, voice and data communications, and computer operations
worldwide
prior to march, 2003, mr.scalet was senior vice president, information technology &
cio (1997 to 2003) for international paper company (global forest
products, paper and packaging company)
bradley t. sheares  age 49
august, 2005  president, u.s. human health  responsible for the entire prescription drug
business comprising u.s. human health (ushh)
january, 2003  president, u.s. human health  responsible for one of the two prescription
drug divisions (primary care product franchises) comprising ushh
march, 2001  president, u.s. human health  responsible for one of the two prescription
drug divisions (hospital and specialty product franchises) comprising ushh
july, 1998  vice president, hospital marketing and sales, ushh
joan e. wainwright  age 45
january, 2001  vice president, public affairs
per wold-olsen  age 58
august, 2005  president, human health intercontinental  responsible for the companys
prescription drug business in europe, the middle east, africa, latin america and canada
and worldwide human health marketing
january, 1997  president, human health-europe, middle east & africa  responsible for the
companys prescription drug business in europe, the middle east and africa and worldwide
human health marketing
all officers listed above serve at the pleasure of the board of directors. none of these
officers was elected pursuant to any arrangement or understanding between the officer and the
board.
table of contents
part ii
item5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases
of equity securities.
the required information on market information and dividends is incorporated by reference to
page 38 of the companys 2005 annual report to stockholders and the required information on the
number of holders of the companys common stock is incorporated by reference to page 68 of the
companys 2005 annual report to stockholders.
issuer purchases of equity securities for the three month period ended december31, 2005 are
as follows:
issuer purchases of equity securities
total number of
($ in millions)
total
shares purchased
approx. dollar value
number
average
as part of
of shares that may yet
of shares
price paid
publicly announced
be purchased under the
period
purchased
per share
plans or programs
plans or programs
october 1
october31, 2005
3,091,800
$
27.08
3,091,800
$
7,697.3
november 1
november30, 2005
2,818,000
$
29.80
2,818,000
$
7,613.4
december 1
december31, 2005
2,729,600
$
30.63
2,729,600
$
7,529.7
total
8,639,400
$
29.09
8,639,400
$
7,529.7
item6. selected financial data.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to the data for the last
five fiscal years of the company included under results for year and year-end position in the
selected financial data table on page 68 of the companys 2005 annual report to stockholders.
item7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to pages 20 through 38 of
the companys 2005 annual report to stockholders.
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to pages 32 (beginning
with the caption financial instruments market risk disclosures) to 33 of the companys 2005
annual report to stockholders.
table of contents
item8. financial statements and supplementary data.
(a)financial statements
the consolidated balance sheet of merck & co., inc. and subsidiaries as of december31, 2005
and 2004, and the related consolidated statements of income, of retained earnings, of comprehensive
income and of cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended december31, 2005, and the
report dated february24, 2006 of pricewaterhousecoopers llp, independent registered public
accounting firm, are incorporated by reference to pages 39 through 65 and page 67, respectively, of
the companys 2005 annual report to stockholders.
(b)supplementary data
selected quarterly financial data for 2005 and 2004 are incorporated by reference to the data
contained in the condensed interim financial data table on page 38 of the companys 2005 annual
report to stockholders.
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure.
not applicable.
item9a. controls and procedures.
management of the company, with the participation of its chief executive officer and chief
financial officer, evaluated the effectiveness of the companys disclosure controls and procedures.
based on their evaluation, as of the end of the period covered by this form 10-k, the companys
chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that the companys disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the securities exchange
act of 1934, as amended) are effective.
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting, as such term is defined in exchange act rule13a-15(f). management conducted
an evaluation of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting based on the
framework in internal control  integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on this evaluation, management concluded
that internal control over financial reporting was effective as of december31, 2005 based on
criteria in internal control  integrated framework issued by coso. managements assessment of
the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2005 has been
audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, and
pricewaterhousecoopers llp has issued a report on managements assessment of the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting, which is incorporated by
reference to page67 of the companys 2005 annual report to stockholders.
there have been no changes in internal control over financial reporting for the period covered
by this report that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the
companys internal control over financial reporting.
item9b. other information.
none.
part iii
item10. directors and executive officers of the registrant.
the required information on directors and nominees is incorporated by reference to pages 6
through 9 of the companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april
25, 2006. information on executive officers is set forth in
parti of this document on pages 35
through 37.
table of contents
the required information on the audit committee financial expert is incorporated by reference
to page 13 (under the heading financial expert on audit committee) of the companys proxy
statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april25, 2006.
the required information on the identification of the audit committee is incorporated by
reference to page 13 (under the caption board committees) of the companys proxy statement for
the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april25, 2006.
the required information on compliance with section 16(a) of the securities exchange act of
1934 is incorporated by reference to page 56 (under the caption section16(a) beneficial ownership
reporting compliance) of the companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to
be held april25, 2006.
the company has adopted a code of conduct  our values and standards applicable to all
employees, including the principal executive officer, principal financial officer, and principal
accounting officer. the code of conduct is available on the companys website at
www.merck.com/about/corporategovernance. the company intends to post on this website any
amendments to, or waivers from, its code of conduct. a printed copy will be sent, without charge,
to any stockholder who requests it by writing to the chief ethics officer of merck & co., inc., one
merck drive, whitehouse station, nj 08889-0100.
item11. executive compensation.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to pages 17 (under the
caption compensation of directors) through 18; pages 26 (beginning with the caption summary
compensation table) through 29; pages 31 (beginning with the caption annual benefits payable
under merck & co., inc. retirement plans) to 38; page 15 (under the caption compensation
committee interlocks and insider participation) of the companys proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held april25, 2006.
item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.
information with respect to securities authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans
is incorporated by reference to page 30 (under the caption equity compensation plan information)
of the companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april25, 2006.
information with respect to security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management is
incorporated by reference to pages 19 (under the caption security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management) to 20 of the companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april25, 2006.
item13. certain relationships and related transactions.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to page 12 (under the
caption relationships with outside firms) and page 38 (under the caption indebtedness of
management) of the companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held
april25, 2006.
item14. principal accountant fees and services.
the information required for this item is incorporated by reference to pages 40 (beginning
with the caption pre-approval policy for services of independent registered public accounting
firm) to 41 of the companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held
april25, 2006.
table of contents
part iv
item15. exhibits and financial statement schedules.
documents filed as part of this form10-k
1. financial statements
the following consolidated financial statements and report of independent registered
public accounting firm are incorporated herein by reference to the companys 2005
annual report to stockholders, as noted on page39 of this document:
consolidated statement of income for the years ended december31, 2005, 2004 and 2003
consolidated statement of retained earnings for the years ended december31, 2005,
2004 and 2003
consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the years ended december31, 2005,
2004 and 2003
consolidated balance sheet as of december31, 2005 and 2004
consolidated statement of cash flows for the years ended december31, 2005, 2004 and
notes to consolidated financial statements
report of pricewaterhousecoopers llp, independent registered public accounting firm
2. financial statement schedules
schedules are omitted because they are either not required or not applicable.
financial statements of affiliates carried on the equity basis have been omitted because,
considered individually or in the aggregate, such affiliates do not constitute a significant
subsidiary.
3. exhibits
exhibit
number
description
2.1
master restructuring agreement dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab, merck &
co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises,
inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of
this exhibit are subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the commission)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of merck & co., inc. (october1, 2004)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
september30, 2004
3.2
by-laws of merck & co., inc. (as amended effective may24, 2005)
incorporated by reference to current report on form8-k dated may24, 2005
4.1
indenture, dated as of april1, 1991, between merck & co., inc. and morgan guaranty trust company of new york,
as trustee  incorporated by reference to exhibit4 to registration statement on forms-3 (no.33-39349)
4.2
first supplemental indenture between merck & co., inc. and first trust of new york, national association, as
trustee  incorporated by reference to exhibit4(b) to registration statement on forms-3 (no.333-36383)
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
*10.1
executive incentive plan (as amended effective february27, 1996)  incorporated by
reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1995
*10.2
base salary deferral plan (as adopted on october22, 1996, effective january1, 1997)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 1996
*10.3
merck & co., inc. deferral program (amended and restated as of december15, 2005)  incorporated by
reference to current report on form8-k dated december16, 2005
*10.4
1991 incentive stock plan (as amended effective february23, 1994)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*10.5
1996 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of february22, 2005)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2004
*10.6
2001 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of february22, 2005)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2004
*10.7
2004 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of february22, 2005)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2004
*10.8
merck & co., inc. change in control separation benefits plan  incorporated by reference to current report on form8-k dated november
23, 2004
*10.9
non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended and restated
february24, 1998)  incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for
the fiscal year ended december31, 1997
*10.10
1996 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended april27, 1999)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1999
*10.11
2001 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended april19, 2002)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 2002
*10.12
supplemental retirement plan (as amended effective january1, 1995)  incorporated
by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*10.13
retirement plan for the directors of merck & co., inc. (amended and restated
june21, 1996)  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for
the period ended june30, 1996
*
management contract or compensatory plan or
arrangement.
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
*10.14
plan for deferred payment of directors compensation (amended and restated as of
may31, 2005)  incorporated by reference to current report on form8-k dated
may24, 2005
10.15
limited liability company agreement of merck capital ventures, llc (dated as of
november27, 2000)  incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2000
*10.16
offer letter between merck &
co., inc. and peter s. kim, dated december15, 2000
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2003
10.17
amended and restated license and option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between
astra ab and astra merck inc.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly
report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.18
kbi shares option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab,
merck & co., inc. and merck holdings, inc.  incorporated by reference to form
10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.19
kbi-e asset option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and among
astra ab,
merck & co., inc., astra merck inc. and astra merck enterprises inc.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period
ended june30, 1998
10.20
kbi supply agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra merck inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this exhibit are subject to a request for confidential
treatment filed with the commission)  incorporated by reference to form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.21
second amended and restated manufacturing agreement dated as of july
1, 1998 among merck & co., inc., astra ab, astra merck inc. and astra usa, inc.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
10.22
limited partnership agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between kb usa, l.p. and kbi
sub inc.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for
the period ended june30, 1998
10.23
distribution agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra merck enterprises inc.
and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly
report for the period ended june30, 1998
*
management contract or compensatory plan or
arrangement.
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
10.24
agreement to incorporate defined terms dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab,
merck & co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck
enterprises inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
2005 annual report to stockholders (only those portions incorporated by reference in
this document are deemed filed)
subsidiaries of merck & co., inc.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
contained on page46 of this report
24.1
power of attorney
24.2
certified resolution of board of directors
31.1
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief executive officer
31.2
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief financial officer
32.1
section1350 certification of chief executive officer
32.2
section1350 certification of chief financial officer
copies of the exhibits may be obtained by stockholders upon written request directed to the
stockholder services department, merck & co., inc., p.o. box 100  ws 3ab-40, whitehouse station,
new jersey 08889-0100.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934,
the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized.
merck & co., inc.
dated: march13, 2006
by richard t. clark
(chief executive officer and president)
by
celia a. colbert
celia a. colbert
(attorney-in-fact)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
signatures
title
date
richard t. clark
chief executive officer and
president; principal executive officer; director
march13, 2006
judy c. lewent
executive
vice president and chief financial officer; principal financial officer
march13, 2006
richard c. henriques, jr.
vice president, controller;
principal accounting officer
march13, 2006
lawrence a. bossidy
director
march13, 2006
william g. bowen
director
march13, 2006
johnnetta b. cole
director
march13, 2006
william b. harrison, jr.
director
william n. kelley
director
march13, 2006
rochelle b. lazarus
director
march13, 2006
thomas e. shenk
director
march13, 2006
anne m. tatlock
director
samuel o. thier
director
march13, 2006
wendell p. weeks
director
march13, 2006
peter c. wendell
director
march13, 2006
celia a. colbert, by signing her name hereto, does hereby sign this document pursuant to
powers of attorney duly executed by the persons named, filed with the securities and exchange
commission as an exhibit to this document, on behalf of such persons, all in the capacities and on
the date stated, such persons including a majority of the directors of the company.
by
celia a. colbert
celia a. colbert
(attorney-in-fact)
table of contents
exhibit23
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
we hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements on form s-3
(nos. 33-39349, 33-60322, 33-51785, 33-57421, 333-17045, 333-36383, 333-77569, 333-72546, 333-87034
and 333-118186) and on forms-8 (nos. 33-21087, 33-21088, 33-40177, 33-51235, 33-53463, 33-64273,
33-64665, 333-91769, 333-30526, 333-31762, 333-40282, 333-53246, 333-56696, 333-72206, 333-65796,
333-101519, 333-109296, 333-117737 and 333-117738) of merck & co., inc. of our report dated
february24, 2006, relating to the consolidated financial statements, managements assessment of
the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting and the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting, which appears in the 2005 annual report to stockholders, which is
incorporated by reference in this annual report on form 10-k.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
florham park, new jersey
march13, 2006
table of contents
exhibit index
exhibit
number
description
2.1
master restructuring agreement dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab, merck &
co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises,
inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of
this exhibit are subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the commission)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of merck & co., inc. (october1, 2004)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
september30, 2004
3.2
by-laws of merck & co., inc. (as amended effective may24, 2005)
incorporated by reference to current report on form8-k dated may24, 2005
4.1
indenture, dated as of april1, 1991, between merck & co., inc. and morgan guaranty trust company of new york,
as trustee  incorporated by reference to exhibit4 to registration statement on forms-3 (no.33-39349)
4.2
first supplemental indenture between merck & co., inc. and first trust of new york, national association, as
trustee  incorporated by reference to exhibit4(b) to registration statement on forms-3 (no.333-36383)
*10.1
executive incentive plan (as amended effective february27, 1996)  incorporated by
reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1995
*10.2
base salary deferral plan (as adopted on october22, 1996, effective january1, 1997)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 1996
*10.3
merck & co., inc. deferral program (amended and restated as of december15, 2005)  incorporated by
reference to current report on form8-k dated december16, 2005
*10.4
1991 incentive stock plan (as amended effective february23, 1994)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*10.5
1996 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of february22, 2005)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2004
*10.6
2001 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of february22, 2005)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2004
*
management contract or compensatory plan or
arrangement.
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
*10.7
2004 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of february22, 2005)
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2004
*10.8
merck & co., inc. change in control separation benefits plan
incorporated by reference to current report on form8-k dated november
23, 2004
*10.9
non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended and restated
february24, 1998)  incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for
the fiscal year ended december31, 1997
*10.10
1996 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended april27, 1999)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1999
*10.11
2001 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended april19, 2002)
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 2002
*10.12
supplemental retirement plan (as amended effective january1, 1995)  incorporated
by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*10.13
retirement plan for the directors of merck & co., inc. (amended and restated
june21, 1996)  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for
the period ended june30, 1996
*10.14
plan for deferred payment of directors compensation (amended and restated as of
may31, 2005)  incorporated by reference to current report on form8-k dated
may24, 2005
10.15
limited liability company agreement of merck capital ventures, llc (dated as of
november27, 2000)  incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2000
*10.16
offer letter between merck &
co., inc. and peter s. kim, dated december15, 2000
incorporated by reference to form10-k annual report for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2003
10.17
amended and restated license and option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between
astra ab and astra merck inc.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly
report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.18
kbi shares option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab,
merck & co., inc. and merck holdings, inc.  incorporated by reference to form
10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
*
management contract or compensatory plan or
arrangement.
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
10.19
kbi-e asset option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab,
merck & co., inc., astra merck inc. and astra merck enterprises inc.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period
ended june30, 1998
10.20
kbi supply agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra merck inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this exhibit are subject to a request for confidential
treatment filed with the commission)  incorporated by reference to form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.21
second amended and restated manufacturing agreement dated as of july
1, 1998 among merck & co., inc., astra ab, astra merck inc. and astra usa, inc.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
10.22
limited partnership agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between kb usa, l.p. and kbi
sub inc.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for
the period ended june30, 1998
10.23
distribution agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra merck enterprises inc.
and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p.  incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly
report for the period ended june30, 1998
10.24
agreement to incorporate defined terms dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab,
merck & co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck
enterprises inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p.
incorporated by reference to form10-q quarterly report for the period ended
june30, 1998
computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
2005 annual report to stockholders (only those portions incorporated by reference in
this document are deemed filed)
subsidiaries of merck & co., inc.
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
contained on page 46 of this report
24.1
power of attorney
24.2
certified resolution of board of directors
31.1
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief executive officer
31.2
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief financial officer
32.1
section1350 certification of chief executive officer
32.2
section1350 certification of chief financial officer
