10-k
y30486e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
as filed with the securities and exchange commission on
february28, 2007
united states
securities and exchange
commission
washington, d. c. 20549
form10-k
(mark one)
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2006
or
o
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from
________ to ________
commission file
no.1-3305
merck& co.,
inc.
one merck drive
whitehouse station, n. j.
08889-0100
(908)423-1000
incorporated in new
jersey
i.r.s. employer
identification
no.22-1109110
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the
act:
name of each exchange
title of each class
on which registered
common stock
($0.01par value)
new york and philadelphia stock
exchanges
number of shares of common stock ($0.01par value)
outstanding as of january31, 2007: 2,166,483,163.
aggregate market value of common stock ($0.01par value)
held by non-affiliates on june30, 2006 based on closing
price on june30, 2006: $79,306,000,000.
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known
seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities
act.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the
act.yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed
all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding
12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to file such reports), and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item405 of
regulations-k
is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in
partiii of this
form10-k
or any amendment to this
form10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated
filer.
large accelerated
fileraccelerated
fileronon-accelerated
filero
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company
(as defined in
rule12b-2
of the exchange
act).yesono
documents
incorporated by reference:
document
part of
form10-k
proxy statement for the annual
meeting of
partiii
stockholders to be held
april24, 2007, to be filed with the securities and
exchange commission within 120days after the close of the
fiscal year covered by this report
table of
contents
page
parti
item1.
business
item1a.
risk
factors
cautionary factors
that may affect future results
item1b.
unresolved staff
comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal
proceedings
item4.
submission of
matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers
of the registrant
partii
item5.
market for
registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial
data
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item7a.
quantitative and
qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial
statements and supplementary data
(a)
financial
statements
notes to
consolidated financial statements
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
(b)
supplementary
data
item9.
changes in and
disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item9a.
controls and
procedures
managements
report
item9b.
other
information
partiii
item10.
directors,
executive officers and corporate governance
item11.
executive
compensation
item12.
security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions, and director
independence
item14.
principal
accountant fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits and
financial statement schedules
signatures
consent of
independent registered public accounting firm
parti
item1.
business.
merck& co., inc. (merck or the
company) is a global research-driven pharmaceutical
company that discovers, develops, manufactures and markets a
broad range of innovative products to improve human and animal
health. the companys operations are principally managed on
a products basis and are comprised of two reportable segments:
the pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines segment. the
pharmaceutical segment includes human health pharmaceutical
products marketed either directly or through joint ventures.
these products consist of therapeutic and preventive agents,
sold by prescription, for the treatment of human disorders.
merck sells these human health pharmaceutical products primarily
to drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals, government
agencies and managed health care providers such as health
maintenance organizations and other institutions. the vaccines
segment includes human health vaccine products marketed either
directly or through a joint venture. these products consist of
preventative pediatric, adolescent and adult vaccines, primarily
administered at physician offices. merck sells these human
health vaccines primarily to physicians, wholesalers, physician
distributors and government entities. the companys
professional representatives communicate the effectiveness,
safety and value of our pharmaceutical and vaccine products to
health care professionals in private practice, group practices
and managed care organizations.
for financial information and other information about the
pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines segment, see
item7. managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations and
item8. financial statements and supplementary
data below.
overview during 2006, merck continued to
execute its strategy to reclaim its leadership position in the
pharmaceutical industry. this was made evident through the
successful launches of five novel medicines and vaccines in
areas such as cancer prevention and diabetes, the advancement of
drug candidates through every phase of the companys
pipeline and the continued success of its newer and in-line
products. additionally, the company is developing a new
commercial model which is designed to broaden its engagement
with customers and scientific leaders, leverage alternative
channels to complement the effectiveness of its sales force, and
drive growth in key markets.
during 2006, five products received u.s.food and drug
administration (fda) approval: gardasil
[quadrivalent human papillomavirus (types6,
11,16, 18)recombinant vaccine], the first vaccine
for the prevention of cervical cancer and genital warts caused
by certain types of human papillomavirus (hpv);
januvia (sitagliptin phosphate), the first medicine of
its class that enhances a natural body system to improve blood
sugar control in patients with type 2 diabetes; zostavax
[zoster vaccine live (oka/merck)], the first vaccine for
adults 60years of age and older to reduce the incidence of
shingles, a disease which every year afflicts an estimated one
million people in the united states alone; rotateq
(rotavirus vaccine, live, oral pentavalent), a pediatric
vaccine to help prevent rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants and
children, the effects of which take the lives of nearly
600,000children under the age of five worldwide every
year; and zolinza (vorinostat), a novel medicine to treat
patients suffering from advanced cutaneous t-cell lymphoma
(ctcl).
in addition, the company has three drug candidates currently
under fda review: janumet (previously referred to as
mk-0431a), an investigational oral medicine combining
sitagliptin phosphate with metformin for type 2 diabetes that is
designed to provide an additional treatment option for patients
who need more than one oral agent to help control their blood
sugar; emend for injection(mk-0517), an intravenous
therapy for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
(cinv); and arcoxia, mercks selective
cox-2 inhibitor for osteoarthritis. additionally, the company
anticipates filing three new drug applications (nda)
with the fda in 2007: mk-0518, a
first-in-classhiv
integrase inhibitor; gaboxadol, a novel compound from
mercks alliance with h. lundbeck a/s for the treatment of
insomnia; and mk-0524a, an extended-release (er)
niacin combined with laropiprant (a novel flushing pathway
inhibitor) for cholesterol management. in addition, by mid-year
2007, merck expects to have four products in phaseiii
development.
additionally, targeted acquisitions made during the year of
sirna therapeutics, inc. (sirna), glycofi, inc.
(glycofi) and abmaxis, inc. (abmaxis),
as well as other alliances and collaborations, will complement
mercks strong internal research capabilities and should
continue to help the company build a pipeline that will support
its long-term growth.
merck is working to deliver innovative and differentiated
products to the market faster and more efficiently. the company
has successfully reduced late development product cycle times
and anticipates further reductions in the coming year.
additionally, mercks new commercial model is expected to
lower spending per primary care brand by 15% to 20% in the
united states from 2005 through 2010 (an interim targeted 9%
reduction is expected to be achieved through the end of
2007)while still appropriately supporting product
launches, as illustrated in the successful launch of five new
products in 2006. through redeployment, the launches were
achieved with no increase in sales force.
the initial phase of a global restructuring program designed to
reduce the companys cost structure, increase efficiency
and enhance competitiveness is underway. the initial steps
include the implementation of a new supply strategy by the merck
manufacturing division, which is intended to create a leaner,
more cost-effective and customer-focused manufacturing model
over a three-year period. as part of this program, in 2005,
merck announced plans to sell or close five manufacturing sites
and two preclinical sites by the end of 2008 (three of the
manufacturing sites were closed, sold or had ceased operations
and the two preclinical sites were closed by the end of 2006),
and eliminate approximately 7,000 positions company-wide (of
which approximately 4,800 positions were eliminated by the end
of 2006 comprised of actual headcount reductions, and the
elimination of contractors and vacant positions). however, the
company continues to hire new employees as the companys
business requires it. the company has also sold certain other
facilities and related assets in connection with the
restructuring program. the pre-tax costs of this restructuring
program were $935.5million in 2006 (comprised of
$793.2million primarily representing accelerated
depreciation and asset impairment costs and $142.3million
of separation and other restructuring related costs) and are
expected to be $300million to $500million in 2007.
through the end of 2008, when the initial phase of the
restructuring program relating to the manufacturing strategy is
expected to be substantially complete, the cumulative pre-tax
costs of the program are expected to range from
$1.9billion to $2.2billion. merck continues to
expect the initial phase of its cost reduction program to yield
cumulative pre-tax savings of $4.5 to $5.0billion from
2006 through 2010.
with respect to the vioxx litigation, to date in the
vioxx product liability lawsuits, of the 29 plaintiffs
whose claims have been scheduled for trial, the claims of seven
were dismissed, the claims of seven were withdrawn from the
trial calendar by plaintiffs, and juries have decided in
mercks favor nine times and in plaintiffs favor four
times. in addition, in the recent california trial involving two
plaintiffs, the jury could not reach a verdict for either
plaintiff and a mistrial was declared. a new jersey state judge
set aside one of the nine merck verdicts. with respect to the
four plaintiffs verdicts, merck already has filed an
appeal or sought judicial review in each of those cases, and in
one of those four, a federal judge overturned the damage award
shortly after trial. in addition, a consolidated trial with two
plaintiffs is currently ongoing in the coordinated proceeding in
new jersey superior court before judge carole. higbee and
another trial has commenced in state court in illinois. during
2006, the company spent $500million in the aggregate,
including $175million in the fourth quarter, in vioxx
legal defense costs worldwide. during 2006, the company
recorded charges of $673million to increase the reserve
solely for its future legal defense costs related to vioxx
litigation and at december31, 2006 the balance of the
reserve was $858million. this reserve is based on certain
assumptions and is the best estimate of the amount the company
believes, at this time, will be spent through 2008. the vioxx
litigation is more fully discussed in item3.
legal proceedings below.
earnings per common share assuming dilution for 2006 were $2.03,
including the impact of the global restructuring program of
$0.28per share, the acquired research charge related to
the acquisition of sirna of $0.21pershare and the
acquired research charge related to the acquisition of glycofi
of $0.14per share (as discussed in
acquisitions below), additional reserves established
solely for future legal defense costs for vioxx
litigation (as discussed in item3. legal
proceedings below) and the impact of adopting a new
accounting standard requiring the expensing of stock options (as
discussed in item7. managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations
below).
product
sales
sales1
of the companys products were as follows:
($ in millions)
singulair
$
3,579.0
$
2,975.6
$
2,622.0
cozaar/hyzaar
3,163.1
3,037.2
2,823.7
fosamax
3,134.4
3,191.2
3,159.7
zocor
2,802.7
4,381.7
5,196.5
primaxin
704.8
739.6
640.6
cosopt/trusopt
697.1
617.2
558.8
proscar
618.5
741.4
733.1
vasotec/vaseretic
547.2
623.1
719.2
cancidas
529.8
570.0
430.0
maxalt
406.4
348.4
309.9
propecia
351.8
291.9
270.2
vioxx
-
-
1,489.3
vaccines/biologicals2
1,859.4
1,103.3
1,070.3
other
4,241.8
3,391.3
2,949.5
total
$
22,636.0
$
22,011.9
$
22,972.8
presented net of discounts and
returns.
these amounts do not reflect sales
of vaccines sold in most major european markets through the
companys joint venture, sanofi pasteur msd, the results of
which are reflected in equity income from affiliates.
the companys pharmaceutical products include therapeutic
and preventive agents, generally sold by prescription, for the
treatment of human disorders. among these are singulair
(montelukast sodium), a leukotriene receptor antagonist
respiratory product for the chronic treatment of asthma and for
the relief of symptoms of allergic rhinitis; cozaar
(losartan potassium)/hyzaar (losartan potassium and
hydrochlorothiazide) and vasotec (enalapril maleate),
the companys most significant hypertension
and/or heart
failure products; fosamax (alendronate sodium) and
fosamax plus d (alendronate sodium/cholecalciferol),
mercks osteoporosis products for treatment and, in the
case of fosamax, prevention of osteoporosis; zocor
(simvastatin), mercks atherosclerosis product;
primaxin (imipenem and cilastatin sodium) and cancidas
(caspofungin acetate), anti-bacterial/anti-fungal
products; cosopt (dorzolamide hydrochloride and
timolol maleate ophthalmic solution) and trusopt
(dorzolamide hydrochloride ophthalmic solution), the
largest-selling ophthalmological products; proscar
(finasteride), a urology product for the treatment of
symptomatic benign prostate enlargement; maxalt
(rizatriptan benzoate), an acute migraine product;
and propecia (finasteride), a product for the treatment
of male pattern hair loss.
among the products included within vaccines/biologicals are
varivax (varicella virus vaccine live [oka/merck]), a
vaccine to help prevent chickenpox, m-m-r ii (measles,
mumps and rubella virus vaccine live), a vaccine against
measles, mumps and rubella, proquad [measles, mumps,
rubella, varicella (oka/merck) virus vaccine live], a pediatric
combination vaccine against measles, mumps, rubella and
varicella, gardasil, a vaccine for the prevention of
cervical cancer and genital warts caused by certain types of
hpv, pneumovax (pneumococcal vaccine polyvalent), a
vaccine for the prevention of pneumococcal disease,
rotateq, a vaccine to help protect against rotavirus
gastroenteritis in infants and children, and zostavax, a
vaccine to help prevent shingles (herpes zoster).
other primarily includes sales of other human pharmaceuticals,
pharmaceutical and animal health supply sales to the
companys joint ventures and revenue from the
companys relationship with astrazeneca lp, primarily
relating to sales of nexium (esomeprazole magnesium) and
prilosec (omeprazole).
u.s. product approvals on february3,
2006, the fda approved rotateq, a pediatric vaccine to
prevent rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants and children.
rotateq is an oral pentavalent three-dose liquid vaccine
that
contains five reassortant rotaviruses. merck has also submitted
applications for licensure of rotateq in more than 100
countries including australia, canada and countries in asia and
latin america and, through sanofi pasteur msd
(spmsd), mercks vaccine joint venture with
sanofi pasteur, in the european union (eu).
rotateq also received regulatory approval in mexico in
november 2005.
on may26, 2006, the fda approved zostavax for the
prevention of herpes zoster (shingles) in individuals
60years of age and older. it was also approved by
regulatory authorities in the eu and australia in may.
zostavax is the first and only medical option approved
for the prevention of shingles.
on june8, 2006, the fda approved gardasil, the
first and only vaccine to prevent cervical cancer and vulvar and
vaginal pre-cancers caused by hpv types 16 and 18 and to prevent
low-grade and pre-cancerous lesions and genital warts caused by
hpv types6, 11, 16 and 18. in the united states, it is
estimated that approximately 9,700 women will be diagnosed with
cervical cancer this year, and approximately 3,700 women will
die.
on october6, 2006, the fda approved oral zolinza
for the treatment of cutaneous manifestations in patients
with ctcl, a form of non-hodgkins lymphoma, who have
progressive, persistent or recurrent disease on or following two
systemic therapies. ctcl is a cancer of the t-cells, a type of
white blood cell, which affects the skin.
on october17, 2006, the fda approved januvia, the
first and only dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (dpp-4)
inhibitor available in the unitedstates for the treatment
of type 2 diabetes. januvia has been approved as
monotherapy and as add-on therapy to either of two other types
of oral diabetes medications, metformin or thiazolidinediones,
to improve blood sugar (glucose) control in patients with type 2
diabetes when diet and exercise is not enough.
on june29, 2006, the u.s.centers for disease control
and preventions (cdc) advisory committee on
immunization practices (acip) unanimously voted to
recommend that children 4 to 6years of age routinely
receive a second dose of varicella-containing vaccine to help
protect against chickenpox. the committee also recommended that
children, adolescents and adults who received only one dose of
varicella-containing vaccine receive a second,
catch-up
dose, which can be accomplished through routine health-care
visits and school- and college-entry requirements. mercks
varivax and its combination vaccine proquad are
the only vaccines to help protect against chickenpox available
in the united states.
voluntary withdrawal of vioxx on
september30, 2004, merck announced a voluntary worldwide
withdrawal of vioxx, its arthritis and acute pain
medication. the companys decision, which was effective
immediately, was based on new three-year data from a
prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial,
approve (adenomatous polyp prevention on vioxx).
the trial, which was stopped, was designed to evaluate the
efficacy of vioxx 25mg in preventing the recurrence
of colorectal polyps in patients with a history of colorectal
adenomas and, in combination with two other trials, to further
assess the cardiovascular safety of vioxx. in this study,
there was an increased relative risk for confirmed
cardiovascular events, such as heart attack and stroke, which
became apparent beginning after about 18months of
treatment in the patients taking vioxx compared to those
taking placebo. for approximately the first 18months of
the approve study the vioxx and placebo curves appeared
to be similar and, in this respect, the approve results were
similar to the results of two placebo-controlled studies
described in the u.s.labeling for vioxx as of the
time of withdrawal.
the company estimates that there were 105million
u.s.prescriptions written for vioxx from may 1999
through august 2004. based on this estimate, the company
estimates that the number of patients who have taken vioxx
in the united states since its 1999 launch is approximately
20million. the number of patients outside the united
states who have taken vioxx is undetermined at this time.
in october 2004, the company received a letter from senator
charles grassley, chairman of the senate committee on finance,
requesting certain documents and information related to
vioxx. the company also received requests for information
from other congressional committees. the company has cooperated
with these inquiries and has continued to describe the reasons
for the companys voluntary withdrawal of vioxx and
to answer any
questions related to the companys development and
extensive testing of the medicine and its disclosures of the
results of its studies.
on february
16-18, 2005,
the fda held a joint meeting of the arthritis advisory committee
and the drug safety and risk management advisory committee. the
committees discussed the overall
benefit-to-risk
considerations (including cardiovascular and gastrointestinal
safety concerns) for cox-2 selective nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs and related agents. on february18,
2005, the members of the committees were asked to vote on
whether the overall risk versus benefit profile for vioxx
supports marketing in the united states. the members of the
committees voted 17 to 15 in support of the marketing of
vioxx in the united states. the company looks forward to
further discussions with the fda and other regulatory
authorities about vioxx.
as previously announced, the board of directors of the company
appointed a special committee to review the companys
actions prior to its voluntary withdrawal of vioxx, to
act for the board in responding to shareholder litigation
matters related to the withdrawal of vioxx and to advise
the board with respect to any action that should be taken as a
result of the review. in december 2004, the special committee
retained the honorable john s. martin,jr. of
debevoise& plimpton llp to conduct an independent
investigation of senior managements conduct with respect
to the cardiovascular safety profile of vioxx during the
period vioxx was developed and marketed. the review was
completed in the third quarter of 2006 and the full report
(including appendices) was made public in september 2006. the
company has provided a copy of the full report and appendices at
its website at
www.merck.com/newsroom/vioxx/martin_report.html. the
company has included its website address only as an inactive
textual reference and does not intend it to be an active link to
its website nor does it incorporate by reference the information
contained therein.
acquisitions in may 2006, merck acquired
abmaxis, a privately-held biopharmaceutical company dedicated to
the discovery and optimization of monoclonal antibody (mab)
products for human therapeutics and diagnostics, for
approximately $80million.
in june 2006, merck acquired glycofi, a privately-held
biotechnology company, a leader in the field of yeast
glycoengineering, which is the addition of specific carbohydrate
modifications to the proteins in yeast, and optimization of
biologic drug molecules, for approximately $373million.
in december 2006, merck acquired sirna, a publicly-held
biotechnology company and a leader in developing a new class of
medicines based on rna interference (rnai)
technology for a total value of approximately $1.1billion.
the acquisition of sirna is expected to increase mercks
ability to use rnai technology to turn off a targeted gene in a
human cell, potentially rendering inoperative a gene responsible
for triggering a specific disease.
joint ventures the company has a number of
joint ventures relating to its pharmaceutical and vaccines
segments.
pharmaceutical
in 2000, the company and schering-plough corporation
(schering-plough) entered into agreements to create
separate equally-owned partnerships to develop and market in the
united states new prescription medicines in the
cholesterol-management and respiratory therapeutic areas. in
december 2001, the cholesterol-management partnership agreements
were expanded to include all the countries of the world,
excluding japan. in october 2002, zetia (ezetimibe)
(marketed as ezetrol outside the united states), the
first in a new class of cholesterol-lowering agents, was
launched in the united states. in july 2004, vytorin
(marketed as inegy outside the united states), a
combination product containing the active ingredients of both
zetia and zocor, was approved in the united states.
in 1982, the company entered into an agreement with astra ab
(astra) to develop and market astra products in the
united states. in 1994, the company and astra formed an equally
owned joint venture that developed and marketed most of
astras new prescription medicines in the united states
including prilosec, the first in a class of medications
known as proton pump inhibitors, which slows the production of
acid from the cells of the stomach lining.
in 1998, the company and astra restructured the joint venture
whereby the company acquired astras interest in the joint
venture, renamed kbi inc. (kbi), and contributed
kbis operating assets to a new u.s.limited
partnership named astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (the
partnership), in which the company maintains a
limited
partner interest. the partnership, renamed astrazeneca lp,
became the exclusive distributor of the products for which kbi
retained rights. the company earns certain partnership returns
as well as ongoing revenue based on sales of current and future
kbi products. the partnership returns include a priority return
provided for in the partnership agreement, variable returns
based, in part, upon sales of certain former astra usa, inc.
products, and a preferential return representing the
companys share of undistributed partnership gaap earnings.
in conjunction with the 1998 restructuring, for a payment of
$443.0million, astra purchased an option to buy the
companys interest in the kbi products, excluding the
companys interest in the gastrointestinal medicines
nexium and prilosec. the company also granted
astra an option (the sharesoption) to buy the
companys common stock interest in kbi, at an exercise
price based on the present value of estimated future net sales
of nexium and prilosec.
in april 1999, astra merged with zeneca group plc, forming
astrazeneca ab (astrazeneca). as a result of the
merger, in exchange for the companys relinquishment of
rights to future astra products with no existing or pending
u.s.patents at the time of the merger, astra paid
$967.4million, which is subject to a
true-up
calculation in 2008 that may require repayment of all or a
portion of this amount. the merger also triggers a partial
redemption of the companys limited partner interest in
2008. furthermore, as a result of the merger, astrazenecas
option to buy the companys interest in the kbi products is
exercisable in 2010 and the company has the right to require
astrazeneca to purchase such interest in 2008. in addition, the
sharesoption is exercisable two years after astras
purchase of the companys interest in the kbi products. the
exercise of this option by astra is also provided for in the
year 2017 or if combined annual sales of the two products fall
below a minimum amount provided, in each case, only so long as
either the merck option in 2008 or astrazenecas option in
2010 has been exercised. the exercise price is based on the
present value of estimated future net sales of nexium and
prilosec as determined at the time of exercise.
in 1989, the company formed a joint venture with
johnson& johnson to develop and market a broad range
of nonprescription medicines for u.s.consumers. this 50%
owned joint venture was expanded into europe in 1993, and into
canada in 1996. significant joint venture products are pepcid
ac (famotidine), an
over-the-counter
form of the companys ulcer medication pepcid
(famotidine), as well as pepcid complete, an
over-the-counter
product which combines the companys ulcer medication with
antacids (calcium carbonate and magnesium hydroxide). in march
2004, the company sold to johnson& johnson its
interest in the european joint venture.
vaccines
in 1992, the company and connaught laboratories, inc. (now
sanofi pasteur s.a.) agreed to collaborate on the development
and marketing of combination pediatric vaccines and to promote
selected vaccines in the united states. while combination
vaccine development efforts continue under this agreement, no
vaccines are currently being promoted.
in 1994, the company and pasteur mrieux connaught (now
sanofi pasteur s.a.) formed a joint venture to market human
vaccines in europe and to collaborate in the development of
combination vaccines for distribution in the then existing eu
and the european free trade association. the company and sanofi
pasteur contributed, among other things, their european vaccine
businesses for equal shares in the joint venture, known as
pasteur mrieux msd, s.n.c. (now sanofi pasteur msd,
s.n.c.). the joint venture maintains a presence, directly or
through affiliates or branches in belgium, italy, germany,
spain, france, austria, ireland, sweden, portugal, the
netherlands, switzerland and the united kingdom, and through
distributors in the rest of its territory.
other
in 1997, the company and rhne-poulenc s.a. (now
sanofi-aventis s.a.) combined their respective animal health and
poultry genetics businesses to formmerial limited
(merial), a fully integrated animal health company,
which is a stand-alone joint venture, equally owned by each
party. merial provides a comprehensive range of pharmaceuticals
and vaccines to enhance the health, well-being and performance
of a wide range of animal species.
competition the markets in which the company
conducts its business are highly competitive and often highly
regulated. global efforts toward health care cost containment
continue to exert pressure on product pricing and access.
such competition involves an intensive search for technological
innovations and the ability to market these innovations
effectively. with its long-standing emphasis on research and
development, the company is well prepared to compete in the
search for technological innovations. additional resources to
meet competition include quality control, flexibility to meet
customer specifications, an efficient distribution system and a
strong technical information service. the company is active in
acquiring and marketing products through joint ventures and
licenses and has been refining its sales and marketing efforts
to further address changing industry conditions. to enhance its
product portfolio, the company continues to pursue external
alliances, from early-stage to late-stage product opportunities,
including joint ventures and targeted acquisitions. however, the
introduction of new products and processes by competitors may
result in price reductions and product replacements, even for
products protected by patents. for example, the number of
compounds available to treat diseases typically increases over
time and has resulted in slowing the growth in sales of certain
of the companys products.
legislation enacted in all states in the united states,
particularly in the area of human pharmaceutical products,
allows, encourages or, in a few instances, in the absence of
specific instructions from the prescribing physician, mandates
the use of generic products (those containing the
same active chemical as an innovators product) rather than
brand-name products. governmental and other
pressures toward the dispensing of generic products have
significantly reduced the sales of certain of the companys
products no longer protected by patents, such as zocor,
which lost market exclusivity in the u.s.in 2006 and
the company experienced a significant decline in zocor
sales thereafter.
distribution the company sells its human
health pharmaceutical products primarily to drug wholesalers and
retailers, hospitals, government agencies and managed health
care providers such as health maintenance organizations and
other institutions. human health vaccines are sold primarily to
physicians, wholesalers, physician distributors and government
entities. the companys professional representatives
communicate the effectiveness, safety and value of the
companys pharmaceutical and vaccine products to health
care professionals in private practice, group practices and
managed care organizations.
in the fourth quarter of 2003, the company implemented a new
distribution program for u.s.wholesalers to moderate the
fluctuations in sales caused by wholesaler investment buying and
improve efficiencies in the distribution of company
pharmaceutical products. the new program lowered previous limits
on average monthly purchases of company pharmaceutical products
by u.s.customers. following the implementation of the
program, fluctuations in sales caused by wholesaler investment
buying significantly moderated.
raw materials raw materials and supplies,
which are generally available from multiple sources, are
purchased worldwide and are normally available in quantities
adequate to meet the needs of the companys pharmaceutical
and vaccines segments.
government regulation and investigation the
pharmaceutical industry is subject to global regulation by
regional, country, state and local agencies. of particular
importance is the fda in the united states, which administers
requirements covering the testing, approval, safety,
effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling and marketing of
prescription pharmaceuticals. in many cases, the fda
requirements have increased the amount of time and money
necessary to develop new products and bring them to market in
the united states. in 1997, the food and drug administration
modernization act (the fda modernization act) was
passed and was the culmination of a comprehensive legislative
reform effort designed to streamline regulatory procedures
within the fda and to improve the regulation of drugs, medical
devices and food. the legislation was principally designed to
ensure the timely availability of safe and effective drugs and
biologics by expediting the premarket review process for new
products. a key provision of the legislation is the
re-authorization of the prescription drug user fee act of 1992,
which permits the continued collection of user fees from
prescription drug manufacturers to augment fda resources
earmarked for the review of human drug applications. this helps
provide the resources necessary to ensure the prompt approval of
safe and effective new drugs.
in the united states, the government expanded health care access
by enacting the medicare prescription drug improvement and
modernization act of 2003, which was signed into law in december
2003. prescription drug coverage began on january1, 2006.
this legislation supports the companys goal of improving
access to medicines by expanding insurance coverage, while
preserving market-based incentives for pharmaceutical
innovation. at the same time, the legislation will ensure that
prescription drug costs will be controlled by competitive
pressures and by encouraging the appropriate use of medicines.
in addressing cost-containment pressure, the company has made a
continuing effort to demonstrate that its medicines can help
save costs in overall patient health care.
for many years, the pharmaceutical industry has been under
federal and state oversight with the approval process for new
drugs, drug safety, advertising and promotion, drug purchasing
and reimbursement programs and formularies variously under
review. the company believes that it will continue to be able to
conduct its operations, including the introduction of new drugs
to the market, in this regulatory environment. one type of
federal initiative to contain federal health care spending is
the prospective or capitated payment system, first
implemented to reduce the rate of growth in medicare
reimbursement to hospitals. such a system establishes in advance
a flat rate for reimbursement for health care for those patients
for whom the payor is fiscally responsible. this type of payment
system and other cost containment systems are now widely used by
public and private payors and have caused hospitals, health
maintenance organizations and other customers of the company to
be more cost-conscious in their treatment decisions, including
decisions regarding the medicines to be made available to their
patients. the company continues to work with private and federal
employers to slow increases in health care costs. further, the
companys efforts to demonstrate that its medicines can
help save costs in other areas have encouraged the use of the
companys medicines and have helped offset the effects of
increasing cost pressures.
also, federal and state governments have pursued methods to
directly reduce the cost of drugs and vaccines for which they
pay. for example, federal laws require the company to pay
specified rebates for medicines reimbursed by medicaid, to
provide discounts for outpatient medicines purchased by certain
public health service entities and disproportionate
share hospitals (hospitals meeting certain criteria), and
to provide minimum discounts of 24% off of a defined
non-federal average manufacturer price for purchases
by certain components of the federal government such as the
department of veterans affairs and the department of defense.
initiatives in some states seek rebates beyond the minimum
required by medicaid legislation, in some cases for patients
beyond those who are eligible for medicaid. under the federal
vaccines for children entitlement program, the cdc funds and
purchases recommended pediatric vaccines at a public sector
price for the immunization of medicaid-eligible, uninsured,
native american and certain underinsured children. the company
was awarded a cdc contract in april 2006 which is in effect
until march 2007 for the supply of pediatric vaccines for the
vaccines for children program that had an aggregate estimated
value of $550million at signing. as of january1,
2006, patients previously eligible for medicaid who are also
medicare beneficiaries (65years and older or disabled)
left the state-administered medicaid system to be covered by the
new medicare prescription drug benefit.
outside the united states, the company encounters similar
regulatory and legislative issues in most of the countries where
it does business. there, too, the primary thrust of governmental
inquiry and action is toward determining drug safety and
effectiveness, often with mechanisms for controlling the prices
of or reimbursement for prescription drugs and the profits of
prescription drug companies. the eu has adopted directives
concerning the classification, labeling, advertising, wholesale
distribution and approval for marketing of medicinal products
for human use. the companys policies and procedures are
already consistent with the substance of these directives;
consequently, it is believed that they will not have any
material effect on the companys business.
the company is subject to the jurisdiction of various regulatory
agencies and is, therefore, subject to potential administrative
actions. such actions may include seizures of products and other
civil and criminal sanctions. under certain circumstances, the
company on its own may deem it advisable to initiate product
recalls. the company believes that it should be able to compete
effectively within this environment.
in addition, certain countries within the eu, recognizing the
economic importance of the research-based pharmaceutical
industry and the value of innovative medicines to society, are
working with industry representatives and the european
commission (ec) on proposals to complete the
single market in pharmaceuticals and improve the
competitive climate through a variety of means including market
deregulation.
the company is subject to a number of privacy and data
protection laws and regulations globally. the legislative and
regulatory landscape for privacy and data protection continues
to evolve, and there has been an increasing amount of focus on
privacy and data protection issues with the potential to affect
directly the companys business.
patents, trademarks and licenses patent
protection is considered, in the aggregate, to be of material
importance in the companys marketing of human health
products in the united states and in most major foreign markets.
patents may cover products per se, pharmaceutical
formulations, processes for or intermediates useful in the
manufacture of products or the uses of products. protection for
individual products extends for varying periods in accordance
with the legal life of patents in the various countries. the
protection afforded, which may also vary from country to
country, depends upon the type of patent and its scope of
coverage.
patent portfolios developed for products introduced by the
company normally provide market exclusivity. basic patents are
in effect for the following major products in the united states:
cancidas, comvax (haemophilus b conjugate and
hepatitis b [recombinant] vaccine), cosopt, cozaar,
crixivan, emend, fosamax, gardasil, hyzaar, invanz
(ertapenem sodium), maxalt, primaxin, propecia,
recombivax hb (hepatitis b vaccine [recombinant]),
rotateq, singulair, januvia, trusopt, zolinza and
zostavax. basic patents are also in effect in the united
states for zetia and vytorin, which were developed
by the merck/schering-plough partnership. a basic patent is also
in effect for sustiva/stocrin (efavirenz). bristol-myers
squibb (bms), under an exclusive license from the
company, sells sustiva in the united states, canada and
certain european countries. the company markets stocrin
in other countries throughout the world. the basic patent
for aggrastat (tirofiban hydrochloride) in the united
states was divested with the product in 2003. the company
retains basic patents for aggrastat outside the united
states.
the fda modernization act includes a pediatric exclusivity
provision that may provide an additional six months of market
exclusivity in the united states for indications of new or
currently marketed drugs if certain agreed upon pediatric
studies are completed by the applicant. these exclusivity
provisions were re-authorized until october1, 2007 by the
best pharmaceuticals for children act passed in
january 2002. in 2005, the fda granted an additional six months
of market exclusivity in the united states to invanz
until august 2013. in 2004, the fda granted an additional
six months of market exclusivity in the united states to
trusopt until october 2008. in 2002, the fda granted an
additional six months of market exclusivity in the united states
to cozaar/hyzaar until february 2010. in 2005, the fda
granted an additional six months of market exclusivity in the
united states to singulair until august 2012. for further
information with respect to the companys patents, see
patent litigation on page32.
while the expiration of a product patent normally results in a
loss of market exclusivity for the covered pharmaceutical
product, commercial benefits may continue to be derived from:
(i)later-granted patents on processes and intermediates
related to the most economical method of manufacture of the
active ingredient of such product; (ii)patents relating to
the use of such product; (iii)patents relating to novel
compositions and formulations; and (iv)in the united
states, market exclusivity that may be available under federal
law. the effect of product patent expiration on pharmaceutical
products also depends upon many other factors such as the nature
of the market and the position of the product in it, the growth
of the market, the complexities and economics of the process for
manufacture of the active ingredient of the product and the
requirements of new drug provisions of the federal food, drug
and cosmetic act or similar laws and regulations in other
countries.
additions to market exclusivity are sought in the united states
and other countries through all relevant laws, including laws
increasing patent life. some of the benefits of increases in
patent life have been partially offset by a general increase in
the number of, incentives for and use of generic products.
additionally, improvements in intellectual property laws are
sought in the united states and other countries through reform
of patent and other relevant laws and implementation of
international treaties.
in june 2006, zocor lost its market exclusivity in the
united states and the company experienced a significant decline
in u.s.zocor sales after that time.
in june 2006, the basic patent in the united states covering
proscar expired. as a result, the company experienced a
significant decline in u.s.proscar sales after that
time. the basic patent for proscar also covers
propecia; however, propecia is protected by
additional patents which expire in october 2013.
in 2003, the fda granted an additional six months of market
exclusivity in the united states to fosamax until
february 2008, and fosamax once weekly until january
2019. however, on january28, 2005, the u.s.court of
appeals for the federal circuit in washington,d.c. found
the companys patent claims for once-weekly administration
of fosamax to be invalid. the company exhausted all
options to appeal this decision in 2005. based on the court of
appeals decision, fosamax will lose its market
exclusivity in the united states in february 2008.
fosamax plus d will lose its u.s.market exclusivity
in april 2008. the company expects significant declines in each
products sales after each products respective loss
of market exclusivity.
worldwide, all of the companys important products are sold
under trademarks that are considered in the aggregate to be of
material importance. trademark protection continues in some
countries as long as used; in other countries, as long as
registered. registration is for fixed terms and can be renewed
indefinitely.
royalties received during 2006 on patent and know-how licenses
and other rights amounted to $83.8million. the company
also paid royalties amounting to $900.5million in 2006
under patent and know-how licenses it holds.
research
and development
the companys business is characterized by the introduction
of new products or new uses for existing products through a
strong research and development program. approximately
11,400people are employed in the companys research
activities. expenditures for the companys research and
development programs were $4.8billion in 2006,
$3.8billion in 2005 and $4.0billion in 2004. the
company maintains its ongoing commitment to research over a
broad range of therapeutic areas and clinical development in
support of new products.
the company maintains a number of long-term exploratory and
fundamental research programs in biology and chemistry as well
as research programs directed toward product development.
mercks new research and development model is designed to
increase productivity and improve the probability of success by
prioritizing the companys research and development
resources on nine priority disease areas
alzheimers disease, atherosclerosis, cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, novel vaccines, obesity, oncology (targeted
therapies), pain and sleep disorders. these therapeutic areas
were carefully chosen based on a set of criteria including unmet
medical needs, scientific opportunity and commercial
opportunity. within these therapeutic areas, merck will commit
resources to achieve research breadth and depth and to develop
best-in-class
targeted and differentiated products that are valued highly by
patients, payers and physicians.
the company will also make focused investments to pursue
specific mechanisms in the following selected disease areas:
antibiotics, antifungals, antivirals (hepatitisc virus,
human immunodeficiency virus), asthma, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, neurodegeneration, ophthalmology,
osteoporosis, schizophrenia and stroke. in addition, the company
will capitalize on selected opportunities outside these areas by
continuing to commercialize attractive clinical development
candidates in the pipeline and by pursuing appropriate external
licensing opportunities.
in the development of human health products, industry practice
and government regulations in the unitedstates and most
foreign countries provide for the determination of effectiveness
and safety of new chemical compounds through preclinical tests
and controlled clinical evaluation. before a new drug may be
marketed in the united states, recorded data on preclinical and
clinical experience are included in the nda or the biologics
license application to the fda for the required approval. the
development of certain other products is also subject to
government regulations covering safety and efficacy in the
united states and many foreign countries.
once the companys scientists discover a new compound that
they believe has promise to treat a medical condition, the
company commences preclinical testing with that compound.
preclinical testing includes laboratory testing and animal
safety studies to gather data on chemistry, pharmacology and
toxicology. pending acceptable preclinical data, the company
will initiate clinical testing in accordance with established
regulatory requirements. the clinical testing begins with
phasei studies, which are designed to assess safety,
tolerability, pharmacokinetics, and preliminary pharmacodynamic
activity of the compound in humans. if favorable, additional,
larger phaseii studies are initiated to determine the
efficacy of the compound in the affected population, define
appropriate dosing for the compound, as well as identify any
adverse effects that could limit the compounds usefulness.
if data from the phaseii trials are satisfactory, the
company commences large-scale phaseiii trials to confirm
the compounds efficacy and safety. upon completion of
those trials, if satisfactory, the company submits regulatory
filings with the appropriate regulatory agencies around the
world to have the product candidate approved for marketing.
there can be no assurance that a compound that is the result of
any particular program will obtain the regulatory approvals
necessary for it to be marketed.
in the united states, the fda approval process begins once a
complete nda is submitted and received by the fda. pursuant to
the prescription drug user fee act, the fda review period
targets for ndas or supplemental ndas is either six months, for
priority review, or ten months, for a standard review. within
60days after receipt of an nda, the fda determines if the
application is sufficiently complete to permit a substantive
review. the fda also assesses, at that time, whether the
application will be granted a priority review or standard
review. once the review timelines are defined, the fda will act
upon the application within those timelines, unless a major
amendment has been submitted (either at the companys own
initiative or the fdas request) to the pending
application. if this occurs, the fda may extend the review
period to allow for review of the new information, but by no
more than 180days. extensions to the review period are
communicated to the company. the fda can act on an application
by issuing an approval letter, a non-approvable letter, or an
approvable letter. based on fda statistics, drug development
time from initiation of preclinical testing to nda approval can
range from 5 to 20years with an average of 8.5years.
the company has three drug candidates currently under fda review:
in june 2006, the fda accepted for standard review an nda for
mk-0517, the intravenous prodrug of emend, for the
treatment of cinv. the company anticipates a decision on the nda
in the second quarter of 2007.
in july 2006, the fda accepted for standard review the nda for
janumet, the companys investigational oral medicine
combining januvia with metformin, which is designed to
provide an additional treatment for patients needing more than
one oral agent to help control blood sugar for treatment of type
2 diabetes. the company expects fda action on the nda by the end
of march 2007. the company is also moving forward as planned
with regulatory filings in countries outside the united states.
arcoxia, the companys investigational selective
cox-2 inhibitor, remains under standard review by the fda in the
united states. in response to the fdas approvable letter,
merck included results of the medal (multinational etoricoxib
and diclofenac arthritis long-term) program that showed the rate
of confirmed thrombotic cardiovascular events was similar
between arcoxia and diclofenac, the most widely used
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug in the world. the company
anticipates fda action in april 2007. the company expects that
an fda advisory committee meeting will be held prior to fda
action. arcoxia is currently available in more than 60
countries in europe, latin america, the asia-pacific region and
middle east/northern africa.
the company anticipates filing three ndas with the fda in 2007:
the company plans to file an nda for mk-0518 with the fda in the
second quarter of 2007 and has received fast track designation
for an indication in treatment-experienced patients.
interim 16-week data from the dose-ranging phaseii trial
of mk-0518, the companys investigational hiv integrase
inhibitor, in patients with advanced hiv infection were
presented at the
13thannual
conference on retroviruses and opportunistic infections in
february 2006. the results showed that the oral investigational
medication at all three doses studied in combination with
optimized background therapy (obt) had greater
antiretroviral activity than obt alone. study results also
showed that mk-0518 in combination with obt was generally well
tolerated in these patients who were failing antiretroviral
therapy (art), who were resistant to at least one
drug of each of the three available classes of oral arts, and
who had limited active arts as options for treatment. at the
american society for microbiologys 46th annual
international conference on antimicrobial agents and
chemotherapy in september 2006, the company presented interim
24-week data from this ongoing study in treatment-experienced
patients, which demonstrated
mk-0518
maintaining viral load regression.
in august 2006 at the
16thinternational
aids conference, the company presented interim
24-week data
from the phaseii dose-ranging trial of
mk-0518
conducted in treatment-nave, hiv-infected patients. the
data showed that mk-0518 twice daily, when used in combination
with tenofovir and lamivudine, achieved a comparable viral load
reduction to efavirenz combined with the same agents in
previously untreated patients. in september 2006 at the american
society for microbiologys 46thannual international
conference on antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, the company
presented additional interim
24-week data
from this phaseii dose-ranging study in
treatment-nave patients that demonstrated no increase in
lipid levels in patients taking mk-0518 with tenofovir and
lamivudine.
the company has entered into phaseiii clinical trials with
mk-0524a and to support mk-0524b, investigational therapies for
lipid management. mk-0524a represents a novel approach to
lowering ldl-c, raising hdl-c and lowering triglycerides.
mk-0524b combines mk-0524a with the proven benefits of
simvastatin to potentially reduce the risk of coronary heart
disease beyond what statins provide alone. the company plans to
file mk-0524a with the fda in 2007 and to file mk-0524b in 2008.
in november 2006, the company presented data from a
phaseii study at the american heart associations
scientific sessions 2006 in chicago that showed
co-administration of mk-0524 with er niacin significantly
reduced flushing in patients with dyslipidemia compared to those
patients who took er niacin alone. flushing, characterized by
redness of the skin with warming or burning on the face and neck
caused by the dilation of blood vessels near the skin, is a
common niacin-induced side effect that can cause discomfort to
patients and is a significant factor leading to discontinuation
of niacin therapy.
in october 2006, the company and h. lundbeck a/s of denmark
announced that the submission of an nda for gaboxadol, a novel
investigational drug in phaseiii development for the
treatment of insomnia, will occur in mid-2007. phaseii
clinical studies of gaboxadol showed improved sleep quality as
well as increased slow-wave sleep without suppressing rem sleep.
in december 2006, merck announced that gaboxadol will likely be
a scheduled compound.
also, by mid-year 2007, merck expects to have four products in
phaseiii development (includingmk-0524b discussed
above):
the company has initiated a targeted phaseiii program with
its investigational compound for the treatment of obesity,
mk-0364, which is an investigational cannabinoid-1 receptor
inverse agonist. results of early clinical studies indicate that
mk-0364 demonstrated significant weight-loss efficacy versus
placebo and was generally safe and well-tolerated, however, as
reported with another cannabinoid-1 receptor inverse agonist,
some psychiatric adverse experiences have been observed.
as announced in december 2006, the company plans to start
phaseiii testing of mk-0974, the calcitonin gene related
peptide receptor antagonist for the treatment of migraine
headaches. the phaseiii program is expected to commence in
first quarter 2007.
also announced in december 2006, the company anticipates that
mk-0822, a cathepsin k inhibitor for the treatment of
osteoporosis, will enter phaseiii testing in mid-2007.
the companys clinical pipeline includes candidates in each
of the following areas: arthritis, atherosclerosis, cancer,
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, endocrine disorders, glaucoma,
infectious diseases, insomnia, neurodegenerative disease,
obesity, osteoporosis, psychiatric disease, pain, respiratory
disease and urogenital disorders. the company supplements its
internal research with an aggressive licensing and external
alliance strategy focused on the entire spectrum of
collaborations from early research to late-stage compounds, as
well as new technologies. the company completed 53 transactions
in 2006, including targeted acquisitions, research
collaborations, preclinical and clinical compounds, and
technology transactions across a broad range of therapeutic
categories.
in march 2006, neuromed pharmaceuticals ltd.
(neuromed) and merck signed a research collaboration
and license agreement to research, develop and commercialize
novel compounds for the treatment of pain and other neurological
disorders, including neuromeds lead compound, nmed-160
(mk-6721), which is currently in phaseii development for
the treatment of pain.
also in march 2006, merck signed an agreement with nicox s.a.
(nicox) to collaborate on the development of new
antihypertensive drugs using nicoxs proprietary nitric
oxide-donating technology.
in september 2006, the company announced that it had expanded
the scope of its existing strategic collaboration with foxhollow
technologies, inc. (foxhollow) for atherosclerotic
plaque analysis. in addition, merck acquired a stake in
foxhollow with the purchase of $95million in common stock.
in october 2006, ambrilia biopharma inc. (ambrilia),
a biopharmaceutical company developing innovative therapeutics
in the fields of cancer and infectious diseases, and merck
announced that ambrilia has entered into an exclusive licensing
agreement granting merck the worldwide rights to ambrilias
hiv/aids protease inhibitor program.
in november 2006, the j. david gladstone institutes and merck
announced a major collaboration and license agreement for
research and development of drugs to treat neurodegenerative
diseases, including alzheimers disease, that are linked to
apoe-regulated mechanisms in the body.
also in november 2006, advinus therapeutics (p)ltd.
(advinus) and merck announced that they have formed
a drug discovery and clinical development collaboration in the
area of metabolic disorders. advinus and merck will work
together to develop clinically validated drug candidates for
metabolic disorders, with merck retaining the right to advance
the most promising of these candidates into late-stage clinical
trials.
in december 2006, merck and idera pharmaceuticals
(idera) announced that they have formed a broad
collaboration to research, develop and commercialize
ideras toll-like receptor agonists by incorporating them
in therapeutic and prophylactic vaccines being developed by
merck for oncology, infectious diseases and alzheimers
disease.
the chart below reflects the companys current research
pipeline as of february15, 2007. candidates shown in
phaseiii include specific products. candidates shown in
phasei and ii include the most advanced compound with a
specific mechanism in a given therapeutic area.
back-up
compounds, regardless of their phase of development, additional
indications in the same therapeutic area and additional line
extensions or formulations for in-line products are not shown.
phasei
alzheimers
disease
mk-0952
atherosclerosis
mk-6213
cancer
mk-0429
mk-0646*
mk-0731
mk-0752
mk-4721*
v930
cardiovascular
mk-0448
mk-8141*
diabetes
mk-0941
mk-0893
mk-1642
mk-3887
phasei
endocrine
mk-0867*
mk-0974
glaucoma
mk-0994
infectious disease
mk-0608
mk-7009
mk-8122*
v710 (s. aureus)
v512 (flu)
insomnia
mk-0454
mk-8998
osteoporosis
mk-0773
parkinsons
disease
mk-0657
psychiatric disease
mk-2637
mk-0249
mk-5757
phaseii
alzheimers
disease
mk-0249
arthritis
mk-0822
atherosclerosis
mk-0859
mk-0633
cancer
mk-0457*
mk-0822
diabetes
mk-0533
endocrine
mk-0677
hiv
v526
hpv
v502**
infectious disease
(pediatric)
v419*
migraine
mk-0974
osteoporosis
mk-0822
overactive bladder
mk-0634
mk-0594
pain
mk-0759
mk-6721*
mk-2295*/***
respiratory disease
mk-0633
stroke
mk-0724*
phaseiii
atherosclerosis
mk-0524b
mk-0524a
(er niacin/
laropiprant)
hiv
mk-0518
(raltegravir)
insomnia
gaboxadol*
obesity
mk-0364
(taranabant)
under fda review
cinv
emend
for injection
(mk-0517)
diabetes
janumet
osteoarthritis
arcoxia
u.s.approvals
rotavirus
gastroenteritis
rotateq
shingles
zostavax
cervical cancer and
genital warts
gardasil**
diabetes
januvia
cancer (ctcl)
zolinza*
*
licensed, alliance, or acquisition
(pipeline)
**
multiple licenses, including csl,
ltd.
***
proof-of-concept
molecule
all product or service marks appearing in type form different
from that of the surrounding text are trademarks or service
marks owned by or licensed to merck, its subsidiaries or
affiliates (including zetia and vytorin,
trademarks owned by entities of the merck/schering-plough
partnership), except as noted. cozaar and hyzaar
are registered trademarks of e.i. du pont de nemours and
company, wilmington, de and prilosec and nexium
are trademarks of the astrazeneca group. the
u.s.trademarks for vasotec and vaseretic are
owned by biovail laboratories incorporated. the
u.s.trademark for aggrastat is owned by guilford
pharmaceuticals inc.
employees
at the end of 2006, the company had approximately 60,000
employees worldwide, with approximately 31,800 employed in the
united states, including puerto rico. approximately 21% of
worldwide employees of the company are represented by various
collective bargaining groups.
as part of a cost-reduction initiative announced in october 2003
and completed at the end of 2004, the company had eliminated
5,100 positions. the company completed a similar program in 2005
with 900 positions being eliminated through december31,
2005.
on november28, 2005, the company announced the first phase
of a global restructuring program designed to reduce the
companys cost structure, increase efficiency, and enhance
competitiveness. the initial steps will include the
implementation of a new supply strategy by the merck
manufacturing division, which is intended to create a leaner,
more cost-effective and customer-focused manufacturing model
over a three-year period.
as a result, merck will incur certain costs associated with exit
or disposal activities. as part of the global restructuring
program, the company expects to eliminate approximately 7,000
positions in manufacturing and other divisions worldwide,
representing about 11% of its global work force, by the end of
2008. about half of the position reductions are expected to
occur in the united states, with the remainder in other
countries. as of december31, 2006, there have been
approximately 4,800 positions eliminated throughout the company
since inception of the program (approximately 3,700 of which
were eliminated during 2006 comprised of actual headcount
reductions, and the elimination of contractors and vacant
positions). however, the company continues to hire new employees
as the companys business requires it. merck intends to
sell or close five of its 31 manufacturing facilities worldwide
and two preclinical sites and to reduce operations at a number
of other sites. through the end of 2006, three of the
manufacturing facilities have been closed, sold, or had ceased
operations, and the two preclinical sites were closed. the
company has also sold certain other facilities and related
assets in connection with the restructuring program. the
remaining sites identified for sale/closure are expected to be
closed by the end of 2008, subject to compliance with legal
obligations.
the pretax costs of the restructuring were $935.5million
in 2006, $401.2million in 2005 and are expected to be
$300million to $500million in 2007. through the end
of 2008, when the initial phase of the restructuring program is
substantially complete, the cumulative pretax costs of the
restructuring activities announced on november28, 2005 are
expected to range from $1.9billion to $2.2billion.
approximately 70% of the cumulative pretax costs are non-cash,
relating primarily to accelerated depreciation for those
facilities scheduled for closure.
environmental
matters
the company believes that it is in compliance in all material
respects with applicable environmental laws and regulations. in
2006, the company incurred capital expenditures of approximately
$7.9million for environmental protection facilities. the
company is also remediating environmental contamination
resulting from past industrial activity at certain of its sites.
expenditures for remediation and environmental liabilities were
$12.6million in 2006, and are estimated at
$94.2million for the years 2007 through 2011. these
amounts do not consider potential recoveries from insurers or
other parties. the company has taken an active role in
identifying and providing for these costs and, in
managements opinion, the liabilities for all environmental
matters which are probable and reasonably estimable have been
accrued and totaled $129.0million at december31,
2006. although it is not possible to predict with certainty the
outcome of these environmental matters, or the ultimate costs of
remediation, management does not believe that any reasonably
possible expenditures that may be incurred in excess of the
liabilities accrued should exceed $62.0million in the
aggregate. management also does not believe that these
expenditures should result in a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, results of operations,
liquidity or capital resources for any year.
geographic
area information
the companys operations outside the united states are
conducted primarily through subsidiaries. sales worldwide by
subsidiaries outside the united states were 39% of sales in
2006, 42% of sales in 2005 and 41% of sales in 2004.
the companys worldwide business is subject to risks of
currency fluctuations, governmental actions and other
governmental proceedings abroad. the company does not regard
these risks as a deterrent to further expansion of its
operations abroad. however, the company closely reviews its
methods of operations and adopts strategies responsive to
changing economic and political conditions.
in recent years, the company has been expanding its operations
in countries located in latin america, the middle east, africa,
eastern europe and asia pacific where changes in government
policies and economic conditions are making it possible for the
company to earn fair returns. business in these developing
areas, while sometimes less stable, offers important
opportunities for growth over time.
financial information about geographic areas of the
companys business is discussed in item8.
financial statements and supplementary data below.
available
information
the companys internet website address is
www.merck.com. the company will make available,
free of charge at the investor information portion
of its website, its annual report on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
current reports on
form8-k,
and all amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant
to section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934, as amended, as soon as reasonably practicable after such
reports are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the
securities and exchange commission (sec).
the companys corporate governance guidelines and the
charters of the board of directors seven standing
committees are available on the companys website at
www.merck.com/about/corporategovernance and all
such information is available in print to any stockholder who
requests it from the company.
item1a.
risk
factors.
you should carefully consider all of the information set forth
in this
form10-k,
including the following risk factors, before deciding to invest
in any of the companys securities. the risks below are not
the only ones the company faces. additional risks not currently
known to the company or that the company presently deems
immaterial may also impair its business operations. the
companys business, financial condition, results of
operations or prospects could be materially adversely affected
by any of these risks. this
form10-k
also contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and
uncertainties. the companys results could materially
differ from those anticipated in these forward-looking
statements as a result of certain factors, including the risks
it faces as described below and elsewhere. see cautionary
factors that may affect future results on page21.
the company faces significant litigation related to
vioxx.
on september30, 2004, the company voluntarily withdrew
vioxx, its arthritis and acute pain medication, from the
market worldwide. as of december31, 2006, approximately
27,400 product liability lawsuits, involving approximately
46,100 plaintiff groups, alleging personal injuries resulting
from the use of vioxx, have been filed against the
company in state and federal courts in the united states. the
company is also a defendant in approximately 264 purported class
actions related to the use of vioxx. (all of these suits
are referred to as the vioxx product liability
lawsuits.) in addition to the vioxx product
liability lawsuits, various purported class actions and
individual lawsuits have been brought against the company and
several current and former officers and directors of the company
alleging that the company made false and misleading statements
regarding vioxx in violation of the federal and state
securities laws (all of these suits are referred to as the
vioxx securities lawsuits). in addition,
various putative class actions have been brought against the
company and several current and former
employees, officers, and directors of the company alleging
violations of the employee retirement income security act
(erisa). (all of these suits are referred to as the
vioxx erisa lawsuits.) in addition,
shareholder derivative suits that were previously filed and
dismissed are now on appeal and several shareholders have filed
demands with the company asserting claims against the board
members and company officers. (all of these suits and demands
are referred to as the vioxx derivative
lawsuits and, together with the vioxx securities
lawsuits and the vioxx erisa lawsuits, the vioxx
shareholder lawsuits.) the company has also been named
as a defendant in actions in various countries outside the
united states. (all of these suits are referred to as the
vioxx foreign lawsuits.) the company has also
been sued by four states with respect to the marketing of
vioxx. the company anticipates that additional lawsuits
relating to vioxx will be filed against it
and/or
certain of its current and former officers and directors in the
future.
the sec is conducting a formal investigation of the company
concerning vioxx. the u.s.department of justice has
issued a subpoena requesting information relating to the
companys research, marketing and selling activities with
respect to vioxx in a federal health care investigation
under criminal statutes. there are also ongoing investigations
by certain congressional committees and local authorities in
europe. a group of attorneys general from thirty-one states and
the district of columbia are conducting an investigation of the
companys sales and marketing of vioxx. the company
is cooperating with authorities in all of these investigations.
(all of these investigations are referred to as the
vioxx investigations.) the company can not
predict the outcome of any of these investigations; however,
they could result in potential civil
and/or
criminal liability.
to date, in the vioxx product liability litigation, of
the 29 plaintiffs whose claims have been scheduled for trial,
the claims of seven were dismissed, the claims of seven were
withdrawn from the trial calendar by plaintiffs, and juries have
decided in mercks favor nine times and in plaintiffs
favor four times. in addition, in the recent california trial
involving two plaintiffs, the jury could not reach a verdict for
either plaintiff and a mistrial was declared. a new jersey state
judge set aside one of the nine merck verdicts. with respect to
the four plaintiffs verdicts, merck already has filed an
appeal or sought judicial review in each of those cases, and in
one of those four, a federal judge overturned the damage award
shortly after trial. in addition, a consolidated trial with two
plaintiffs is currently ongoing in the coordinated proceeding in
new jersey superior court before judge higbee and another trial
has commenced in state court in illinois. the vioxx
product liability litigation is discussed more fully below
in item3. legal proceedings below.
the outcomes of these vioxx product liability trials
should not be interpreted to indicate any trend or what outcome
may be likely in future vioxx trials.
the company currently anticipates that a number of vioxx
product liability lawsuits will be tried in 2007. a trial in
the oregon securities case is scheduled for 2007, but the
company cannot predict whether this trial will proceed on
schedule or the timing of any of the other vioxx
shareholder lawsuit trials. the company believes that it has
meritorious defenses to the vioxx product liability
lawsuits, vioxx shareholder lawsuits and vioxx
foreign lawsuits (collectively, the vioxx
lawsuits) and will vigorously defend against them. the
companys insurance coverage with respect to the vioxx
lawsuits will not be adequate to cover its defense costs and
any losses.
during 2006, the company spent $500million, including
$175million in the fourth quarter, in the aggregate in
legal defense costs worldwide related to (i)the vioxx
product liability lawsuits, (ii)the vioxx shareholder
lawsuits, (iii)the vioxx foreign lawsuits, and
(iv)the vioxx investigations (collectively, the
vioxx litigation). in the third quarter of
2006, the company recorded a charge of $598million and in
the fourth quarter it recorded another charge of
$75million, to increase the reserve solely for its future
legal defense costs related to the vioxx litigation from
$685million at december31, 2005 to $858million
at december31, 2006. this reserve is based on certain
assumptions, described below under legal
proceedings, and is the best estimate of the amount that
the company believes, at this time, will be spent through 2008.
the company is not currently able to estimate any amount of
damages that it may be required to pay in connection with the
vioxx lawsuits or vioxx investigations. these
proceedings, which are expected to continue for years, are
currently at an early stage and the company has very little
information as to the course the proceedings will take. in view
of the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of
litigation, particularly where there are many claimants and the
claimants seek unspecified damages, the company is unable to
predict the outcome of these matters, and at this time cannot
reasonably estimate the possible loss or range of loss with
respect to the vioxx
lawsuits. the company has not established any reserves for any
potential liability relating to the vioxx lawsuits or the
vioxx investigations.
a series of unfavorable outcomes in the vioxx lawsuits or
the vioxx investigations, resulting in the payment of
substantial damages or fines or resulting in criminal penalties,
could have a material adverse effect on the companys
business, cash flow, results of operations, financial position
and prospects.
certain of the companys major products are going to
lose patent protection in the near future and, when that occurs,
the company expects a significant decline in sales of those
products.
the company depends upon patents to provide it with exclusive
marketing rights for its products for some period of time. as
product patents for several of the companys products have
recently expired, or are about to expire, in the united states
and in other countries, the company faces strong competition
from lower price generic drugs. loss of patent protection for
one of the companys products typically leads to a rapid
loss of sales for that product, as lower priced generic versions
of that drug become available. in the case of products that
contribute significantly to the companys sales, the loss
of patent protection can have a material adverse effect on the
companys results of operations.
in june 2006, zocor, the companys statin for
modifying cholesterol, lost its market exclusivity in the
unitedstates. zocor had already lost its basic
patent protection in many markets throughout the world. the
company has experienced a significant decline in zocor
sales. worldwide sales of zocor were
$2.8billion in 2006, compared to $4.4billion in
2005. worldwide sales of zocor are expected to be
$0.6billion to $0.9billion in 2007.
in september 2004, the company appealed a decision of the
opposition division (the opposition division) of the
european patent office (the epo) that revoked the
companys patent in europe that covers the once-weekly
administration of alendronate. that decision was upheld and,
therefore, presently the company is not entitled to market
exclusivity for fosamax in most major european markets
after 2007. in addition, mercks basic patent covering the
use of alendronate has been challenged in several european
countries. the company has received adverse decisions in
germany, holland and the united kingdom. the decision in the
united kingdom was upheld on appeal. the company has appealed
the decisions in germany and holland. the company expects a
significant decline in european sales of fosamax after
loss of exclusivity. sales of fosamax outside the
unitedstates in 2006 have already been adversely affected
by the availability of generic alendronate sodium products in
some markets, including the united kingdom, canada and germany.
on january28, 2005, the u.s.court of appeals for the
federal circuit in washington,d.c. found the
companys patent claims for once-weekly administration of
fosamax to be invalid. the company exhausted all options
to appeal this decision in 2005. based on the court of appeals
decision, fosamax and fosamax plus d will lose
market exclusivity in the united states in february 2008 and
april2008, respectively, and the company expects a
significant decline in fosamax and fosamax plus d
sales in the united states after each products respective
loss of market exclusivity.
the companys research and development efforts may not
succeed in developing commercially successful products and the
company may not be able to acquire commercially successful
products in other ways; in consequence, the company may not be
able to replace sales of successful products that have lost
patent protection.
like other major pharmaceutical companies, in order to remain
competitive, the company must continue to launch new products
each year. declines in sales of products such as zocor
and fosamax mean that the companys future
success is dependent on its pipeline of new products, including
new products which it develops through joint ventures and
products which it is able to obtain through license or
acquisition. to accomplish this, the company commits substantial
effort, funds and other resources to research and development,
both through its own dedicated resources, and through various
collaborations with third parties. to support its research and
development efforts the company must make ongoing, substantial
expenditures, without any assurance that the efforts it is
funding will result in a commercially successful product. the
company must also commit substantial efforts, funds and other
resources to recruiting and retaining high quality scientists
and other personnel with pharmaceutical research and development
expertise.
based on fda statistics, drug development time from initiation
of preclinical testing to nda approval can range from 5 to
20years with an average of 8.5years. for a
description of the research and development process, see
research and development above. each phase of
testing is highly regulated, and during each phase there is a
substantial risk that the company will encounter serious
obstacles or will not achieve its goals, and accordingly the
company may abandon a product in which it has invested
substantial amounts of time and money. some of the risks
encountered in the research and development process include the
following: pre-clinical testing of a new compound may yield
disappointing results; clinical trials of a new drug may not be
successful; a new drug may not be effective or may have harmful
side effects; a new drug may not be approved by the fda for its
intended use; it may not be possible to obtain a patent for a
new drug; or sales of a new product may be disappointing.
the company cannot state with certainty when or whether any of
its products now under development will be launched; whether it
will be able to develop, license or otherwise acquire compounds,
product candidates or products; or whether any products, once
launched, will be commercially successful. the company must
maintain a continuous flow of successful new products and
successful new indications or brand extensions for existing
products sufficient both to cover its substantial research and
development costs and to replace sales that are lost as
profitable products, such as zocor and fosamax,
lose patent protection or are displaced by competing products or
therapies. failure to do so in the short term or long term would
have a material adverse effect on the companys business,
results of operations, cash flow, financial position and
prospects.
the companys products, including products in
development, can not be marketed unless the company obtains and
maintains regulatory approval.
the companys activities, including research, preclinical
testing, clinical trials and manufacturing and marketing its
products, are subject to extensive regulation by numerous
federal, state and local governmental authorities in the united
states, including the fda, and by foreign regulatory
authorities, including the european commission. in the united
states, the fda is of particular importance to the company, as
it administers requirements covering the testing, approval,
safety, effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling and marketing of
prescription pharmaceuticals. in many cases, the fda
requirements have increased the amount of time and money
necessary to develop new products and bring them to market in
the united states. regulation outside the united states also is
primarily focused on drug safety and effectiveness and, in many
cases, cost reduction. the fda and foreign regulatory
authorities have substantial discretion to require additional
testing, to delay or withhold registration and marketing
approval and to mandate product withdrawals.
even if the company is successful in developing new products, it
will not be able to market any of those products unless and
until it has obtained all required regulatory approvals in each
jurisdiction where it proposes to market the new products. once
obtained, the company must maintain approval as long as it plans
to market its new products in each jurisdiction where approval
is required. the companys failure to obtain approval,
significant delays in the approval process, or its failure to
maintain approval in any jurisdiction will prevent it from
selling the new products in that jurisdiction until approval is
obtained, if ever. the company would not be able to realize
revenues for those new products in any jurisdiction where it
does not have approval.
the company is dependent on its patent rights, and if its
patent rights are invalidated or circumvented, its business
would be adversely affected.
patent protection is considered, in the aggregate, to be of
material importance in the companys marketing of human
health products in the united states and in most major foreign
markets. patents covering products that it has introduced
normally provide market exclusivity, which is important for the
successful marketing and sale of its products. the company seeks
patents covering each of its products in each of the markets
where it intends to sell the products and where meaningful
patent protection is available.
even if the company succeeds in obtaining patents covering its
products, third parties or government authorities may challenge
or seek to invalidate or circumvent its patents and patent
applications. it is important for the companys business to
defend successfully the patent rights that provide market
exclusivity for its products. the company is often involved in
patent disputes relating to challenges to its patents or
infringement and similar claims against the company. the company
aggressively defends its important patents both within and
outside the united states, including by filing claims of
infringement against other parties. see item3. legal
proceedings patent
litigation below. in particular, manufacturers of generic
pharmaceutical products from time to time file abbreviated new
drug applications (anda) with the fda seeking to
market generic forms of the companys products prior to the
expiration of relevant patents owned by the company. the company
normally responds by vigorously defending its patent, including
by filing lawsuits alleging patent infringement. patent
litigation and other challenges to the companys patents
are costly and unpredictable and may deprive the company of
market exclusivity for a patented product or, in some cases,
third party patents may prevent the company from marketing and
selling a product in a particular geographic area.
if one or more important products lose patent protection in
profitable markets, sales of those products are likely to
decline significantly as a result of generic versions of those
products becoming available. the companys results of
operations may be adversely affected by the lost sales unless
and until the company has successfully launched commercially
successful replacement products.
the company faces intense competition from lower-cost generic
products.
in general, the company faces increasing competition from
lower-cost generic products. the patent rights that protect its
products are of varying strengths and durations. in addition, in
some countries, patent protection is significantly weaker than
in the united states or the eu. in the united states, political
pressure to reduce spending on prescription drugs has led to
legislation which encourages the use of generic products.
although it is the companys policy to actively protect its
patent rights, generic challenges to the companys products
can arise at any time, and it may not be able to prevent the
emergence of generic competition for its products.
loss of patent protection for a product typically is followed
promptly by generic substitutes, reducing the companys
sales of that product. availability of generic substitutes for
the companys drugs may adversely affect its results of
operations and cash flow. in addition, proposals emerge from
time to time in the united states and other countries for
legislation to further encourage the early and rapid approval of
generic drugs. any such proposal that is enacted into law could
worsen this substantial negative effect on the companys
sales and, potentially, its results of operations and cash flow.
the company faces intense competition from new products.
the companys products face intense competition from
competitors products. this competition may increase as new
products enter the market. in such an event, the
competitors products may be safer or more effective or
more effectively marketed and sold than the companys
products. alternatively, in the case of generic competition,
they may be equally safe and effective products which are sold
at a substantially lower price than the companys products.
as a result, if the company fails to maintain its competitive
position, this could have a material adverse effect on its
business and results of operations.
the company faces pricing pressure with respect to its
products.
the companys products are subject to increasing price
pressures and other restrictions worldwide, including in the
united states. these include (i)practices of managed care
groups and institutional and governmental purchasers and
(ii)u.s.federal laws and regulations related to
medicare and medicaid, including the medicare prescription drug
improvement and modernization act of 2003 (the 2003
act).
the 2003 act included a prescription drug benefit for
individuals which first went into effect on january1,
2006. the increased purchasing power of entities that negotiate
on behalf of medicare beneficiaries could result in further
pricing pressures. the company expects pricing pressures to
increase in the future.
changes in laws and regulations could adversely affect the
companys business.
all aspects of the companys business, including research
and development, manufacturing, marketing, pricing, sales,
litigation and intellectual property rights, are subject to
extensive legislation and regulation. changes in applicable
federal and state laws and agency regulations could have a
material adverse effect on the companys business.
cautionary
factors that may affect future results
(cautionary statements under the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995)
this report and other written reports and oral statements made
from time to time by the company may contain so-called
forward-looking statements, all of which are based
on managements current expectations and are subject to
risks and uncertainties which may cause results to differ
materially from those set forth in the statements. one can
identify these forward-looking statements by their use of words
such as expects, plans,
will, estimates, forecasts,
projects and other words of similar meaning. one can
also identify them by the fact that they do not relate strictly
to historical or current facts. these statements are likely to
address the companys growth strategy, financial results,
product development, product approvals, product potential, and
development programs. one must carefully consider any such
statement and should understand that many factors could cause
actual results to differ materially from the companys
forward-looking statements. these factors include inaccurate
assumptions and a broad variety of other risks and
uncertainties, including some that are known and some that are
not. no forward-looking statement can be guaranteed and actual
future results may vary materially. the company does not assume
the obligation to update any forward-looking statement. the
company cautions you not to place undue reliance on these
forward-looking statements. although it is not possible to
predict or identify all such factors, they may include the
following:
significant litigation related to vioxx.
competition from generic products as the companys products
lose patent protection.
increased brand competition in therapeutic areas
important to the companys long-term business performance.
the difficulties and uncertainties inherent in new product
development. the outcome of the lengthy and complex process of
new product development is inherently uncertain. a candidate can
fail at any stage of the process and one or more late-stage
product candidates could fail to receive regulatory approval.
new product candidates may appear promising in development but
fail to reach the market because of efficacy or safety concerns,
the inability to obtain necessary regulatory approvals, the
difficulty or excessive cost to manufacture
and/or the
infringement of patents or intellectual property rights of
others. furthermore, the sales of new products may prove to be
disappointing and fail to reach anticipated levels.
pricing pressures, both in the united states and abroad,
including rules and practices of managed care groups, judicial
decisions and governmental laws and regulations related to
medicare, medicaid and health care reform, pharmaceutical
reimbursement and pricing in general.
changes in government laws and regulations and the enforcement
thereof affecting the companys business.
efficacy or safety concerns with respect to marketed products,
whether or not scientifically justified, leading to product
recalls, withdrawals or declining sales.
legal factors, including product liability claims, antitrust
litigation and governmental investigations, including tax
disputes, environmental concerns and patent disputes with
branded and generic competitors, any of which could preclude
commercialization of products or negatively affect the
profitability of existing products.
lost market opportunity resulting from delays and uncertainties
in the approval process of the fda and foreign regulatory
authorities.
increased focus on privacy issues in countries around the world,
including the united states and the eu. the legislative and
regulatory landscape for privacy and data protection continues
to evolve, and there has been an increasing amount of focus on
privacy and data protection issues with the potential to affect
directly the companys business.
changes in tax laws including changes related to the taxation of
foreign earnings.
changes in accounting pronouncements promulgated by
standard-setting or regulatory bodies, including the financial
accounting standards board and the sec, that are adverse to the
company.
economic factors over which the company has no control,
including changes in inflation, interest rates and foreign
currency exchange rates.
this list should not be considered an exhaustive statement of
all potential risks and uncertainties. see risk
factors on page16.
item1b.
unresolved
staff comments.
none
item2.
properties.
the companys corporate headquarters is located in
whitehouse station, new jersey. the companys
u.s.pharmaceutical business is conducted through
divisional headquarters located in upper gwynedd and west point,
pennsylvania. the companys vaccines business is conducted
through divisional headquarters located in west point. principal
research facilities for human health products are located in
rahway, new jersey and west point. the company also has
production facilities for human health products at nine
locations in the united states and puerto rico. branch
warehouses provide services throughout the country. outside the
united states, through subsidiaries, the company owns or has an
interest in manufacturing plants or other properties in
australia, canada, japan, singapore, south africa, and other
countries in western europe, central and south america, and asia.
capital expenditures for 2006 were $980.2million compared
with $1.4billion for 2005. in the united states, these
amounted to $714.7million for 2006 and $938.7million
for 2005. abroad, such expenditures amounted to
$265.5million for 2006 and $464.0million for 2005.
the company and its subsidiaries own their principal facilities
and manufacturing plants under titles which they consider to be
satisfactory. the company considers that its properties are in
good operating condition and that its machinery and equipment
have been well maintained. plants for the manufacture of
products are suitable for their intended purposes and have
capacities and projected capacities adequate for current and
projected needs for existing company products. some capacity of
the plants is being converted, with any needed modification, to
the requirements of newly introduced and future products.
item3.
legal
proceedings.
the company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings
of a nature considered normal to its business, including product
liability, intellectual property, and commercial litigation, as
well as additional matters such as antitrust actions.
vioxx
litigation
product
liability lawsuits
as previously disclosed, individual and putative class actions
have been filed against the company in state and federal courts
alleging personal injury
and/or
economic loss with respect to the purchase or use of
vioxx. all such actions filed in federal court are
coordinated in a multidistrict litigation in the
u.s.district court for the eastern district of louisiana
(the mdl) before district judge eldon e. fallon. a
number of such actions filed in state court are coordinated in
separate coordinated proceedings in state courts in new jersey,
california and texas, and the counties of philadelphia,
pennsylvania and clark county, nevada. as of december31,
2006, the company had been served or was aware that it had been
named as a defendant in approximately 27,400 lawsuits, which
include approximately 46,100 plaintiff groups, alleging personal
injuries resulting from the use of vioxx, and in
approximately 264 putative class actions alleging personal
injuries
and/or
economic loss. (all of the actions discussed in this paragraph
are collectively referred to as the vioxx product
liability lawsuits.) of these lawsuits, approximately
8,300 lawsuits representing approximately 23,700 plaintiff
groups are or are slated to be in the federal mdl and
approximately 16,800 lawsuits representing approximately 16,800
plaintiff groups are included in a coordinated proceeding in new
jersey superior court before judge carol e. higbee.
in addition to the vioxx product liability lawsuits
discussed above, the claims of over 4,025 plaintiffs had been
dismissed as of december31, 2006. of these, there have
been over 1,225 plaintiffs whose claims were
dismissed with prejudice (i.e., they cannot be brought again)
either by plaintiffs themselves or by the courts. over 2,800
additional plaintiffs have had their claims dismissed without
prejudice (i.e., they can be brought again).
in the mdl, judge fallon in july 2005 indicated that he would
schedule for trial a series of cases during the period november
2005 through 2006, in the following categories: (i)heart
attack with short term use; (ii)heart attack with long
term use; (iii)stroke; and (iv)cardiovascular injury
involving a prescription written after april 2002 when the
labeling for vioxx was revised to include the results of
the vigor trial. these trials began in november 2005 and
concluded in december 2006. the next scheduled trial in the mdl
is a re-trial in barnettv. merck on the issue of damages
as discussed below.
several vioxx product liability lawsuits are currently
scheduled for trial in 2007. the company has provided a list of
such trials at its website at www.merck.com which it will
periodically update as appropriate. the company has included its
website address only as an inactive textual reference and does
not intend it to be an active link to its website nor does it
incorporate by reference the information contained therein.
merck has entered into a tolling agreement (the tolling
agreement) with the mdl plaintiffs steering
committee that establishes a procedure to halt the running of
the statute of limitations (tolling) as to certain categories of
claims allegedly arising from the use of vioxx by non-new
jersey citizens. the tolling agreement applies to individuals
who have not filed lawsuits and may or may not eventually file
lawsuits and only to those claimants who seek to toll claims
alleging injuries resulting from a thrombotic cardiovascular
event that results in a myocardial infarction or ischemic
stroke. the tolling agreement provides counsel additional time
to evaluate potential claims. the tolling agreement requires any
tolled claims to be filed in federal court. as of
december31, 2006, approximately 14,180 claimants had
entered into tolling agreements.
merck voluntarily withdrew vioxx from the market on
september30, 2004. many states have a two-year statute of
limitations for product liability claims, requiring that claims
must be filed within two years after the plaintiffs learned or
could have learned of their potential cause of action. as a
result, some may view september30, 2006 as a deadline for
filing vioxx cases. it is important to note, however,
that the law regarding statutes of limitations can be complex,
varies from state to state, can be fact-specific, and in some
cases, might be affected by the existence of pending class
actions. for example, some states have three year statutes of
limitations and, in some instances, the statute of limitations
is even longer. merck expects that there will be legal arguments
concerning the proper application of these statutes, and the
decisions will be up to the judges presiding in individual cases
in state and federal proceedings.
the company has previously disclosed the outcomes of several
vioxx product liability lawsuits that were tried prior to
september30, 2006 (see chart below).
in august 2006, in barnett v. merck, a case before judge fallon
in the mdl, a jury in new orleans, louisiana returned a
plaintiff verdict in the second federal vioxx case to go
to trial. the jury awarded $50million in compensatory
damages and $1million in punitive damages. on
august30, 2006, judge fallon overturned as excessive the
damages portion of the verdict and ordered a new trial on
damages. judge fallon has set re-trial for october29, 2007
on the issue of damages. merck has filed motions for a new trial
on all issues and for judgment as a matter of law, both of which
are currently pending before the court. plaintiff has opposed
mercks motion and has asked the judge to reduce the amount
of the award rather than re-try the case.
juries found in favor of merck on all counts in the fourth and
fifth cases to go to trial in the mdl. the jury returned its
verdict for merck in masonv. merck on november8,
2006 and in dedrickv. merck on december13, 2006.
on november22, 2006, judge fallon denied a motion filed in
the mdl to certify a nationwide class of all persons who
allegedly suffered personal injury as a result of taking
vioxx.
on december15, 2006, the jury in albright v. merck, a case
tried in state court in birmingham, alabama, returned a verdict
for merck on all counts.
the company previously disclosed that in april 2006, in
garzav. merck, a jury in rio grande city, texas returned a
verdict in favor of the plaintiff. in september 2006, the texas
state court granted the companys request to investigate
possible jury bias because a juror admitted that he had, prior
to the trial, on several occasions
borrowed money from the plaintiff. on december21, 2006,
the court entered judgment for plaintiff in the amount of
$7.75million, plus interest, reduced from the original
award of $32million because of the texas state cap on
punitive damages. the company is seeking a new trial and will
appeal the verdict if the court does not grant a new trial.
on october31, 2006, in california superior court in los
angeles, a consolidated trial began in the cases appellv.
merck and arrigalev. merck. on january18, 2007,
judge victoria chaney declared a mistrial as to both plaintiffs
after the jury reported that it was deadlocked.
on october5, 2006, in the coordinated proceeding in new
jersey superior court, judge higbee dismissed claims of the
united kingdom plaintiffs. these plaintiffs have appealed.
the first case scheduled for trial in the texas coordinated
proceeding, rigbyv. merck, was scheduled to begin trial on
november7, 2006. the rigby case was voluntarily dismissed
on october23, 2006 when the plaintiff filed a notice of
non-suit with the court.
a consolidated trial, hermans v. merck and humestonv.
merck, began on january17, 2007, in the coordinated
proceeding in new jersey superior court before judge higbee.
humestonv. merck was first tried in 2005, but judge higbee
set aside the november 2005 jury verdict in favor of merck and
ordered a new trial on the grounds of newly discovered evidence.
the hermans/humeston trial is separated into two phases: a
general phase regarding mercks conduct and a
plaintiff-specific phase. there will be jury questions and a
deliberation after phasei regarding mercks  conduct.
if the jury answers any of the questions in the affirmative, the
case will move to phaseii. in phaseii each plaintiff
will present his or her specific case. at the end of
phaseii, the jury will deliberate and will answer
questions with respect to each of the two plaintiffs. the jury
will answer separate verdict sheets but in the course of only
one deliberation. if the case moves to a punitive phase, there
will be a single presentation for each side and one jury
deliberation for both plaintiffs.
the first case scheduled for trial in the philadelphia
coordinated proceeding, mccoolv. merck, was scheduled to
begin trial on february26, 2007. the plaintiff voluntarily
dismissed with prejudice her case on january16, 2007.
on september28, 2006, the new jersey superior court,
appellate division, heard argument on plaintiffs appeal of
judge higbees dismissal of the sinclairv. merck
case. this putative class action was originally filed in
december 2004 and sought the creation of a medical monitoring
fund. judge higbee had granted the companys motion to
dismiss in may 2005. on january16, 2007, the appellate
division reversed the decision and remanded the case back to
judge higbee for further factual inquiry. the company has
petitioned the new jersey supreme court for review of the
appellate divisions decision.
to date in the vioxx product liability lawsuits, of the
29 plaintiffs whose claims have been scheduled for trial, the
claims of seven were dismissed, the claims of seven were
withdrawn from the trial calendar by plaintiffs, and juries have
decided in mercks favor nine times and in plaintiffs
favor four times. in addition, in the recent california trial
involving two plaintiffs, the jury could not reach a verdict for
either plaintiff and a mistrial was declared. a new jersey state
judge set aside one of the nine merck verdicts. with respect to
the four plaintiffs verdicts, merck already has filed an
appeal or sought judicial review in each of those cases, and in
one of those four, a federal judge overturned the damage award
shortly after trial. in addition, a consolidated trial with two
plaintiffs is currently ongoing in the coordinated proceeding in
new jersey superior court before judge higbee and another trial,
schwallerv. merck, has commenced in state court in madison
county, illinois.
the following chart sets forth the results of all
u.s.vioxx product liability trials to date.
state or
federal
verdict date
plaintiff
court
result
comments
aug. 19, 2005
ernst
texas
verdict for plaintiff
jury awarded plaintiff $253.4
million; the court reduced amount to approximately
$26.1million plus interest.  the judgment is now on appeal.
nov. 3, 2005
humeston
n.j.
verdict for merck; then judge
overturned the verdict
judge has ordered a new trial,
which is currently ongoing.
feb.17, 2006
plunkett
federal
mistrial after jury deadlocked in
first trial; verdict for merck in retrial
merck prevailed in february 2006
retrial. plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
april5, 2006
mcdarby
n.j.
verdict for plaintiff
plaintiff was awarded $13.5 million
in damages. mercks motion for a new trial is pending, as
is plaintiffs motion for attorneys fees.
april5, 2006
cona
n.j.
verdict for merck on failure to
warn claim
however, the jury awarded plaintiff
the nominal sum of $135 for his consumer fraud act claim.
mercks motion for a new trial on the consumer fraud act
claim is pending, as is plaintiffs motion for
attorneys fees.
april21, 2006
garza
texas
verdict for plaintiff
judge reduced $32 million jury
award to $7.75million plus interest. merck has moved for a
new trial.
july13, 2006
doherty
n.j.
verdict for merck
plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
aug. 2, 2006
grossberg
california
verdict for merck
plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
aug. 17, 2006
barnett
federal
verdict for plaintiff
plaintiff awarded $51 million in
damages.  the judge ruled the award was grossly
excessive, and has scheduled a new trial on damages in
october 2007. mercks motion for a new trial on the
remaining issues is pending.
sept. 26, 2006
smith
federal
verdict for merck
nov. 15, 2006
mason
federal
verdict for merck
dec. 13, 2006
dedrick
federal
verdict for merck
plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
dec. 15, 2006
albright
alabama
verdict for merck
plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
jan. 18, 2007
arrigale/appell
california
mistrial declared after the jury
deadlocked
other
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, on july29, 2005, a new jersey
state trial court certified a nationwide class of third-party
payors (such as unions and health insurance plans) that paid in
whole or in part for the vioxx used by their plan members
or insureds. the named plaintiff in that case seeks recovery of
certain vioxx purchase costs (plus penalties) based on
allegations that the purported class members paid more for
vioxx than they would have had they known of the
products alleged risks. merck believes that the class was
improperly certified. the trial courts ruling is
procedural only; it does not address the merits of
plaintiffs allegations, which the company intends to
defend vigorously. on march31, 2006, the new jersey
superior court, appellate division, affirmed the class
certification order. on july19, 2006, the new jersey
supreme court decided to exercise its discretion to hear the
companys appeal of the appellate divisions decision.
on august24, 2006, the appellate division ordered a stay
of the proceedings in superior court pending a ruling by the
supreme court. oral argument before the new jersey supreme court
is scheduled to take place in march 2007.
as previously reported, the company has also been named as a
defendant in separate lawsuits brought by the attorneys general
of alaska, louisiana, mississippi, montana, texas and utah.
these actions allege that the company misrepresented the safety
of vioxx and seek (i)recovery of the cost of
vioxx purchased or reimbursed by the state and its
agencies; (ii)reimbursement of all sums paid by the state
and its agencies for medical services for the treatment of
persons injured by vioxx; (iii)damages under
various common law theories; and/or (iv)remedies under
various state statutory theories, including state consumer fraud
and/or fair business practices or medicaid fraud statutes,
including civil penalties.
shareholder
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the vioxx product
liability lawsuits, the company and various current and former
officers and directors are defendants in various putative class
actions and individual lawsuits under the federal securities
laws and state securities laws (the vioxx
securities lawsuits). all of the vioxx
securities lawsuits pending in federal court have been
transferred by the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation
(the jpml) to the united states district court for
the district of new jersey before district judge stanley r.
chesler for inclusion in a nationwide mdl (the shareholder
mdl). judge chesler has consolidated the vioxx
securities lawsuits for all purposes. plaintiffs request
certification of a class of purchasers of company stock between
may21, 1999 and october29, 2004. the complaint
alleges that the defendants made false and misleading statements
regarding vioxx in violation of sections10(b) and
20(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, and seeks
unspecified compensatory damages and the costs of suit,
including attorneys fees. the complaint also asserts a
claim under section20a of the securities and exchange act
against certain defendants relating to their sales of merck
stock. in addition, the complaint includes allegations under
sections11, 12 and 15 of the securities act of 1933 that
certain defendants made incomplete and misleading statements in
a registration statement and certain prospectuses filed in
connection with the merck stock investment plan, a dividend
reinvestment plan. defendants have filed a motion to dismiss the
complaint. oral argument on the motion to dismiss is scheduled
to take place in march 2007.
as previously disclosed, on august15, 2005, a complaint
was filed in oregon state court by the state of oregon through
the oregon state treasurer on behalf of the oregon public
employee retirement fund against the company and certain current
and former officers and directors. the complaint, which was
brought under oregon securities law, alleges that plaintiff has
suffered damages in connection with its purchases of merck
common stock at artificially inflated prices due to the
companys alleged violations of law related to disclosures
about vioxx. the current and former officers and
directors have entered into a tolling agreement and, on
june30, 2006, were dismissed without prejudice from the
case. on july19, 2006, the court denied the companys
motion to dismiss the complaint, but required plaintiff to amend
the complaint. plaintiff filed an amended complaint on
september21, 2006. merck filed a motion to require
plaintiffs to make the complaint more definite and certain,
which was denied by the court. merck filed an answer to the
complaint in january 2007.
as previously disclosed, various shareholder derivative actions
filed in federal court were transferred to the shareholder mdl
and consolidated for all purposes by judge chesler (the
vioxx derivative lawsuits). the consolidated
complaint arose out of substantially the same factual
allegations that are made in the vioxx securities
lawsuits. the vioxx derivative lawsuits, which were
purportedly brought to assert rights of the company, assert
claims against certain members of the board past and present and
certain executive officers for breach of fiduciary
duty, waste of corporate assets, unjust enrichment, abuse of
control and gross mismanagement. on may5, 2006, judge
chesler granted defendants motion to dismiss and denied
plaintiffs request for leave to amend their complaint.
plaintiffs appeal of the district courts decision
refusing them leave to amend the complaint is currently pending
before the united states court of appeals for the third circuit.
as previously disclosed, on october29, 2004, two
individual shareholders made a demand on the board of directors
of the company to take legal action against mr.raymond
gilmartin, former chairman, president and chief executive
officer and other individuals for allegedly causing damage to
the company with respect to the allegedly improper marketing of
vioxx. in july 2006, the board received another
shareholder letter demanding that the board take legal action
against the board and management of merck for allegedly causing
damage to the company relating to the companys allegedly
improper marketing of vioxx. in december 2006, each of
these demands was rejected by the board of directors.
as previously announced, the board of directors appointed a
special committee to review the companys actions prior to
its voluntary withdrawal of vioxx, to act for the board
in responding to shareholder litigation matters related to the
withdrawal of vioxx, and to advise the board with respect
to any action that should be taken as a result of the review. in
december 2004, the special committee retained the honorable john
s. martin,jr. of debevoise& plimpton llp to
conduct an independent investigation of senior managements
conduct with respect to the cardiovascular safety profile of
vioxx during the period vioxx was developed and
marketed. the review was completed in the third quarter of 2006
and the full report (including appendices) was made public in
september 2006. the company has provided a copy of the full
report and appendices at its website at
www.merck.com/newsroom/vioxx/martin_report.html. the
company has included its website address only as an inactive
textual reference and does not intend it to be an active link to
its website nor does it incorporate by reference the information
contained therein.
in addition, as previously disclosed, various putative class
actions filed in federal court under the employee retirement
income security act (erisa) against the company and
certain current and former officers and directors (the
vioxx erisa lawsuits and, together with the
vioxx securities lawsuits and the vioxx derivative
lawsuits, the vioxx shareholder lawsuits)
have been transferred to the shareholder mdl and consolidated
for all purposes. the consolidated complaint asserts claims on
behalf of certain of the companys current and former
employees who are participants in certain of the companys
retirement plans for breach of fiduciary duty. the lawsuits make
similar allegations to the allegations contained in the vioxx
securities lawsuits. on october7, 2005, defendants
moved to dismiss the erisa complaint. on july11, 2006,
judge chesler granted in part and denied in part
defendants motion to dismiss.
international
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the lawsuits discussed
above, the company has been named as a defendant in litigation
relating to vioxx in various countries (collectively, the
vioxx foreign lawsuits) in europe, as well as
canada, brazil, argentina, australia, turkey, and israel.
additional
lawsuits
based on media reports and other sources, the company
anticipates that additional vioxx product liability
lawsuits, vioxx shareholder lawsuits and vioxx
foreign lawsuits (collectively, the vioxx
lawsuits) will be filed against it
and/or
certain of its current and former officers and directors in the
future.
insurance
as previously disclosed, the company has product liability
insurance for claims brought in the vioxx product
liability lawsuits with stated upper limits of approximately
$630million after deductibles and co-insurance. this
insurance provides coverage for legal defense costs and
potential damage amounts that have been or will be incurred in
connection with the vioxx product liability lawsuits. the
company believes that this insurance coverage extends to
additional vioxx product liability lawsuits that may be
filed in the future. the company has directors and officers
insurance coverage applicable to the vioxx securities
lawsuits and vioxx derivative lawsuits with stated upper
limits of approximately $190million. the company has
fiduciary and other insurance for the vioxx erisa
lawsuits with stated upper limits of approximately
$275million. additional insurance coverage for these
claims may also be available under upper-level excess policies
that provide coverage for a variety
of risks. there are disputes with certain insurers about the
availability of some or all of this insurance coverage and there
are likely to be additional disputes. the companys
insurance coverage with respect to the vioxx lawsuits
will not be adequate to cover its defense costs and any losses.
as previously disclosed, the companys upper level excess
insurers (which provide excess insurance potentially applicable
to all of the vioxx lawsuits) have commenced an
arbitration seeking, among other things, to cancel those
policies, to void all of their obligations under those policies
and to raise other coverage issues with respect to the vioxx
lawsuits. merck intends to contest vigorously the
insurers claims and will attempt to enforce its rights
under applicable insurance policies. the amounts actually
recovered under the policies discussed in this section may be
less than the amounts specified in the preceding paragraph.
investigations
as previously disclosed, in november 2004, the company was
advised by the staff of the sec that it was commencing an
informal inquiry concerning vioxx. on january28,
2005, the company announced that it received notice that the sec
issued a formal notice of investigation. also, the company has
received subpoenas from the u.s.department of justice (the
doj) requesting information related to the
companys research, marketing and selling activities with
respect to vioxx in a federal health care investigation
under criminal statutes. in addition, as previously disclosed,
investigations are being conducted by local authorities in
certain cities in europe in order to determine whether any
criminal charges should be brought concerning vioxx. the
company is cooperating with these governmental entities in their
respective investigations (the vioxx
investigations). the company cannot predict the outcome of
these inquiries; however, they could result in potential civil
and/or
criminal dispositions.
as previously disclosed, the company has received a number of
civil investigative demands (cid) from a group of
attorneys general from 31states and the district of
columbia who are investigating whether the company violated
state consumer protection laws when marketing vioxx. the
company is cooperating with the attorneys general in responding
to the cids.
in addition, the company received a subpoena in september 2006
from the state of california attorney general seeking documents
and information related to the placement of vioxx on
californias medi-cal formulary. the company is cooperating
with the attorney general in responding to the subpoena.
reserves
the company currently anticipates that a number of vioxx
product liability lawsuits will be tried throughout 2007. a
trial in the oregon securities case is scheduled for 2007, but
the company cannot predict whether this trial will proceed on
schedule or the timing of any of the other vioxx
shareholder lawsuit trials. the company believes that it has
meritorious defenses to the vioxx lawsuits and will
vigorously defend against them. in view of the inherent
difficulty of predicting the outcome of litigation, particularly
where there are many claimants and the claimants seek
indeterminate damages, the company is unable to predict the
outcome of these matters, and at this time cannot reasonably
estimate the possible loss or range of loss with respect to the
vioxx lawsuits. the company has not established any
reserves for any potential liability relating to the
vioxx lawsuits or the vioxx investigations,
including for those cases in which verdicts or judgments have
been entered against the company, and are now in post-verdict
proceedings or on appeal. in each of those cases the company
believes it has strong points to raise on appeal and therefore
that unfavorable outcomes in such cases are not probable.
unfavorable outcomes in the vioxx litigation (as defined
below) could have a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, liquidity and results of
operations.
legal defense costs expected to be incurred in connection with a
loss contingency are accrued when probable and reasonably
estimable. as of december31, 2005, the company had a
reserve of $685million solely for its future legal defense
costs related to the vioxx litigation.
during 2006, the company spent $500million in the
aggregate, including $175million in the fourth quarter, in
legal defense costs worldwide related to (i)the
vioxx product liability lawsuits, (ii)the
vioxx shareholder lawsuits, (iii)the vioxx
foreign lawsuits, and (iv)the vioxx investigations
(collectively, the vioxx litigation). in the
third quarter and fourth quarter of 2006, the company recorded
charges of $598million and $75million, respectively,
to increase the reserve solely for its future legal defense
costs related to the vioxx
litigation to $858million at december31, 2006. in
increasing the reserve, the company considered the same factors
that it considered when it previously established reserves for
the vioxx litigation. management now believes it has a
better estimate of the companys expenses and can
reasonably estimate such costs through 2008. some of the
significant factors considered in the establishment and ongoing
review of the reserve for the vioxx legal defense costs
were as follows: the actual costs incurred by the company; the
development of the companys legal defense strategy and
structure in light of the scope of the vioxx litigation;
the number of cases being brought against the company; the costs
and outcomes of completed trials and the most current
information regarding anticipated timing, progression, and
related costs of pre-trial activities and trials in the
vioxx product liability lawsuits. events such as
scheduled trials, that are expected to occur throughout 2007 and
into 2008, and the inherent inability to predict the ultimate
outcomes of such trials, limit the companys ability to
reasonably estimate its legal costs beyond the end of 2008.
while the company does not anticipate that it will need to
increase the reserve every quarter, it will continue to monitor
its legal defense costs and review the adequacy of the
associated reserves and may determine to increase its reserves
for legal defense costs at any time in the future if, based upon
the factors set forth, it believes it would be appropriate to do
so.
other
product liability litigation
as previously disclosed, the company is a defendant in product
liability lawsuits in the united states involving fosamax
(the fosamax litigation). as of
december31, 2006, 104 cases had been filed against merck
in either federal or state court, including 4 cases which seek
class action certification, as well as damages and medical
monitoring. in these actions, plaintiffs allege, among other
things, that they have suffered osteonecrosis of the jaw,
generally subsequent to invasive dental procedures such as tooth
extraction or dental implants,
and/or
delayed healing, in association with the use of fosamax.
on august16, 2006, the jpml ordered that the
fosamax product liability cases pending in federal courts
nationwide should be transferred and consolidated into one
multidistrict litigation (the fosamax mdl)
for coordinated pre-trial proceedings. the fosamax mdl
has been transferred to judge john keenan in the united states
district court for the southern district of new york. as a
result of the jpml order, over 80 cases are before judge keenan.
judge keenan has issued a case management order setting forth a
schedule governing the proceedings which focuses primarily upon
resolving the class action certification motions in 2007. the
company intends to defend against these lawsuits.
as of december31, 2006, the company established a reserve
of approximately $48million solely for its future legal
defense costs for the fosamax litigation. some of the
significant factors considered in the establishment of the
reserve for the fosamax litigation legal defense costs
were as follows: the actual costs incurred by the company thus
far; the development of the companys legal defense
strategy and structure in light of the creation of the
fosamax mdl; the number of cases being brought against
the company; and the anticipated timing, progression, and
related costs of pre-trial activities in the fosamax
litigation. the company will continue to monitor its legal
defense costs and review the adequacy of the associated
reserves. due to the uncertain nature of litigation, the company
is unable to estimate its costs beyond the end of 2008.
unfavorable outcomes in the fosamax litigation could have
a material adverse effect on the companys financial
position, liquidity and results of operations.
commercial
litigation
beginning in 1993, the company was named in a number of
antitrust suits, certain of which were certified as class
actions, instituted by most of the nations retail
pharmacies and consumers in several states. the company settled
the federal class action, which represented the single largest
group of claims and has settled substantially all of the
remaining cases on satisfactory terms. the few remaining cases
have been inactive for several years. the company has not
engaged in any conspiracy and no admission of wrongdoing was
made or included in any settlement agreements.
as previously disclosed, the company was joined in ongoing
litigation alleging manipulation by pharmaceutical manufacturers
of average wholesale prices (awp), which are
sometimes used in calculations that determine public and private
sector reimbursement levels. in 2002, the jpml ordered the
transfer and consolidation of all pending federal awp cases to
federal court in boston, massachusetts. plaintiffs filed one
consolidated class action complaint, which aggregated the claims
previously filed in various federal district court
actions and also expanded the number of manufacturers to include
some which, like the company, had not been defendants in any
prior pending case. in may 2003, the court granted the
companys motion to dismiss the consolidated class action
and dismissed the company from the class action case. subsequent
to the companys dismissal, the plaintiffs filed an amended
consolidated class action complaint, which did not name the
company as a defendant. the company and many other
pharmaceutical manufacturers are defendants in similar
complaints pending in federal and state court brought
individually by a number of counties in the state of new york.
the company and the other defendants are awaiting the final
ruling on their motion to dismiss in the suffolk county case,
which was the first of the new york county cases to be filed. in
addition, as of december31, 2006, the company was a
defendant in state cases brought by the attorneys general of
kentucky, illinois, alabama, wisconsin, mississippi, arizona,
hawaii and alaska, all of which are being defended.
as previously disclosed, the company has been named as a
defendant in antitrust cases in federal court in minnesota and
in state court in california, each alleging an unlawful
conspiracy among different sets of pharmaceutical manufacturers
to protect high prices in the united states by impeding
importation into the united states of lower-priced
pharmaceuticals from canada. the court dismissed the federal
claims in the minnesota case with prejudice and the plaintiffs
filed a notice of appeal. the federal court of appeals for the
eighth circuit affirmed the dismissal of the federal claims. the
state claims in that action were dismissed without prejudice,
but have not been refiled in any jurisdiction.
in the california antitrust action, the parties engaged in
discovery and the defendant manufacturers filed for summary
judgment. in december 2006, the court granted summary judgment
in favor of merck and the other defendants and dismissed the
case. the plaintiffs have filed a notice of appeal in the
california state appeals court.
as previously disclosed, a suit in federal court in alabama by
two providers of health services to needy patients alleges that
15 pharmaceutical companies overcharged the plaintiffs and a
class of those similarly situated, for pharmaceuticals purchased
by the plaintiffs under the program established by
section340b of the public health service act. the company
and the other defendants filed a motion to dismiss the complaint
on numerous grounds which was recently denied by the court.
after denial of the motion to dismiss, the case was dismissed
voluntarily by the parties.
as previously disclosed, in january 2003, the doj notified the
federal court in new orleans, louisiana that it was not going to
intervene at that time in a pending federal false claims act
case that was filed under seal in december 1999 against the
company. the court issued an order unsealing the complaint,
which was filed by a physician in louisiana, and ordered that
the complaint be served. the complaint, which alleged that the
companys discounting of pepcid in certain louisiana
hospitals led to increases in costs to medicaid, was dismissed.
an amended complaint was filed under seal and the case has been
administratively closed by the court until the seal is lifted.
the state of louisiana has filed its own amended complaint,
incorporating the allegations contained in the sealed amended
complaint. the allegations contained in the sealed amended
complaint are unknown.
in april 2005, the company was named in a qui tam lawsuit under
the nevada false claims act. the suit, in which the nevada
attorney general has intervened, alleges that the company
inappropriately offered nominal pricing and other marketing and
pricing inducements to certain customers and also failed to
comply with its obligations under the medicaid best price scheme
related to such arrangements. in may 2006, the companys
motion to dismiss this action was denied by the district court.
the company is defending against this lawsuit.
governmental
proceedings
as previously disclosed, the company has received a subpoena
from the doj in connection with its investigation of the
companys marketing and selling activities, including
nominal pricing programs and samples. the company has also
reported that it has received a cid from the attorney general of
texas regarding the companys marketing and selling
activities relating to texas. as previously disclosed, the
company received another cid from the attorney general of texas
asking for additional information regarding the companys
marketing and selling activities related to texas, including
with respect to certain of its nominal pricing programs and
samples. in april 2004, the company received a subpoena from the
office of the inspector general for the district of columbia in
connection with an investigation of the companys
interactions with physicians in the district of columbia,
maryland, and virginia. in november 2004, the company received a
letter request from the
doj in connection with its investigation of the companys
pricing of pepcid. in september 2005, the company
received a subpoena from the illinois attorney general. the
subpoena seeks information related to repackaging of
prescription drugs. there was no activity relating to merck in
the illinois matter in 2006.
as previously disclosed, the company has received a letter from
the doj advising it of the existence of a qui tam complaint
alleging that the company violated certain rules related to its
calculations of best price and other federal pricing benchmark
calculations, certain of which may affect the companys
medicaid rebate obligation. the doj has informed the company
that it does not intend to intervene in this action and has
closed its investigation. the lawsuit continues, however.
the company is cooperating with all of these investigations. the
company cannot predict the outcome of these investigations;
however, it is possible that unfavorable outcomes could have a
material adverse effect on the companys financial
position, liquidity and results of operations. in addition, from
time to time, other federal, state or foreign regulators or
authorities may seek information about practices in the
pharmaceutical industry or the companys business practices
in inquiries other than the investigations discussed in this
section. it is not feasible to predict the outcome of any such
inquiries.
as previously disclosed, on february23, 2004, the italian
antitrust authority (ica) adopted a measure
commencing a formal investigation of merck sharp&
dohme (italia) s.p.a. (msd italy) and the company
under article14 of the italian competition law and
article82 ec to ascertain whether the company and msd
italy committed an abuse of a dominant position by refusing to
grant to acs dobfar s.p.a. (dobfar), an italian
company, a voluntary license under the companys italian
supplementary protection certificate (spc), pursuant
to domestic legislation passed in 2002, to permit dobfar to
manufacture imipenem and cilastatin (i&c), the
active ingredients in tienam, in italy for sale outside
italy in countries where patent protection had expired or never
existed. a hearing before the ica was held on may2, 2005
and on june17, 2005, the ica found, on a preliminary
basis, that the companys refusal to grant the license was
an abuse of a dominant position, and imposed interim measures
requiring the company to grant a license to manufacture i&c
in italy for stockpiling purposes only, until expiration of the
spc. on november16, 2005, the italian administrative court
denied the companys appeal of the icas order. the
companys spc expired in january 2006. proceedings before
the ica continued on the merits of the article82
investigation and, in an effort to resolve the matter, the
company offered a commitment to the ica pursuant to which the
company would grant non-exclusive licenses under its italian spc
for finasteride with respect to finasteride 5mg for the
treatment of benign prostate hyperplasia. the deadline for the
ica to adopt its final decision as to whether the companys
commitment warrants the closure of the case is march16,
2007.
vaccine
litigation
as previously disclosed, the company is a party in claims
brought under the consumer protection act of 1987 in the united
kingdom, which allege that certain children suffer from a
variety of conditions as a result of being vaccinated with
various bivalent vaccines for measles and rubella
and/or
trivalent vaccines for measles, mumps and rubella, including the
companys m-m-rii. the conditions include
autism, with or without inflammatory bowel disease, epilepsy,
encephalitis, encephalopathy, guillain-barre syndrome and
transverse myelitis. there are now 6 claimants proceeding or, to
the companys knowledge, intending to proceed against the
company. the company will defend against these lawsuits.
as previously disclosed, the company is also a party to
individual and class action product liability lawsuits and
claims in the united states involving pediatric vaccines (e.g.,
hepatitis b vaccine) that contained thimerosal, a preservative
used in vaccines. merck has not distributed
thimerosal-containing pediatric vaccines in the united states
since the fall of 2001. as of december31, 2006, there were
approximately 250 active thimerosal related lawsuits with
approximately 670 plaintiffs. other defendants include other
vaccine manufacturers who produced pediatric vaccines containing
thimerosal as well as manufacturers of thimerosal. in these
actions, the plaintiffs allege, among other things, that they
have suffered neurological injuries as a result of exposure to
thimerosal from pediatric vaccines. two cases scheduled for
trial in 2006 were dismissed one, a state court case
in ohio voluntarily dismissed by the plaintiffs, and the second,
a federal district court case in texas in which the court
entered summary judgment in favor of defendants in 2005 and
plaintiffs ultimately voluntarily dismissed
their appeal. the company will defend against these lawsuits;
however, it is possible that unfavorable outcomes could have a
material adverse effect on the companys financial
position, liquidity and results of operations.
the company has been successful in having cases of this type
either dismissed or stayed on the ground that the action is
prohibited under the national childhood vaccine injury act (the
vaccine act). the vaccine act prohibits any person
from filing or maintaining a civil action (in state or federal
court) seeking damages against a vaccine manufacturer for
vaccine-related injuries unless a petition is first filed in the
united states court of federal claims (hereinafter the
vaccine court). under the vaccine act, before filing
a civil action against a vaccine manufacturer, the petitioner
must either (a)pursue his or her petition to conclusion in
vaccine court and then timely file an election to proceed with a
civil action in lieu of accepting the vaccine courts
adjudication of the petition or (b)timely exercise a right
to withdraw the petition prior to vaccine court adjudication in
accordance with certain statutorily prescribed time periods. the
company is not a party to vaccine court proceedings because the
petitions are brought against the united states department of
health and human services. the cases with trial dates referred
to in the preceding paragraph as having been dismissed were
brought by plaintiffs who claimed to have made a timely
withdrawal of their vaccine court petitions.
the company is aware that there are approximately 4,700 cases
pending in the vaccine court involving allegations that
thimerosal-containing vaccines
and/or the
m-m-rii vaccine cause autism spectrum disorders.
not all of the thimerosal-containing vaccines involved in the
vaccine court proceeding are company vaccines. the company is
the sole source of the m-m-rii vaccine
domestically. in june 2007, the special masters presiding over
the vaccine court proceedings are scheduled to begin a hearing
in which both petitioners and the government will present
evidence on the issue of whether these vaccines can cause autism
spectrum disorders. that hearing is expected to last a number of
weeks. since it is not a party, the company will not participate
in the proceedings.
patent
litigation
from time to time, generic manufacturers of pharmaceutical
products file andas with the fda seeking to market generic
forms of the companys products prior to the expiration of
relevant patents owned by the company. generic pharmaceutical
manufacturers have submitted andas to the fda seeking to
market in the united states a generic form of fosamax,
prilosec, nexium, propecia, trusopt and cosopt prior
to the expiration of the companys (and astrazenecas
in the case of prilosec and nexium) patents
concerning these products. the generic companies
andas generally include allegations of non-infringement,
invalidity and unenforceability of the patents. generic
manufacturers have received fda approval to market a generic
form of prilosec. the company has filed patent
infringement suits in federal court against companies filing
andas for generic alendronate (fosamax),
finasteride (propecia), dorzolamide (trusopt) and
dorzolamide/timolol (cosopt), and astrazeneca and the
company have filed patent infringement suits in federal court
against companies filing andas for generic omeprazole
(prilosec) and esomeprazole (nexium). similar
patent challenges exist in certain foreign jurisdictions. the
company intends to vigorously defend its patents, which it
believes are valid, against infringement by generic companies
attempting to market products prior to the expiration dates of
such patents. as with any litigation, there can be no assurance
of the outcomes, which, if adverse, could result in
significantly shortened periods of exclusivity for these
products.
in february 2007, schering plough received a notice from a
generic company indicating that it had filed an anda for
zetia and that it is challenging the u.s.patents
that are listed for zetia. merck and schering plough
market zetia through a joint venture and they are
considering the appropriate response.
on february22, 2007, the company received a notice from a
generic company indicating that it had filed an anda for
montelukast and that it is challenging the u.s. patent that is
listed for singulair. the company is considering the
appropriate response.
as previously disclosed, on january28, 2005, the
u.s.court of appeals for the federal circuit in
washington,d.c. found the companys patent claims for
once-weekly administration of fosamax to be invalid. the
company exhausted all options to appeal this decision in 2005.
based on the court of appeals decision, fosamax and
fosamax plus d will lose market exclusivity in the united
states in february 2008 and april 2008, respectively and the
company expects a significant decline in
u.s.fosamax and fosamax plus d sales after
each products respective loss of market exclusivity.
in may 2005, the federal court of canada trial division issued a
decision refusing to bar the approval of generic alendronate on
the ground that mercks patent for weekly alendronate was
likely invalid. this decision cannot be appealed and generic
alendronate was launched in canada in june 2005. in july 2005,
merck was sued in the federal court of canada by apotex seeking
damages for lost sales of generic weekly alendronate due to the
patent proceeding.
as previously disclosed, in september 2004, the company appealed
a decision of the opposition division of the epo that revoked
the companys patent in europe that covers the once-weekly
administration of alendronate. on march14, 2006, the board
of appeal of the epo upheld the decision of the opposition
division. thus, presently the company is not entitled to market
exclusivity for fosamax in most major european markets
after 2007. in addition, mercks basic patent covering the
use of alendronate has been challenged in several european
countries. the company has received adverse decisions in
germany, holland and the united kingdom. the decision in the
united kingdom was upheld on appeal. the company has appealed
the decisions in germany and holland.
in june 2006, the company filed lawsuits in federal court
against barr laboratories, inc. and teva pharmaceutical
industries ltd. (teva) asserting that their
respective manufacturing processes for making their alendronate
products would infringe one or more process patents of the
company.
on october5, 2004, in an action in australia challenging
the validity of the companys australian patent for the
once-weekly administration of alendronate, the patent was found
to be invalid. that decision was upheld on appeal.
in addition, as previously disclosed, in japan a proceeding has
been filed challenging the validity of the companys
japanese patent for the once-weekly administration of
alendronate.
on january18, 2006, the company sued hi-tech pharmacal
co., inc. (hi-tech) of amityville, new york for
patent infringement in response to hi-techs application to
the fda seeking approval of a generic version of mercks
ophthalmic drugs trusopt and cosopt, which are
used for treating elevated intraocular pressure in people with
ocular hypertension or glaucoma. in the lawsuit, merck sued to
enforce a patent covering an active ingredient dorzolamide,
which is present in both trusopt and cosopt. in
that case, the district court entered judgment in mercks
favor and hi-tech appealed. a hearing of the appeal was
conducted in december 2006 and a decision is pending. merck has
elected not to enforce two u.s.patents listed with the fda
which cover the combination of dorzolamide and timolol, the two
active ingredients in cosopt. this lawsuit automatically
stays fda approval of hi-techs andas for
30months from january 2006 or until an adverse court
decision, whichever may occur earlier. the patent covering
dorzolamide provides exclusivity for trusopt and
cosopt until october 2008 (including six months of
pediatric exclusivity). after such time, the company expects
sales of these products to decline.
in the case of omeprazole, the trial court in the united states
rendered an opinion in october 2002 upholding the validity of
the companys and astrazenecas patents covering the
stabilized formulation of omeprazole and ruling that one
defendants omeprazole product did not infringe those
patents. the other three defendants products were found to
infringe the formulation patents. in december 2003, the
u.s.court of appeals for the federal circuit affirmed the
decision of the trial court. with respect to the companys
patent infringement claims against certain other generic
manufacturers omeprazole products, the trial concluded in
june 2006 and a decision is pending.
the company and astrazeneca received notice in october 2005 that
ranbaxy laboratories limited (ranbaxy) has filed an
anda for esomeprazole magnesium. the anda contains
paragraphiv challenges to patents on nexium. on
november21, 2005, the company and astrazeneca sued ranbaxy
in the united states district court in new jersey. accordingly,
fda approval of ranbaxys anda is stayed for 30months
until april 2008 or until an adverse court decision, if any,
whichever may occur earlier. the company and astrazeneca
received notice in january 2006 that ivax pharmaceuticals, inc.,
subsequently acquired by teva, had filed an anda for
esomeprazole magnesium. the anda contains paragraphiv
challenges to patents on nexium. on march8, 2006.
the company and astrazeneca sued teva in the united states
district court in new jersey. accordingly, fda approval of
tevas anda is stayed for 30months until september
2008 or until an adverse court decision, if any, whichever may
occur earlier.
in the case of finasteride, an anda has been filed seeking
approval of a generic version of propecia and alleging
invalidity of the companys patents. the company filed a
patent infringement lawsuit in the district court of delaware in
september 2004. in 2006, the company reached a settlement with
the generic company, dr.reddys laboratories
(drl), under which drl may sell a generic 1mg
finasteride product beginning in january 2013.
in europe, the company is aware of various companies seeking
registration for generic losartan (the active ingredient for
cozaar). the company has patent rights to losartan via
license from e.i. du pont de nemours and company (du
pont). the company and du pont have filed patent
infringement proceedings against various companies in portugal,
spain and norway.
other
litigation
on july27, 2005, merck was served with a further
shareholder derivative suit filed in the new jersey superior
court for hunterdon county against the company and certain
current and former officers and directors. this lawsuit seeks to
recover or cancel compensation awarded to the companys
executive officers in 2004, and asserts claims for breach of
fiduciary duty, waste and unjust enrichment. on july21,
2006, the court granted defendants motion to dismiss based
on plaintiffs failure to make pre-suit demand on
mercks board of directors and denied plaintiffs
request for leave to amend. thus, this case has been terminated.
in november 2005, an individual shareholder delivered a letter
to the board alleging that the company had sustained damages
through the companys adoption of its change in control
separation benefits plan (the cic plan) in november
2004. the shareholder made a demand on the board to take legal
action against the boards current or former members for
allegedly causing damage to the company with respect to the
adoption of the cic plan. in response to that demand letter, the
independent members of the board determined at the
november22, 2005 board meeting that the board would take
the shareholders request under consideration and it
remains under consideration.
as previously disclosed, on august20, 2004, the united
states district court for the district of new jersey granted a
motion by the company, medco health solutions, inc. (medco
health) and certain officers and directors to dismiss a
shareholder derivative action involving claims related to the
companys revenue recognition practice for retail
co-payments paid by individuals to whom medco health provides
pharmaceutical benefits as well as other allegations. the
complaint was dismissed with prejudice. plaintiffs appealed the
decision. on december15, 2005, the u.s.court of
appeals for the third circuit upheld most of the district
courts decision dismissing the suit, and sent the issue of
whether the companys board of directors properly refused
the shareholder demand relating to the companys treatment
of retail co-payments back to the district court for
reconsideration under a different legal standard. plaintiffs
moved to remand their action to state court on august18,
2006, and the district court granted that motion on
february1, 2007. the shareholder derivative suit is
currently pending before the superior court of new jersey,
chancery division, hunterdon county.
as previously disclosed, prior to the spin-off of medco health,
the company and medco health agreed to settle, on a class action
basis, a series of lawsuits asserting violations of erisa (the
gruer cases). the company, medco health and certain
plaintiffs counsel filed the settlement agreement with the
federal district court in new york, where cases commenced by a
number of plaintiffs, including participants in a number of
pharmaceutical benefit plans for which medco health is the
pharmacy benefit manager, as well as trustees of such plans,
have been consolidated. medco health and the company agreed to
the proposed settlement in order to avoid the significant cost
and distraction of prolonged litigation. the proposed class
settlement has been agreed to by plaintiffs in five of the cases
filed against medco health and the company. under the proposed
settlement, the company and medco health have agreed to pay a
total of $42.5million, and medco health has agreed to
modify certain business practices or to continue certain
specified business practices for a period of five years. the
financial compensation is intended to benefit members of the
settlement class, which includes erisa plans for which medco
health administered a pharmacy benefit at any time since
december17, 1994. the district court held hearings to hear
objections to the fairness of the proposed settlement and
approved the settlement in 2004, but has not yet determined the
number of class member plans that have properly elected not to
participate in the settlement. the settlement becomes final only
if and when all appeals have been resolved. certain class member
plans have indicated that they will not participate in the
settlement. cases initiated by three such plans and two
individuals remain pending in the
southern district of new york. plaintiffs in these cases have
asserted claims based on erisa as well as other federal and
state laws that are the same as or similar to the claims that
had been asserted by settling class members in the gruer cases.
the company and medco health are named as defendants in these
cases.
three notices of appeal were filed and the appellate court heard
oral argument in may 2005. on december8, 2005, the
appellate court issued a decision vacating the district
courts judgment and remanding the cases to the district
court to allow the district court to resolve certain
jurisdictional issues. a hearing was held to address such issues
on february24, 2006. the district court issued a ruling on
august10, 2006 resolving such jurisdictional issues in
favor of the settling plaintiffs. the class members and other
party that had previously appealed the district courts
judgment have renewed their appeals. the renewed appeals are
presently being briefed.
after the spin-off of medco health, medco health assumed
substantially all of the liability exposure for the matters
discussed in the foregoing two paragraphs. these cases are being
defended by medco health.
there are various other legal proceedings, principally product
liability and intellectual property suits involving the company,
which are pending. while it is not feasible to predict the
outcome of such proceedings or the proceedings discussed in this
item, in the opinion of the company, all such proceedings are
either adequately covered by insurance or, if not so covered,
should not ultimately result in any liability that would have a
material adverse effect on the financial position, liquidity or
results of operations of the company, other than proceedings for
which a separate assessment is provided in this item.
environmental
matters
the company is a party to a number of proceedings brought under
the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and
liability act, commonly known as superfund, and other federal
and state equivalents. these proceedings seek to require the
operators of hazardous waste disposal facilities, transporters
of waste to the sites and generators of hazardous waste disposed
of at the sites to clean up the sites or to reimburse the
government for cleanup costs. the company has been made a party
to these proceedings as an alleged generator of waste disposed
of at the sites. in each case, the government alleges that the
defendants are jointly and severally liable for the cleanup
costs. although joint and several liability is alleged, these
proceedings are frequently resolved so that the allocation of
cleanup costs among the parties more nearly reflects the
relative contributions of the parties to the site situation. the
companys potential liability varies greatly from site to
site. for some sites the potential liability is de minimis
and for others the costs of cleanup have not yet been
determined. while it is not feasible to predict the outcome of
many of these proceedings brought by federal or state agencies
or private litigants, in the opinion of the company, such
proceedings should not ultimately result in any liability which
would have a material adverse effect on the financial position,
results of operations, liquidity or capital resources of the
company. the company has taken an active role in identifying and
providing for these costs and such amounts do not include any
reduction for anticipated recoveries of cleanup costs from
insurers, former site owners or operators or other recalcitrant
potentially responsible parties.
on june13, 2006, potassium thiocyanate was accidentally
discharged from the companys plant in west point,
pennsylvania through the upper gwynedd township authoritys
wastewater treatment plant into the wissahickon creek, causing a
fishkill. federal and state agencies are investigating the
discharge and the company is currently cooperating with the
investigations.
item4.
submission
of matters to a vote of security holders.
not applicable.
executive
officers of the registrant (ages as of february1,
2007)
richard t. clark age60
april, 2007 chairman, chief executive officer and
president
may, 2005 chief executive officer and president
june, 2003 president, merck manufacturing
division responsible for the companys
manufacturing, information services and operational excellence
organizations worldwide
january, 2003 chairman, president and chief
executive officer, medco health solutions, inc. (medco health),
formerly a wholly-owned subsidiary of the company
january, 2000 president, medco health
david w. anstice age58
september, 2006 executive vice president, strategy
initiatives responsible for the
end-to-end
and global support function initiatives and for providing
strategic direction in key pharmaceutical emerging markets
(china and india)
august, 2005 president, human health-asia
pacific responsible for the companys
prescription drug business in the asia pacific region, japan,
australia, new zealand and the companys joint venture
relationship with schering-plough
january, 2003 president, human health
responsible for the companys prescription drug business in
japan, latin america, canada, australia, new zealand and the
companys joint venture relationship with schering-plough
march, 2001 president, the americas and
u.s.human health responsible for one of the
two prescription drug divisions comprising u.s.human
health, as well as the companys prescription drug business
in canada and latin america, and the companys joint
venture relationship with schering-plough
john canan age50
september, 2006 vice president,
controller responsible for the corporate
controllers group
june, 2003 vice president, corporate
audit& assurance services
september, 2002 vice president and controller, asia
and joint ventures responsible for financial and
operational oversight of asia human health and several of the
companys joint ventures
august, 1999 controller, asia pacific human health
celia a. colbert age50
january, 1997 vice president, secretary (since
september, 1993)and assistant general counsel (since
november, 1993)
willie a. deese age51
may, 2005 president, merck manufacturing
division responsible for the companys global
manufacturing, procurement, and operational excellence functions
january, 2004 senior vice president, global
procurement
prior to january 2004, mr.deese was senior vice president,
global procurement and logistics (2001 to 2003)for
glaxosmithkline plc.
kenneth c. frazier age52
november, 2006 executive vice president and general
counsel responsible for legal and public affairs
functions and the merck company foundation (a
not-for-profit
charitable organization affiliated with the company)
december, 1999 senior vice president and general
counsel responsible for legal and public affairs
functions and the merck company foundation (a
not-for-profit
charitable organization affiliated with the company)
mirian m. graddick-weir age52
september, 2006 senior vice president, human
resources
prior to september 2006, dr.graddick-weir was executive
vice president of human resources and employee communications at
at&t, and has held several other senior human resources
leadership positions at at&t for more than 20years
(communications services provider).
steven b. kelmar age53
august, 2006 vice president, public affairs
prior to august 2006, mr.kelmar led the global public
affairs and communications function at novartis ag since 2002.
peter s. kim age48
january, 2003 president, merck research laboratories
(mrl)
february, 2001 executive vice president, research
and development, mrl
judy c. lewent age58
august, 2005 executive vice president and chief
financial officer responsible for the companys
strategic planning, financial and corporate development
functions, internal auditing, corporate licensing, the
companys joint venture relationships, and merck capital
ventures, llc, a subsidiary of the company
january, 2003 executive vice president, chief
financial officer and president, human health asia
responsible for financial and corporate development functions,
internal auditing, corporate licensing, the companys
prescription drug business in asia north and asia south, the
companys joint venture relationships, and merck capital
ventures, llc
february, 2001 executive vice president and chief
financial officer (since april, 1990) responsible
for financial and corporate development functions, internal
auditing, corporate licensing, the companys joint venture
relationships, and merck capital ventures, llc
on february20, 2007, the company announced that
ms.lewent intends to retire in july 2007.
peter loescher age49
may, 2006 president, global human health
responsible for the companys four marketing and sales
divisions: u.s.human health, human health asia pacific,
human health intercontinental (europe, middle east, africa,
canada and latin america), and merck vaccines
prior to may 2006, mr.loescher served as president and
chief executive officer of ge healthcare bio-sciences (medical
diagnostics and life sciences business) since 2004, after it
acquired amersham health. mr.loescher was president of
amersham health (2002 2004)before becoming its
chief operating officer in 2004.
mark e. mcdonough age42
february, 2007 vice president and
treasurer responsible for the companys
treasury function, and for providing financial support for human
resources
january, 2004 assistant treasurer, global capital
markets responsible for managing the companys
investment and financing portfolios and the treasury share
repurchase program
september, 2000 senior director, human health
finance responsible for providing global
franchise-based financial reporting and analytics to key
customers
margaret g. mcglynn age47
august, 2005 president, merck vaccines
global responsibilities for the vaccines business including the
companys sanofi-pasteur joint venture
january, 2003 president, u.s.human
health responsible for one of the two prescription
drug divisions (hospital and specialty product franchises)
comprising u.s.human health (ushh), and the managed care
group of ushh
august, 2001 executive vice president, customer
marketing and sales, ushh
stefan oschmann age49
september, 2006 president, europe, middle east,
africa& canada
april, 2006 senior vice president, worldwide human
health marketing
october, 2005 executive vice president, worldwide
marketing
january, 2001managing director, msd germany, a
subsidiary of the company
j.chris scalet age48
january, 2006 senior vice president, global
services, and chief information officer (cio)
responsible for global shared services across the human
resources, finance, site services and information services
function; and the enterprise business process redesign initiative
march, 2003 senior vice president, information
services, and cio responsible for all areas of
information technology and services including application
development, technical support, voice and data communications,
and computer operations worldwide
prior to march 2003, mr.scalet was senior vice president,
information technology& cio (1997 to 2003)for
international paper company (global forest products, paper and
packaging company).
adam h. schechter age42
july, 2006 president, u.s.human
health commercial responsibility in the united
states for the companys portfolio of prescription medicines
october, 2005 general manager, u.s.human
health division responsible for the
neuro-psychiatry, osteoporosis, migraine, respiratory, and new
products franchises
february, 2004 vice president/general manager,
merck/schering-plough pharmaceuticals u.s.joint venture
august, 2002 vice president, merck human health
division, arthritis& analgesia franchise business group
wendy l. yarno age52
september, 2006 chief marketing officer
responsible for global marketing services, global alliance
management and global pricing, global human health business
practices& compliance and three franchises: oncology,
specialty and neuroscience; respiratory, bone and arthritis and
analgesia; and infectious diseases and hospital products
november, 2005 general manager, business
unit3, u.s.human health
january, 2003 executive vice president, worldwide
human health marketing
december, 1999 senior vice president, human resources
all officers listed above serve at the pleasure of the board of
directors. none of these officers was elected pursuant to any
arrangement or understanding between the officer and the board.
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities.
the principal market for trading of the companys common
stock is the new york stock exchange (nyse) under
the symbol mrk. the common stock market price information set
forth in the table below is based on historical nyse market
prices.
the following table also sets forth, for the calendar periods
indicated, the dividend per share information.
cash
dividends paid per common share
year
4thq
3rdq
2ndq
1stq
$
1.52
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
1.52
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
0.38
common
stock market prices
4thq
3rdq
2ndq
1stq
high
$
46.37
$
42.51
$
36.84
$
36.65
low
$
41.24
$
35.00
$
32.75
$
31.81
high
$
32.54
$
32.34
$
35.20
$
32.61
low
$
25.50
$
26.97
$
30.40
$
27.48
as of january31, 2007, there were approximately 183,132
stockholders of record.
equity
compensation plan information
the following table summarizes information about the options,
warrants and rights and other equity compensation under the
companys equity plans as of the close of business on
december31, 2006. the table does not include information
about tax qualified plans such as the merck& co., inc.
employee savings and security plan.
number of
securities
remaining available
number of
for future issuance
securities to be
under equity
issued upon
weighted-average
compensation plans
exercise of
exercise price of
(excluding
outstanding
outstanding
securities
options, warrants
options, warrants
reflected in column
plan category
and rights
and rights
(a))
(a)
(b)
(c)
equity compensation plans approved
by security holders(1)
253,655,299
(2)
$53.36
166,532,568
equity compensation plans not
approved by security holders(3)
total
253,655,299
$53.36
166,532,568
(1)
includes options to purchase shares of company common stock and
other rights under the following stockholder-approved plans: the
1996 incentive stock plan, the 2001 incentive stock plan, the
2004 incentive
stock plan, the 2007 incentive stock plan, the 1996 non-employee
directors stock option plan, the 2001 non-employee directors
stock option plan and the 2006 non-employee directors stock
option plan.
(2)
excludes approximately 6,000,567shares of restricted stock
units and 2,753,676 performance share units (assuming maximum
payouts) under the 2004 incentive stock plan. also excludes
370,042shares of phantom stock deferred under the
merck& co., inc. deferral program. as of
december31, 2005, no additional shares were reserved under
the deferral program. beginning january1, 2006, one-tenth
of 1percent of the outstanding shares of merck common
stock on the last business day of the preceding calendar year
plus any shares authorized under the deferral program but not
issued are reserved for future issuance (2,149,813 as of
december31, 2006). the actual amount of shares to be
issued prospectively equals the amount participants elect to
defer from payouts under the companys various incentive
programs, such as the executive incentive plan, into phantom
stock, increased by the amount of dividends that would be paid
on an equivalent number of shares of merck common stock, divided
by the market price of merck common stock.
(3)
the table does not include information for equity compensation
plans and options and other warrants and rights assumed by the
company in connection with mergers and acquisitions and pursuant
to which there remain outstanding options or other warrants or
rights (collectively, assumed plans), which include
the following: medco containment services, inc. 1991
classc non-qualified stock option plan; sibia
neurosciences, inc. 1996 equity incentive plan; provantage
health services, inc. 1999 stock incentive plan; rosetta
inpharmatics, inc. 1997 and 2000 employee stock plans. a total
of 1,681,419shares of merck common stock may be purchased
under the assumed plans, at a weighted average exercise price of
$17.17. no further grants may be made under any assumed plans.
performance
graph
the following graph compares the cumulative total stockholder
return (stock price appreciation plus reinvested dividends) on
the companys common stock with the cumulative total return
(including reinvested dividends) of the dow jones us
pharmaceutical index (djuspr), formerly referred to
as the dow jones pharmaceutical index united states
owned companies, and the standard& poors 500
index (s&p 500 index) for the five years ended
december31, 2006. amounts below have been rounded to the
nearest dollar or percent.
comparison
of five-year cumulative total return*
merck& co., inc., dow jones us pharmaceutical index
and s&p 500 index
end of
2006/2001
period value
cagr**
merck
$
%
djuspr
s&p 500
merck
100.00
98.92
87.70
63.46
66.03
94.21
djuspr
100.00
79.62
87.15
79.93
78.61
89.92
s&p 500
100.00
77.91
100.24
111.14
116.59
134.99
*
assumes that the value of the
investment in company common stock and each index was $100 on
december31, 2001 and that all dividends were reinvested.
**
compound annual growth rate
issuer purchases of equity securities for the three month period
ended december31, 2006 are as follows:
issuer
purchases of equity securities
total number of
($ in millions)
total
shares purchased
approx. dollar value
number
average
as part of
of shares that may yet
of shares
price paid
publicly announced
be purchased under the
period
purchased
per share
plans or
programs(1)
plans or
programs(1)
october1
october31,2006
1,996,600
$
43.69
1,996,600
$
6,691.5
november1
november30,2006
1,889,300
$
44.40
1,889,300
$
6,607.7
december1
december31,2006
1,830,100
$
43.84
1,830,100
$
6,527.4
total
5,716,000
$
43.97
5,716,000
$
6,527.4
(1)
these share repurchases were made
as part of a plan announced in july 2002 to purchase
$10billion in merck shares.
item6.
selected
financial
data.(1)
the following selected financial data should be read in
conjunction with item7. managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations and consolidated financial statements and notes
thereto contained in item8. financial statements and
supplementary data of this report.
merck&
co., inc. and subsidiaries
($ in millions except per share amounts)
2006(2)
2005(3)
2004(4)
2003(5)
results for year:
sales
$
22,636.0
$
22,011.9
$
22,972.8
$
22,567.8
$
21,445.8
materials and production costs
6,001.1
5,149.6
4,965.7
4,443.7
4,004.9
marketing and administrative
expenses
8,165.4
7,155.5
7,238.7
6,200.3
5,652.2
research and development expenses
4,782.9
3,848.0
4,010.2
3,279.9
2,677.2
restructuring costs
142.3
322.2
107.6
194.6
-
equity income from affiliates
(2,294.4
)
(1,717.1
)
(1,008.2
)
(474.2
)
(644.7
)
other (income) expense, net
(382.7
)
(110.2
)
(344.0
)
(203.2
)
104.5
income from continuing operations
before taxes
6,221.4
7,363.9
8,002.8
9,126.7
9,651.7
taxes on income
1,787.6
2,732.6
2,172.7
2,492.7
2,856.9
income from continuing operations
4,433.8
4,631.3
5,830.1
6,634.0
6,794.8
income from discontinued
operations, net of taxes
-
-
-
241.3
354.7
net income
4,433.8
4,631.3
5,830.1
6,875.3
7,149.5
basic earnings per common share
continuing operations
$
2.04
$
2.11
$
2.63
$
2.97
$
3.01
discontinued operations
-
-
-
0.11
0.16
net income
$
2.04
$
2.11
$
2.63
$
3.07(6
)
$
3.17
earnings per common share assuming
dilution
continuing operations
$
2.03
$
2.10
$
2.62
$
2.94
$
2.98
discontinued operations
-
-
-
0.11
0.16
net income
$
2.03
$
2.10
$
2.62
$
3.05
$
3.14
cash dividends declared
3,318.7
3,338.7
3,329.1
3,264.7
3,204.2
cash dividends paid per common share
$
1.52
$
1.52
$
1.49
$
1.45
$
1.41
capital expenditures
980.2
1,402.7
1,726.1
1,915.9
2,128.1
depreciation
2,098.1
1,544.2
1,258.7
1,129.6
1,067.5
year-end position:
working capital
$
2,507.5
$
7,806.9
$
1,688.8
$
1,926.9
$
2,011.2
property, plant and equipment, net
13,194.1
14,398.2
14,713.7
14,169.0
14,195.6
total assets
44,569.8
44,845.8
42,572.8
40,587.5(7
)
47,561.2
long-term debt
5,551.0
5,125.6
4,691.5
5,096.0
4,879.0
stockholders equity
17,559.7
17,977.7
17,349.3
15,620.8(7
)
18,200.5
financial ratios:
income from continuing
operations
as a % of sales
19.6%
21.0%
25.4%
29.4%
31.7%
net income
as a % of average total assets
9.9%
10.6%
14.0%
15.0%
15.5%
year-end statistics:
average common shares outstanding
(millions)
2,177.6
2,197.0
2,219.0
2,236.7
2,257.5
average common shares outstanding
assuming dilution (millions)
2,187.7
2,200.4
2,226.4
2,253.1
2,277.0
number of stockholders of record
184,200
198,200
216,100
233,000
246,300
number of employees
60,000
61,500
62,600
63,200
(7)
77,300
(1)
prior year amounts reflect the
impact of retrospectively adopting securities and exchange
commission interpretation, commission guidance regarding
accounting for sales of vaccines and bioterror countermeasures
to the federal government for placement into the pediatric
vaccine stockpile or the strategic national stockpile, (see
note2 to the consolidated financial statements).
(2)
amounts for 2006 include the
impact of restructuring actions, acquired research expenses
resulting from acquisitions made during the year, additional
vioxx legal defense
costs and the incremental impact of expensing stock options.
(3)
amounts for 2005 include the
impact of the net tax charge primarily associated with the
american jobs creation act repatriation, restructuring actions
and additional vioxx
legal defense costs.
(4)
amounts for 2004 include the
impact of the withdrawal of
vioxx, vioxx legal
defense costs and restructuring actions.
(5)
amounts for 2003 include the
impact of the implementation of a new distribution program for
u.s.wholesalers and restructuring actions.
(6)
amount does not add as a result
of rounding.
(7)
decrease in 2003 primarily
reflects the impact of the spin-off of medco health.
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations.
description
of mercks business
merck is a global research-driven pharmaceutical company that
discovers, develops, manufactures and markets a broad range of
innovative products to improve human and animal health. the
companys operations are principally managed on a products
basis and are comprised of two reportable segments: the
pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines segment. the
pharmaceutical segment includes human health pharmaceutical
products marketed either directly or through joint ventures.
these products consist of therapeutic and preventive agents,
sold by prescription, for the treatment of human disorders.
merck sells these human health pharmaceutical products primarily
to drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals, government
agencies and managed health care providers such as health
maintenance organizations and other institutions. the vaccines
segment includes human health vaccine products marketed either
directly or through a joint venture. these products consist of
preventative pediatric, adolescent and adult vaccines, primarily
administered at physician offices. merck sells these human
health vaccines primarily to physicians, wholesalers, physician
distributors and government entities. the companys
professional representatives communicate the effectiveness,
safety and value of our pharmaceutical and vaccine products to
health care professionals in private practice, group practices
and managed care organizations.
overview
during 2006, merck continued to execute its strategy to reclaim
its leadership position in the pharmaceutical industry. this was
made evident through the successful launches of five novel
medicines and vaccines in areas such as cancer prevention and
diabetes, the advancement of drug candidates through every phase
of the companys pipeline and the continued success of its
newer and in-line products. additionally, the company is
developing a new commercial model which is designed to broaden
its engagement with customers and scientific leaders, leverage
alternative channels to complement the effectiveness of its
sales force, and drive growth in key markets.
during 2006, five products received u.s.food and drug
administration (fda) approval: gardasil, the
first vaccine for the prevention of cervical cancer and genital
warts caused by certain types of human papillomavirus
(hpv); januvia, the first medicine of its
class that enhances a natural body system to improve blood sugar
control in patients with type 2 diabetes; zostavax, the
first vaccine for adults 60years of age and older to
reduce the incidence of shingles, a disease which every year
afflicts an estimated one million people in the united states
alone; rotateq, a pediatric vaccine to help prevent
rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants and children, the effects
of which take the lives of nearly 600,000 children under the age
of five worldwide every year; and zolinza, a novel
medicine to treat patients suffering from advanced cutaneous
t-cell lymphoma (ctcl).
in addition, the company has three drug candidates currently
under fda review: janumet (previously referred to as
mk-0431a), an investigational oral medicine combining
sitagliptin phosphate with metformin for type 2 diabetes that is
designed to provide an additional treatment option for patients
who need more than one oral agent to help control their blood
sugar; emend for injection(mk-0517), an intravenous
therapy for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
(cinv); and arcoxia, mercks selective
cox-2 inhibitor for osteoarthritis. additionally, the company
anticipates filing three new drug applications (nda)
with the fda in 2007: mk-0518, a
first-in-classhiv
integrase inhibitor; gaboxadol, a novel compound from
mercks alliance with h. lundbeck a/s for the treatment of
insomnia; and mk-0524a, an extended-release (er)
niacin combined with laropiprant (a novel flushing pathway
inhibitor) for cholesterol management. in addition, by mid-year
2007, merck expects to have four products in phaseiii
development.
additionally, targeted acquisitions made during the year of
sirna therapeutics, inc. (sirna), glycofi, inc.
(glycofi) and abmaxis, inc. (abmaxis),
as well as other alliances and collaborations, will complement
mercks strong internal research capabilities and should
continue to help the company build a pipeline that will support
its long-term growth.
merck is working to deliver innovative and differentiated
products to the market faster and more efficiently. the company
has successfully reduced late development product cycle times
and anticipates further reductions in the coming year.
additionally, mercks new commercial model is expected to
lower spending per
primary care brand by 15% to 20% in the united states from 2005
through 2010 (an interim targeted 9% reduction is expected to be
achieved through the end of 2007)while still appropriately
supporting product launches, as illustrated in the successful
launch of five new products in 2006. through redeployment, the
launches were achieved with no increase in sales force.
the initial phase of a global restructuring program designed to
reduce the companys cost structure, increase efficiency
and enhance competitiveness is underway. the initial steps
include the implementation of a new supply strategy by the merck
manufacturing division, which is intended to create a leaner,
more cost-effective and customer-focused manufacturing model
over a three-year period. as part of this program, in 2005,
merck announced plans to sell or close five manufacturing sites
and two preclinical sites by the end of 2008 (three of the
manufacturing sites were closed, sold or had ceased operations
and the two preclinical sites were closed by the end of 2006),
and eliminate approximately 7,000 positions company-wide (of
which approximately 4,800 positions were eliminated by the end
of 2006 comprised of actual headcount reductions, and the
elimination of contractors and vacant positions). however, the
company continues to hire new employees as the companys
business requires it. the company has also sold certain other
facilities and related assets in connection with the
restructuring program. the pre-tax costs of this restructuring
program were $935.5million in 2006 (comprised of
$793.2million primarily representing accelerated
depreciation and asset impairment costs and $142.3million
of separation and other restructuring related costs) and are
expected to be $300million to $500million in 2007.
through the end of 2008, when the initial phase of the
restructuring program relating to the manufacturing strategy is
expected to be substantially complete, the cumulative pre-tax
costs of the program are expected to range from
$1.9billion to $2.2billion. merck continues to
expect the initial phase of its cost reduction program to yield
cumulative pre-tax savings of $4.5 to $5.0billion from
2006 through 2010.
with respect to the vioxx litigation, to date in the
vioxx product liability lawsuits, of the 29 plaintiffs
whose claims have been scheduled for trial, the claims of seven
were dismissed, the claims of seven were withdrawn from the
trial calendar by plaintiffs, and juries have decided in
mercks favor nine times and in plaintiffs favor four
times. in addition, in the recent california trial involving two
plaintiffs, the jury could not reach a verdict for either
plaintiff and a mistrial was declared. a new jersey state judge
set aside one of the nine merck verdicts. with respect to the
four plaintiffs verdicts, merck already has filed an
appeal or sought judicial review in each of those cases, and in
one of those four, a federal judge overturned the damage award
shortly after trial. in addition, a consolidated trial with two
plaintiffs is currently ongoing in the coordinated proceeding in
new jersey superior court before judge carole. higbee and
another trial has commenced in state court in illinois. during
2006, the company spent $500million in the aggregate,
including $175million in the fourth quarter, in vioxx
legal defense costs worldwide. during 2006, the company
recorded charges of $673million to increase the reserve
solely for its future legal defense costs related to vioxx
litigation and at december31, 2006 the balance of the
reserve was $858million. this reserve is based on certain
assumptions and is the best estimate of the amount the company
believes, at this time, will be spent through 2008. the vioxx
litigation is more fully discussed in note11 to the
consolidated financial statements.
earnings per common share assuming dilution for 2006 were $2.03,
including the impact of the global restructuring program of
$0.28per share, the acquired research charge related to
the acquisition of sirna of $0.21per share and the
acquired research charge related to the acquisition of glycofi
of $0.14per share (as discussed in
acquisitions below), additional reserves established
solely for future legal defense costs for vioxx
litigation (as discussed above) and the impact of adopting a
new accounting standard requiring the expensing of stock options
(as discussed in share-based compensation below).
competition
and the health care environment
the markets in which the company conducts its business are
highly competitive and often highly regulated. global efforts
toward health care cost containment continue to exert pressure
on product pricing and access.
in the united states, the government expanded health care access
by enacting the medicare prescription drug improvement and
modernization act of 2003, which was signed into law in december
2003. prescription drug coverage began on january1, 2006.
this legislation supports the companys goal of improving
access to
medicines by expanding insurance coverage, while preserving
market-based incentives for pharmaceutical innovation. at the
same time, the legislation will ensure that prescription drug
costs will be controlled by competitive pressures and by
encouraging the appropriate use of medicines.
in addressing cost-containment pressure, the company has made a
continuing effort to demonstrate that its medicines can help
save costs in overall patient health care. in addition, pricing
flexibility across the companys product portfolio has
encouraged growing use of its medicines and mitigated the
effects of increasing cost pressures.
outside the united states, in difficult environments encumbered
by government cost-containment actions, the company has worked
in partnership with payers on allocating scarce resources to
optimize health care outcomes, limiting the potentially
detrimental effects of government policies on sales growth and
access to innovative medicines and vaccines, and to support the
discovery and development of innovative products to benefit
patients. the company also is working with governments in many
emerging markets in eastern europe, latin america and asia to
encourage them to increase their investments in health and
thereby improve their citizens access to medicines. within
europe, european institutions such as the european commission
(ec) have recognized the economic importance of the
research-based pharmaceutical industry and the value of
innovative medicines to society. as a result, they are working
with industry representatives to complete the single
market in pharmaceuticals and improve the competitive
climate through a variety of means including market
deregulation. in order to advance the related policy debate, the
ec launched the high levelpharmaceutical forum
(hlpf) at the end of 2005. this initiative aims at
improving the prospects of the research-based pharmaceutical
industry in europe and thus the health prospects of all patients
who will benefit from innovative therapies. through an active
dialogue among all stakeholders in the health care system (from
payers to patients), this initiative is an attempt to tackle key
policy issues in europe: (i)promoting greater pricing
flexibility for medicines; (ii)ensuring that health
authorities apply best practices for the evaluation of the
relative effectiveness of medicines; and (iii)improving
greater access to information on medicines for patients in
europe. the company has been actively engaged with the ec and
other stakeholders in order to achieve a successful outcome for
the hlpf that would help european patients gain greater and
quicker access to its medicines.
the company is committed to improving access to medicines and
enhancing the quality of life for people around the world. the
african comprehensive hiv/aids partnerships (achap)
in botswana, a partnership between the government of botswana,
the bill& melinda gates foundation and the merck
company foundation/merck& co., inc., is supporting
botswanas response to hiv/aids through a comprehensive and
sustainable approach to hiv prevention, care, treatment and
support. in may 2005, the company initiated a similar
partnership with the peoples republic of china (focused
initially in sichuan province) to help strengthen chinas
response to the hiv epidemic.
to further catalyze access to hiv medicines in developing
countries, under price reduction guidelines that the company
announced in 2001, merck makes no profit on the sale of its
current hiv/aids medicines in the worlds poorest countries
and those hardest hit by the pandemic, and offers its hiv/aids
medicines at significantly reduced prices to medium-income
countries. in february 2007, merck announced that it had again
reduced the price of stocrin in the least developed
countries of the world and those hardest hit by the pandemic. by
the end of 2006, more than 475,000patients in more than 75
developing countries were being treated with antiretroviral
regimens containing either crixivan or stocrin.
through these and other actions, merck is working independently
and with partners in the public and private sectors alike to
focus on the most critical barriers to access to medicines in
the developing world: the need for sustainable financing,
increased international assistance and additional investments in
education, training and health infrastructure and capacity in
developing countries.
the company is subject to a number of privacy and data
protection laws and regulations globally. the legislative and
regulatory landscape for privacy and data protection continues
to evolve, and there has been an increasing amount of focus on
privacy and data protection issues with the potential to affect
directly the companys business.
although no one can predict the outcome of these and other
legislative, regulatory and advocacy initiatives, the company is
well positioned to respond to the evolving health care
environment and market forces.
as patents on certain of the companys products expire,
merck has entered into, and may continue to enter into,
authorized generic agreements which allow the company to benefit
when these medicines become available in generic form.
the company anticipates that the worldwide trend toward
cost-containment will continue, resulting in ongoing pressures
on health care budgets. as the company continues to successfully
launch new products, contribute to health care debates and
monitor reforms, its new products, policies and strategies
should enable it to maintain a strong position in the changing
economic environment.
acquisitions
in december 2006, merck completed the acquisition of sirna for
approximately $1.1billion. sirna is a biotechnology
company that is a leader in developing a new class of medicines
based on rna interference (rnai) technology, which
could significantly alter the treatment of disease. the
transaction was accounted for as a business combination in which
the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the
acquired net assets has been recorded as goodwill of
$345.9million. the goodwill was not deductible for tax
purposes. the company recorded a charge of $466.2million
for acquired research associated with sirnas compounds
currently under development,  which related to the development
of treatments for both the hepatitis b and hepatitisc
viruses, which are in preclinical development, as well as
licensing agreements held by sirna. the charge was not
deductible for tax purposes. the ongoing activity with respect
to each of these compounds under development is not expected to
be material to the companys research and development
expenses. the allocation of the purchase price also resulted in
the recognition of an intangible asset of $357.8million,
and a related deferred tax liability of $146.3million,
related to sirnas developed technology. the acquisition of
sirna is expected to increase mercks ability to use rnai
technology to turn off a targeted gene in a human cell,
potentially rendering inoperative a gene responsible for
triggering a specific disease. (see note5 to the
consolidated financial statements.)
in june 2006, merck acquired glycofi, a privately-held
biotechnology company that is a leader in the field of yeast
glycoengineering, which is the addition of specific carbohydrate
modifications to the proteins in yeast, and optimization of
biologic drug molecules, for $373million in cash
($400million purchase price net of $25million of
shares already owned and net transaction costs). the company
recorded a $296.3million charge for acquired research in
connection with the acquisition which is not deductible for tax
purposes. the company also recorded a $99.4million
intangible asset ($57.6million net of deferred taxes)
related to glycofis developed technology. in may 2006,
merck acquired abmaxis, a privately-held biopharmaceutical
company dedicated to the discovery and optimization of
monoclonal antibody products for human therapeutics and
diagnostics, for $80million in cash. substantially all of
the purchase price was allocated to an intangible asset relating
to abmaxis technology platform. while each of the
acquisitions has independent scientific merits, the combination
of the glycofi and abmaxis platforms is potentially synergistic,
giving merck the ability to operate across the entire spectrum
of therapeutic antibody discovery, development and
commercialization. (see note5 to the consolidated
financial statements.)
operating
results
sales
worldwide sales for 2006 increased 3% in total over 2005
primarily driven by higher volumes. foreign exchange and price
changes had virtually no impact on sales growth in 2006. sales
performance over 2005 reflects strong growth of
singulair, a
once-a-day
oral medicine indicated for the chronic treatment of asthma and
the relief of symptoms of allergic rhinitis, and the
companys vaccines, which include gardasil to help
protect against cervical cancer and genital warts caused by
certain types of hpv, proquad, the combination vaccine
for simultaneous vaccination against measles, mumps, rubella and
varicella, and rotateq to help protect against rotavirus
gastroenteritis in infants and children. also contributing to
the sales growth were higher revenues from the companys
relationship with astrazeneca lp (azlp) primarily
driven by nexium, and increased sales of cozaar/hyzaar
for high blood pressure. in addition, sales in 2006 reflect
certain supply sales associated with activities not expected to
continue beyond 2006, including the companys arrangement
with dr.reddys laboratories (drl) for
the sale of generic simvastatin. sales growth was partially
offset by lower sales of zocor, the companys statin
for modifying cholesterol and proscar, a urology product
for the treatment of symptomatic benign
prostate enlargement. mercks u.s.marketing
exclusivity for zocor expired on june23, 2006,
while proscar lost u.s.marketing exclusivity on
june19, 2006.
domestic sales increased 8% over 2005, while foreign sales
declined 4%. foreign sales represented 39% of total sales in
2006. domestic sales benefited from the launch of three new
vaccines, while foreign sales were negatively affected by the
loss of marketing exclusivity and continued generic erosion
related to zocor and fosamax products.
worldwide sales for 2005 decreased 4% in total over 2004,
reflecting a decrease of 7% related to the voluntary worldwide
withdrawal of vioxx, offset by revenue growth in all
other products of 3%. this growth reflects a 1% favorable effect
from foreign exchange, a 1% favorable effect from price changes
and a volume increase of 1%. foreign sales represented 42% of
total sales for 2005.
sales(1)of
the companys products were as follows:
($ in millions)
singulair
$
3,579.0
$
2,975.6
$
2,622.0
cozaar/hyzaar
3,163.1
3,037.2
2,823.7
fosamax
3,134.4
3,191.2
3,159.7
zocor
2,802.7
4,381.7
5,196.5
primaxin
704.8
739.6
640.6
cosopt/trusopt
697.1
617.2
558.8
proscar
618.5
741.4
733.1
vasotec/vaseretic
547.2
623.1
719.2
cancidas
529.8
570.0
430.0
maxalt
406.4
348.4
309.9
propecia
351.8
291.9
270.2
vioxx
-
-
1,489.3
vaccines/biologicals
(2)
1,859.4
1,103.3
1,070.3
other
4,241.8
3,391.3
2,949.5
$
22,636.0
$
22,011.9
$
22,972.8
(1)
presented net of discounts and returns.
(2)
these amounts do not reflect sales of vaccines sold in most
major european markets through the companys joint venture,
sanofi pasteur msd, the results of which are reflected in equity
income from affiliates.
the companys pharmaceutical products include therapeutic
and preventive agents, generally sold by prescription, for the
treatment of human disorders. among these are singulair,
a leukotriene receptor antagonist respiratory product for the
chronic treatment of asthma and for the relief of symptoms of
allergic rhinitis; cozaar/hyzaar and vasotec, the
companys most significant hypertension
and/or heart
failure products; fosamax and fosamax plus d
(marketed as fosavance throughout the european union
(eu)), for the treatment and, in the case of
fosamax, prevention of osteoporosis; zocor,
mercks atherosclerosis product; primaxin and
cancidas, anti-bacterial/anti-fungal products; cosopt
and trusopt, the largest-selling ophthalmological
products; proscar, a urology product for the treatment of
symptomatic benign prostate enlargement; maxalt, an acute
migraine product and propecia, a product for the
treatment of male pattern hair loss.
among the products included within vaccines/biologicals are
varivax, a vaccine to help prevent chickenpox, m-m-r
ii, a vaccine against measles, mumps and rubella,
proquad, the pediatric combination vaccine against
measles, mumps, rubella and varicella, gardasil, a
vaccine for the prevention of cervical cancer and genital warts
caused by certain types of hpv, pneumovax, a vaccine for
the prevention of pneumococcal disease, rotateq, a
vaccine to help protect against rotavirus gastroenteritis in
infants and children, and zostavax, a vaccine to help
prevent shingles (herpes zoster) in individuals 60years of
age or older.
other primarily includes sales of other human pharmaceuticals,
pharmaceutical and animal health supply sales to the
companys joint ventures and revenue from the
companys relationship with azlp, primarily relating to
sales of nexium and prilosec. revenue from azlp
was $1.8billion, $1.7billion, and $1.5billion
in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. in 2006, other also
includes certain supply sales associated with activities not
expected to continue beyond 2006, including the companys
arrangement with drl for the sale of generic simvastatin.
segment
revenues
($ in millions)
pharmaceutical segment revenues
$
20,374.8
$
20,678.8
$
21,591.0
vaccines segment
revenues(1)
1,705.5
984.2
972.8
other segment
revenues(2)
162.1
161.8
185.1
other
revenues(3)
393.6
187.1
223.9
total revenues
$
22,636.0
$
22,011.9
$
22,972.8
(1)
in accordance with segment
reporting requirements, vaccines segment revenues exclude
$153.9million, $119.1million and $97.5million
in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively, of vaccines sales by
certain
non-u.s.subsidiaries
managed by and included in the pharmaceutical segment.
(2)
includes other non-reportable
human and animal health segments.
(3)
other revenues are primarily
comprised of miscellaneous corporate revenues, sales related to
divested products or businesses and other supply sales not
included in segment results.
pharmaceutical
segment revenues
sales of the pharmaceutical segment decreased 1% in 2006
primarily due to declines in zocor and proscar
post-patent expiration, partially offset by increases in
singulair and cozaar/hyzaar.
singulair, mercks
once-a-day
oral respiratory medicine indicated for the treatment of chronic
asthma and the relief of symptoms of allergic rhinitis,
continued its strong performance in 2006, reflecting the
continued demand for asthma and seasonal and perennial allergic
rhinitis medications. singulair continues to be the
number one prescribed product in the u.s.respiratory
market. total 2006 sales of singulair were
$3.6billion, an increase of 20% over 2005.
global sales for cozaar, and its companion agent
hyzaar (a combination of cozaar and
hydrochlorothiazide), for the treatment of hypertension were
$3.2billion in 2006, a 4% increase over 2005. cozaar
and hyzaar compete in the fastest-growing class in
the antihypertensive market, angiotensinii antagonists
(aiia). cozaar/hyzaar remained the number two
branded aiia in the united states and europe in 2006.
in december 2006, the companys japanese subsidiary
launched preminent, known as hyzaar in most
worldwide markets, the first-ever-fixed-dose combination in
japan of an angiotensin receptor blocker and hydrochlorothiazide
for the treatment of hypertension. japan is the second largest
pharmaceutical market in the world.
global sales for fosamax and fosamax plus d, for
the treatment of postmenopausal, male
and/or
glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis, were $3.1billion in
2006, a decrease of 2% over 2005. sales outside of the united
states were affected by the availability of other generic
alendronate sodium products in some key markets, including the
united kingdom, canada and germany. the company has ongoing
litigation in certain of those european countries based on the
companys alendronate patents. fosamax and
fosamax plus d together remain the most prescribed
medicine worldwide for the treatment of osteoporosis. fosamax
and fosamax plus d will lose market exclusivity in
the united states in february 2008 and april 2008, respectively,
and the company expects significant declines in
u.s.fosamax and fosamax plus d sales after
each products respective loss of market exclusivity.
in august 2006, fosamax (marketed as fosamac)
became the first once-weekly, oral medicine for osteoporosis to
be launched in japan.
worldwide sales of zocor, mercks statin for
modifying cholesterol, were $2.8billion in 2006, a
decrease of 36% from 2005. sales of zocor were negatively
affected by the loss of u.s.marketing exclusivity in june
2006. global sales of zocor are expected to be
$0.6billion to $0.9billion in 2007.
in february 2006, the company entered into an agreement with drl
that authorized the sale of generic simvastatin. under the terms
of the agreement, the company is reimbursed on a cost-plus basis
by drl for supplying finished goods and receives a share of the
net profits recorded by drl. merck continues to offer branded
zocor and to manufacture simvastatin for branded
zocor, vytorin and the companys
investigational compound mk-0524b. in 2006, merck recorded
$208.9million associated with the drl arrangement for
simvastatin. this revenue is not expected to continue beyond
2006.
in october 2006, januvia was approved by the fda, and is
now the first and only dipeptidyl peptidase-4
(dpp-4) inhibitor available in the united states for
the treatment of type 2 diabetes. dpp-4 inhibitors represent a
new class of prescription medications that improve blood sugar
control in patients with type 2 diabetes by enhancing a natural
body system called the incretin system. januvia has been
approved as monotherapy and as add-on therapy to either of two
other oral diabetes medications, metformin or thiazolidinediones
(tzds), to improve blood sugar (glucose) control in
patients with type 2 diabetes when diet and exercise are not
enough.
on january25, 2007, the company received a positive
opinion about januvia from the committee for medicinal
products for human use (chmp) of the european
medicines agency (emea) in europe. the chmp opinion
recommended that januvia be approved in the eu for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes. following the conclusion of the
chmp review, the opinion for januvia will be transmitted
to the ec. if the ec adopts the opinion, januvia will be
the first and only prescription medication in a new class of
drugs known as dpp-4 inhibitors, which enhance the bodys
own ability to lower blood sugar (glucose) when it is elevated.
the decision will be applicable to the 27 countries that are
members of the eu. marketing authorization from the ec is
expected in early april 2007 after the adoption of the opinion.
including the eu, merck anticipates approval for januvia
in at least another 55 countries in 2007.
clinical studies show that januvia provides significant
a1c (a measure of average blood glucose level over a two- to
three-month period) reductions in both monotherapy and when
added to two commonly used types of diabetes drugs, metformin
and tzds. treatment with januvia was not associated with
weight gain or an increased risk of hypoglycemia. januvia
is now available in 11 countries including the united
states, mexico, and brazil, and other regulatory filings around
the world are moving forward. global sales of januvia
were $42.9million in 2006.
in october 2006, the fda approved zolinza for the
treatment of cutaneous manifestations in patients with ctcl who
have progressive, persistent or recurrent disease on or
following two systemic therapies. the approval of zolinza
represents the first anticancer treatment approved for ctcl
since 1999.
other products experiencing growth in 2006 include cosopt
to treat glaucoma, propecia for male pattern hair
loss, maxalt to treat migraine pain, arcoxia for
the treatment of arthritis and pain, invanz for the
treatment of selected moderate to severe infection in adults,
emend for prevention of acute and delayed nausea and
vomiting associated with moderately and highly emetogenic cancer
chemotherapy as well as for the treatment of post-operative
nausea and vomiting. also contributing to mercks total
sales in 2006 was revenue resulting from the companys
relationship with azlp, primarily relating to sales of
nexium.
proscar, mercks urology product for the treatment
of symptomatic benign prostate enlargement, lost marketing
exclusivity in the united states in june 2006. mercks
u.s.sales of proscar for 2006 were
$243.7million, a decrease of 34% compared with 2005. the
company expects the decline in u.s.proscar sales to
continue. the basic patent for proscar also covers
propecia, however, propecia is protected by
additional patents which expire in october 2013.
vaccines
segment revenues
sales of the vaccines segment increased 73% in 2006 as a result
of new product launches and the continued success of in-line
vaccines. the following discussion of vaccines includes total
vaccines sales, the vast majority of which are included in the
vaccines segment and the remainder, representing certain sales
of vaccines by
non-u.s.subsidiaries,
are managed by and included in the pharmaceutical segment. these
amounts do not reflect
sales of vaccines sold in most major european markets through
sanofi pasteur msd (spmsd) the companys joint
venture with sanofi pasteur, the results of which are reflected
in equity income from affiliates.
in 2006, the company announced fda approval of three new
breakthrough vaccines: gardasil, rotateq and
zostavax.
on june8, 2006, the fda approved gardasil, the only
vaccine available in the united states to prevent cervical
cancer and vulvar and vaginal pre-cancers caused by hpv types 16
and 18 and to prevent low-grade and pre-cancerous lesions and
genital warts caused by hpv types6, 11, 16 and 18.
gardasil is approved for 9- to
26-year-old
girls and women. gardasil is a three dose, intra muscular
vaccine given over six months. in the united states, it is
estimated that approximately 9,700 women will be diagnosed with
cervical cancer this year, and approximately 3,700 women will
die.
in june 2006, the u.s.centers for disease controls
(cdc) advisory committee on immunization practices
(acip) voted unanimously to recommend that girls and
women 11 to 26years old be vaccinated with
gardasil.the acip recommended that
gardasil be administered to 11- and
12-year-old
females and to females aged 13 to 26 who have not previously
been vaccinated, and that 9- and
10-year-old
females be vaccinated with gardasil at the discretion of
their physicians.
on november1, 2006, the company announced that the cdc
added gardasil to the cdcs vaccines for children
program for eligible girls and women aged 9 to 18. as of
february2, 2007, managed care plans representing at least
96% of privately-insured lives in the united states (currently
more than 120insurance plans) had decided to reimburse for
gardasil when covered under the members benefit
design. these insurers are reimbursing the vaccine at or above
the lowest price paid to merck by private non-hmo customers.
in september 2006, gardasil was approved as the first and
only vaccine in the eu for use in children and adolescents aged
9 to 15years and in adult females aged 16 to 26years
for the prevention of cervical cancer, high-grade cervical
dysplasias/precancers [cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (cin
2/3)], high-grade/precancerous vulvar dysplastic lesions (vin
2/3) and genital warts caused by hpv types6, 11, 16 and
18. gardasil is marketed by spmsd in 19 european
countries, including 15 in the eu. in the remaining central and
eastern european countries, gardasil is marketed by merck
sharp& dohme as either gardasil or
silgard.
in 2006, total sales of gardasil recorded by merck were
$234.8million. gardasil has been approved in
54countries, all under accelerated reviews, with
regulatory applications pending in approximately 50 countries.
in february 2005, the company announced that it and
glaxosmithkline (gsk) entered into a cross-license
and settlement agreement for certain patent rights related to
hpv vaccines. pursuant to the agreement, gsk received an upfront
payment and is receiving royalties from the company based upon
sales of gardasil, upon development and launch. the
agreement resolves competing intellectual property claims
related to the companys and gsks vaccine candidates.
in addition, in 1995, merck entered into a license agreement and
collaboration with csl limited relating to technology used in
gardasil. gardasil is also the subject of other
third-party licensing agreements. as a consequence of these
agreements, the company will pay royalties on the worldwide
sales of gardasil of approximately 24% to 26% in the
aggregate.
clinical studies to evaluate the efficacy of gardasil in
females 27 to 45years of age and males 16 to 26years
of age continue in more than 30 countries around the world. the
company expects to submit to the fda an indication for females
27 to 45years of age in the fourth quarter of 2007, and an
indication for males 16 to 26years of age in 2008. the
company is also conducting ongoing clinical studies to assess
the potential for cross-protection against hpv types related to
hpv 16 and18, including hpv 31 and 45. cross-protection,
if proven, could potentially expand the vaccines
prevention coverage against cervical cancer.
in february 2006, the fda approved rotateq, the
companys vaccine to help protect against rotavirus
gastroenteritis in infants and children. the fda approval of
rotateq was based on data from the companys
phaseiii clinical trials of nearly 70,000 infants,
including data from the rotavirus efficacy and safety trial
(rest), one of the largest pre-licensure vaccine
clinical trials ever conducted. in these clinical trials,
rotateq prevented 98% of severe cases of rotavirus
gastroenteritis and prevented 74% of rotavirus gastroenteritis
cases of any severity caused by serotypes targeted by the
vaccine (g1, g2, g3, g4) compared to placebo through the first
full
rotavirus season after vaccination. rotateq also reduced
hospitalizations by 96% and emergency room visits by 94% for
rotavirus gastroenteritis caused by serotypes targeted by the
vaccine through the first two years after the third dose.
in february 2006, the cdcs acip unanimously voted to
recommend that all infants, starting at 6 to 12weeks of
age be vaccinated with rotateq, now the only rotavirus
vaccine available in the united states. the acip recommended
that the oral, ready-to use vaccine be given during the current
routine well-baby visits at2, 4, and 6months of age.
in april, rotateq was made available in the cdc vaccines
for children program.
within the united states, as of february6, 2007, health
insurance plans representing approximately 90% of covered lives
in the eligible age group of infants and young children between
six and 32weeks of age have added rotateq to their
formularies. rotateq has been approved in 34 countries
and applications for licensure have been filed in more than 100
countries. in nicaragua, where rotateq was approved in
2006, the company will provide the vaccine free of charge for
all infants born in the country over a
three-year
period commencing in october 2006, through a joint demonstration
project with the nicaraguan ministry of health. in 2006,
rotateq sales recorded by merck were $163.4million.
in february 2007, merck updated the labeling information for
rotateq to include post-marketing reports of
intussusception and hematochezia to the vaccine adverse events
reporting system (vaers), a national vaccine safety
surveillance program. in february 2007, the fda reported that
since the licensure of rotateq on february3, 2006
until january31, 2007, 28 cases of intussusception in
infants who received rotateq have been reported in the
united states to vaers and that this number does not exceed the
number of cases expected based on the background rate. rest was
specifically designed to evaluate vaccine safety with respect to
intussusception. in rest, there was no increased risk of
intussuception with rotateq, compared to placebo.
in may 2006, the fda approved zostavax, the
companys vaccine for prevention of herpes zoster
(shingles) in individuals 60years of age and older. it was
also approved by regulatory authorities in the eu and australia
in may. zostavax is the first and only medical option
approved for the prevention of shingles.
in october 2006, the cdc acip voted unanimously to recommend
that adults 60years of age and older be vaccinated with
zostavax to help prevent shingles. following the acip
recommendation, in the united states, as of february6,
2007, managed care plans representing approximately 85% of
covered lives are reimbursing for zostavax. sales of
zostavax recorded by merck in 2006 were
$38.6million.
in june 2006, the acip unanimously voted to recommend that
children 4 to 6years of age routinely receive a second
dose of varicella (chickenpox)-containing vaccine. mercks
varivax and its combination vaccine proquad are
the only vaccines to help protect against chickenpox available
in the united states. the acip also voted to recommend that
children, adolescents and adults who previously received one
dose of varicella-containing vaccine should receive a
catch-up
second dose. the acip voted to include the second dose of
chickenpox vaccine in the vaccines for children program.
merck has recently determined that the bulk manufacturing
process for the companys varicella zoster virus
(vzv)-containing
vaccines was producing lower amounts of bulk vzv intermediate
than expected. the vzv bulk in question was designated for use
in fulfilling future quantities of the three vzv-containing
vaccines varivax, proquad and
zostavax. as a result, production of the vzv bulk has
been temporarily suspended while the company identifies the
cause of this issue.
this situation does not affect the quality of any of
mercks
vzv-containing
vaccines currently on the market, any lots of vaccine in
inventory that are ready for release to the market or any
vaccines which will be  filled and finished from existing vzv
bulk.
as the company works to resolve this issue, it is decreasing the
availability of proquad, while increasing the
availability of the component vaccines varivax and
m-m-rii.
additionally, the company will postpone the introductions
outside the united states of proquad and zostavax
until the vzv bulk issue is resolved.
based on this approach and in view of current projections, the
company currently expects to meet anticipated market demand for
vzv-containing
vaccines.
costs,
expenses and other
share-based
compensation
on january1, 2006, the company adopted financial
accounting standards board (fasb) statement
no.123r, share-based payment
(fas123r) (see note14 to the
consolidated financial statements). fas123r requires all
share-based payments to employees be expensed over the requisite
service period based on the grant-date fair value of the awards.
prior to adopting fas123r, the company accounted for
employee stock options using the intrinsic value method which
measures share-based compensation expense as the amount by which
the market price of the stock at the date of grant exceeds the
exercise price. the company elected the modified prospective
transition method for adopting fas123r, and therefore,
prior periods were not restated. under this method, the
provisions of fas123r apply to all awards granted or
modified after january1, 2006. total pre-tax share-based
compensation expense was $312.5million in 2006,
$48.0million in 2005 and $25.7million in 2004.
incremental pre-tax expense related to the adoption of
fas123r was $227.8million in 2006. in addition, the
unrecognized expense of awards that have not yet vested at the
date of adoption shall be recognized in net income in the
periods after the date of adoption. at december31, 2006,
there was $273.8million of total pre-tax unrecognized
compensation expense related to nonvested stock option,
restricted stock unit and performance share unit awards which
will be recognized over a weighted average period of
2.0years. for segment reporting, share-based compensation
expense is recorded in unallocated expense.
($ in millions)
change
change
materials and production
$
6,001.1
%
$
5,149.6
%
$
4,965.7
marketing and administrative
8,165.4
%
7,155.5
%
7,238.7
research and development
4,782.9
%
3,848.0
%
4,010.2
restructuring costs
142.3
%
322.2
*
107.6
equity income from affiliates
(2,294.4
)
%
(1,717.1
)
%
(1,008.2
)
other (income) expense, net
(382.7
)
*
(110.2
)
%
(344.0
)
$
16,414.6
%
$
14,648.0
%
$
14,970.0
*
100% or greater.
materials
and production
in 2006, materials and production costs increased 17%, compared
to a 3% increase in sales. the increase is primarily
attributable to $736.4million recorded in 2006 related to
the global restructuring program compared with
$177.1million recorded in 2005. of the amount recorded in
2006, $707.3million represents accelerated depreciation
associated with the planned sale or closure of five of the
companys manufacturing facilities (see note4 to the
consolidated financial statements). the remaining
$29.1million represents impairment charges associated with
the abandonment of certain fixed assets that will no longer be
used in the business as a result of these restructuring actions.
materials and production costs in 2006 also include stock option
expense of $23.8million. additionally, materials and
production costs included a 1% unfavorable impact from inflation
in 2006.
in 2005, materials and production costs increased 4%, compared
to a 4% decline in sales. the increase is primarily attributable
to $177.1million recorded in 2005 related to the global
restructuring program. of this, $111.2million represents
impairment charges associated with the abandonment of certain
fixed assets that will no longer be used in the business as a
result of these restructuring actions. the remaining
$65.9million represents accelerated depreciation
associated with mercks plan to sell or close five of its
owned manufacturing facilities. additionally, 1% of the increase
in materials and production costs in 2005 is attributable to the
unfavorable effect from inflation. the variance in these costs
relative to the sales decline reflects the impact of the items
noted above, as well as the unfavorable effect on sales
associated with the voluntary worldwide withdrawal of vioxx
in 2004.
gross margin was 73.5% in 2006 compared to 76.6% in 2005 and
78.4% in 2004. the restructuring charges noted above had an
unfavorable impact of 3.3percentage points in 2006 and
0.8percentage points in 2005. in addition, in 2006,
zocor lost u.s.marketing exclusivity which
negatively affected the gross margin. the impact of the
voluntary worldwide withdrawal of vioxx had an
unfavorable effect on the gross margin in 2004.
marketing
and administrative
in 2006, marketing and administrative expenses increased 14%,
primarily reflecting $673million of additional reserves
solely for legal defense costs for vioxx litigation (see
note11 to the consolidated financial statements) as well
as costs associated with the launches of three new vaccines and
other new products, mainly januvia in the united states.
in 2006, marketing and administrative expenses also included a
$48million charge to establish a legal defense reserve for
fosamax litigation (see note11 to the consolidated
financial statements), as well as stock option expense of
$143.7million. additionally, marketing and administrative
expenses included a 3% unfavorable effect from inflation in 2006.
in 2005, marketing and administrative expenses decreased 1%
primarily due to costs recorded in 2004 of $141.4million
for the voluntary worldwide withdrawal of vioxx and
$604million for the establishment of a reserve solely for
legal defense costs for vioxx litigation. partially
offsetting the decrease was an additional reserve of
$295million for vioxx legal defense costs recorded
in 2005, as well as costs required to prepare for the launch of
three new vaccines. additionally, a 4% unfavorable effect from
inflation and a 1% unfavorable effect from exchange also
partially offset the declines.
research
and development
research and development expenses increased 24% in 2006.
included in the increase is a $466.2million acquired
research charge related to acquisition of sirna, as well as a
$296.3million acquired research charge resulting from the
glycofi acquisition. in addition, the increase reflects
accelerated depreciation costs of $56.5million in 2006
related to the closure of research facilities in connection with
the global restructuring program, as well as stock option
expense of $55.5million. additionally, a 2% unfavorable
effect from inflation also contributed to the increase in 2006.
the company has three drug candidates currently under fda review:
in june 2006, the fda accepted for standard review an nda for
mk-0517, the intravenous prodrug of emend, for the
treatment of cinv. the company anticipates a decision on the nda
in the second quarter of 2007.
in july 2006, the fda accepted for standard review the nda for
janumet, the companys investigational oral medicine
combining januvia with metformin, which is designed to
provide an additional treatment for patients needing more than
one oral agent to help control blood sugar for treatment of type
2 diabetes. the company expects fda action on the nda by the end
of march 2007. the company is also moving forward as planned
with regulatory filings in countries outside the united states.
arcoxia, the companys investigational selective
cox-2 inhibitor, remains under standard review by the fda in the
united states. in response to the fdas approvable letter,
merck included results of the medal (multinational etoricoxib
and diclofenac arthritis long-term) program that showed the rate
of confirmed thrombotic cardiovascular events was similar
between arcoxia and diclofenac, the most widely used
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug in the world. the company
anticipates fda action in april 2007. the company expects that
an fda advisory committee meeting will be held prior to fda
action. arcoxia is currently available in more than 60
countries in europe, latin america, the asia-pacific region and
middle east/northern africa.
the company anticipates filing three ndas with the fda in 2007:
the company plans to file an nda for mk-0518 with the fda in the
second quarter of 2007 and has received fast track designation
for an indication in treatment-experienced patients.
interim 16-week data from the dose-ranging phaseii trial
of mk-0518, the companys investigational hiv integrase
inhibitor, in patients with advanced hiv infection were
presented at the
13thannual
conference on retroviruses and opportunistic infections in
february 2006. the results showed that the oral investigational
medication at all three doses studied in combination with
optimized background therapy (obt) had greater
antiretroviral activity than obt alone. study results also
showed that mk-0518 in combination with obt was generally well
tolerated in these patients who were failing antiretroviral
therapy (art), who were resistant to at least one
drug of each of the three available classes of oral arts, and
who had limited active arts as options for treatment. at the
american society for microbiologys
46th
annual international conference on antimicrobial
agents and chemotherapy in september 2006, the company presented
interim 24-week data from this ongoing study in
treatment-experienced patients, which demonstrated mk-0518
maintaining viral load regression.
in august 2006 at the
16thinternational
aids conference, the company presented interim
24-week data
from the phaseii dose-ranging trial of mk-0518 conducted
in treatment-nave, hiv-infected patients. the data showed
that mk-0518 twice daily, when used in combination with
tenofovir and lamivudine, achieved a comparable viral load
reduction to efavirenz combined with the same agents in
previously untreated patients. in september 2006 at the american
society for microbiologys 46thannual international
conference on antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, the company
presented additional interim
24-week data
from this phaseii dose-ranging study in
treatment-nave patients that demonstrated no increase in
lipid levels in patients taking mk-0518 with tenofovir and
lamivudine.
the company has entered into phaseiii clinical trials with
mk-0524a and to support mk-0524b, investigational therapies for
lipid management. mk-0524a represents a novel approach to
lowering ldl-c, raising hdl-c and lowering triglycerides.
mk-0524b combines mk-0524a with the proven benefits of
simvastatin to potentially reduce the risk of coronary heart
disease beyond what statins provide alone. the company plans to
file mk-0524a with the fda in 2007 and to file mk-0524b in 2008.
in november 2006, the company presented data from a
phaseii study at the american heart associations
scientific sessions 2006 in chicago that showed
co-administration of mk-0524 with er niacin significantly
reduced flushing in patients with dyslipidemia compared to those
patients who took er niacin alone. flushing, characterized by
redness of the skin with warming or burning on the face and neck
caused by the dilation of blood vessels near the skin, is a
common niacin-induced side effect that can cause discomfort to
patients and is a significant factor leading to discontinuation
of niacin therapy.
in october 2006, the company and h. lundbeck a/s of denmark
announced that the submission of an nda for gaboxadol, a novel
investigational drug in phaseiii development for the
treatment of insomnia, will occur in mid-2007. phaseii
clinical studies of gaboxadol showed improved sleep quality as
well as increased slow-wave sleep without suppressing rem sleep.
in december 2006, merck announced that gaboxadol will likely be
a scheduled compound.
also, by mid-year 2007, merck expects to have four products in
phaseiii development (including
mk-0524b
discussed above):
the company has initiated a targeted phaseiii program with
its investigational compound for the treatment of obesity,
mk-0364, which is an investigational cannabinoid-1 receptor
inverse agonist. results of early clinical studies indicate that
mk-0364 demonstrated significant weight-loss efficacy versus
placebo and was generally safe and well-tolerated, however, as
reported with another cannabinoid-1 receptor inverse agonist,
some psychiatric adverse experiences have been observed.
as announced in december 2006, the company plans to start
phaseiii testing of mk-0974, the calcitonin gene related
peptide receptor antagonist for the treatment of migraine
headaches. the phaseiii program is expected to commence in
first quarter 2007.
also announced in december 2006, the company anticipates that
mk-0822, a cathepsin k inhibitor for the treatment of
osteoporosis, will enter phaseiii testing in mid-2007.
in august 2006, merck and gilead sciences, inc.
(gilead) established an agreement for the
distribution of atripla, a once-daily, single tablet regimen for
the treatment of hiv-1 infection in adults, in developing
countries around the world. atripla contains 600mg of
efavirenz, a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor,
200mg of emtricitabine and 300mg of tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate, both nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors. efavirenz is marketed by merck under the tradename
stocrin in all territories outside of the united states,
canada and certain european countries (where it is
commercialized by bristol-myers squibb (bms) under
the tradename sustiva). emtricitabine and tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate are commercialized by gilead under the
tradenames emtriva and viread, respectively. the compounds are
commonly prescribed together as a once-daily, fixed-dose tablet,
marketed under the tradename truvada for use as part of
combination therapy.
in october 2006, the company along with bms and gilead announced
the submission of a marketing authorisation application
(maa) for atripla in the eu to the emea. the maa
will be reviewed by the chmp, subject to validation by the emea.
the maa for atripla in the eu was filed jointly by the three
companies through a newly established three-way collaboration
based in ireland. review of the maa will be conducted by the
emea under the centralized licensing procedure, which, when
finalized, provides one marketing authorization in all member
states of the eu. discussions among the three companies
regarding agreements for manufacturing, commercialization and
distribution of atripla in the eu are ongoing.
merck continues to remain focused on augmenting its internal
efforts by capitalizing on growth opportunities, ranging from
targeted acquisitions to research collaborations, preclinical
and clinical compounds and technology transactions that will
drive both near- and long-term growth. the company completed 53
transactions in 2006 across a broad range of therapeutic
categories, as well as earlystage technology transactions.
merck is currently evaluating other opportunities, and is
actively monitoring the landscape for a range of targeted
acquisitions that meet the companys strategic criteria.
highlights from these activities for the year include:
in march 2006, neuromed pharmaceuticals ltd.
(neuromed) and merck signed a research collaboration
and license agreement to research, develop and commercialize
novel compounds for the treatment of pain and other neurological
disorders, including neuromeds lead compound, nmed-160
(mk-6721), which is currently in phaseii development for
the treatment of pain. under the terms of the agreement,
neuromed received an upfront payment of $25million. the
successful development and launch of nmed-160 for an initial
single indication on a worldwide basis would trigger milestone
payments totaling $202million. milestones could increase
to approximately $450million if a further indication for
nmed-160 is developed and approved and an additional compound is
developed and approved for two indications. neuromed would also
receive royalties on worldwide sales of nmed-160 and any
additional compounds developed under this agreement.
also in march 2006, merck and nicox s.a. (nicox)
entered into a new agreement to collaborate on the development
of new antihypertensive drugs using nicoxs proprietary
nitric oxide-donating technology. the agreement covers nitric
oxide-donating derivatives of several major classes of
antihypertensive agents for the treatment of high blood
pressure, complications of hypertension, and other
cardiovascular and related disorders. merck has the exclusive
right to develop and commercialize antihypertensives that use
nicoxs nitric oxide-donating technology for the treatment
of systemic hypertension.
in may 2006, the company acquired abmaxis, a privately-held
biopharmaceutical company dedicated to the discovery and
optimization of monoclonal antibody products for human
therapeutics and diagnostics. in june 2006, the company acquired
glycofi, a privately-held biotechnology company, a leader in the
field of yeast glycoengineering and optimization of biologic
drug molecules. in connection with the acquisition, the company
recorded a charge of $296.3million for acquired research
associated with glycofis technology platform to be used in
the research and development process, for which, at the
acquisition date, technological feasibility had not been
established and no alternative future use existed (see
acquisitions above).
in october 2006, merck and ambrilia biopharma inc.
(ambrilia), a biopharmaceutical company developing
innovative therapeutics in the fields of cancer and infectious
diseases, announced they entered into an exclusive licensing
agreement granting merck the worldwide rights to ambrilias
hiv/aids protease inhibitor program. under the terms of this
agreement, ambrilia granted merck the exclusive worldwide rights
to its lead compound, ppl-100, which has completed a
phasei single-dose pharmacokinetic study and is currently
in a phasei repeat dose pharmacokinetic study. in return,
ambrilia received an upfront licensing fee of $17million
on signing and is eligible for cash payments totaling up to
$215million upon successful completion of development,
clinical, regulatory and sales milestones. ambrilia will receive
royalties on all future product sales.
in november 2006, the company expanded the scope of its existing
strategic collaboration with foxhollow technologies, inc.
(foxhollow) for atherosclerotic plaque analysis.
additionally, merck acquired a stake in foxhollow with the
purchase of $95million of newly-issued shares of foxhollow
common stock for $29.629per share, representing
approximately an 11% stake. the existing strategic
collaboration, entered into in 2005, provided for foxhollow to
receive an upfront payment with the opportunity for additional
payments if the collaboration continued. under the terms of the
expanded collaboration agreement, merck will pay
$40million to
foxhollow over four years in exchange for foxhollows
agreement to collaborate exclusively with merck in specified
disease areas. merck will also provide a minimum of
$60million in funding to foxhollow over the first three
years of the four year collaboration program term, for research
activities to be conducted by foxhollow under mercks
direction. foxhollow will receive milestone payments on
successful development of drug products or diagnostic tests
utilizing results from the collaboration, as well as royalties.
in november 2006, merck and the j. david gladstone institutes
announced a major collaboration and license agreement for
research and development of drugs to treat neurodegenerative
diseases, including alzheimers disease, that are linked to
apoe-regulated mechanisms in the body. the agreement provides
merck, through an affiliate, with a worldwide, exclusive license
to research, develop and commercialize compounds that are
directed to apoe-regulated pathways and result from
collaborative research or discoveries that have been made in the
field of neurodegeneration by the gladstone institutes.
also in november 2006, merck and advinus therapeutics
(p)ltd. (advinus) announced they have formed a
drug discovery and clinical development collaboration in the
area of metabolic disorders. advinus and merck will work
together to develop clinically validated drug candidates for
metabolic disorders, with merck retaining the right to advance
the most promising of these candidates into late-stage clinical
trials. advinis will receive an upfront payment and could
potentially receive milestone payments of $74.5million for
each target included in the collaboration. the collaboration
will begin with two target programs, and could expand to include
others over time.
in december 2006, merck completed the acquisition of sirna, a
publicly-held biotechnology company that is a leader in
developing a new class of medicines based on rnai technology,
which could significantly alter the treatment of disease. in
connection with the acquisition, the company recorded a charge
of $466.2million for acquired research associated with
sirnas compounds currently under development, for which,
at the acquisition date, technological feasibility had not been
established and no alternative future use existed (see
acquisitions above).
additionally in december 2006, merck and idera pharmaceuticals
(idera) announced that they had formed a broad
collaboration to research, develop and commercialize
ideras toll-like receptor (tlr) agonists.
under the terms of the agreement, merck will receive worldwide
exclusive rights to a number of ideras agonist compounds
targeting tlr7, 8 and 9 for use in combination with
mercks therapeutic and prophylactic vaccines under
development for oncology, infectious diseases and
alzheimers disease. merck and idera will engage in a
two-year research and development collaboration to generate
novel agonists targeting tlr 7 and tlr 8 and incorporating both
merck and idera chemistry for use in the licensed fields. merck
paid an upfront license fee of $20million to idera and
purchased $10million of its common stock at $5.50per
share. in addition, merck will fund the research and development
collaboration. idera is eligible to receive milestone payments
of up to $165million if vaccines are successfully
developed in each of the three fields. additional milestones of
up to $260million would be payable for follow-on
indications in the oncology field and the successful development
of additional vaccines containing ideras tlr agonists.
there is no limit to the number of vaccines to which merck can
apply ideras agonists within the licensed fields. in
addition, idera will receive royalties on products
commercialized under the collaboration.
the company maintains a number of long-term exploratory and
fundamental research programs in biology and chemistry as well
as research programs directed toward product development. the
companys research and development programs are generally
designed to focus on the development of novel medicines to
address large, unmet medical needs. mercks new efforts to
improve drug discovery involve focusing on nine priority disease
areas, as well as utilizing new research technologies, building
alliances with external partners and making targeted
acquisitions which will complement the companys strong
internal research capabilities. the previous announced nine
priority disease areas are: alzheimers disease;
atherosclerosis; cardiovascular disease; diabetes; novel
vaccines; obesity; oncology (targeted therapies); pain; and
sleep disorders. these therapeutic areas were carefully chosen
based on a set of criteria including unmet medical needs,
scientific opportunity and commercial opportunity. a chart
reflecting the companys current research pipeline as of
february15, 2007 is set forth in item1.
business above.
research and development expenses decreased 4% in 2005. included
in 2005 are accelerated depreciation costs of
$121.8million related to the closure of research
facilities. in addition, the decrease reflects the 2004 impact
of $225.0million of licensing expense for the initial
payments for certain disclosed research collaborations and
$125.5million of acquired research expense from the
acquisition of aton pharma, inc. in 2004. partially offsetting
the decrease is an 8% increase in other research and development
activities supporting mercks pipeline, as well as a 2%
unfavorable effect from inflation.
restructuring
costs
restructuring costs were $142.3million and
$322.2million for 2006 and 2005, respectively. included in
restructuring costs are separation costs associated with
mercks plan to eliminate approximately 7,000 positions by
the end of 2008. in 2006 and 2005, merck incurred
$113.7million and $182.4million, respectively, in
separation costs associated with actual headcount reductions, as
well as headcount reductions that were probable and could be
reasonably estimated related to the global restructuring
program. the company eliminated 3,700 positions in 2006 and
1,100 positions in 2005 (which are comprised of actual headcount
reductions, and the elimination of contractors and vacant
positions). also, in 2005, the company recorded
$116.8million for separation costs associated with other
restructuring programs. restructuring costs are included in
unallocated expense for segment reporting purposes.
equity
income from affiliates
equity income from affiliates reflects the performance of the
companys joint ventures and partnerships. in 2006 and
2005, the increase in equity income from affiliates reflects the
successful performance of vytorin and zetia
through the merck/schering-plough partnership. the growth in
2005 is also attributable to higher partnership returns from
azlp. see selected joint venture and affiliate
information below.
other
(income) expense, net
the increase in other (income) expense, net, in 2006 reflects an
increase in interest income generated from the companys
investment portfolio derived from higher interest rates and
higher average investment portfolio balances. the decrease in
other (income) expense, net, in 2005 primarily reflects a
$176.8million gain in 2004 from the sale of the
companys 50% equity stake in its european joint venture
with johnson& johnson, as well as realized gains on
the companys investment portfolio recorded in 2004.
segment
profits
($ in millions)
pharmaceutical segment profits
$
13,649.4
$
13,157.9
$
13,560.3
vaccines segment profits
892.8
767.0
881.4
other segment profits
380.7
355.5
278.2
other
(8,701.5
)
(6,916.5
)
(6,717.1
)
income before income taxes
$
6,221.4
$
7,363.9
$
8,002.8
segment profits are comprised of segment revenues less certain
elements of materials and production costs and operating
expenses, including components of equity income (loss) from
affiliates and depreciation and amortization expenses. for
internal management reporting presented to the chief operating
decision maker, the company does not allocate the vast majority
of indirect production costs, research and development expenses
and general and administrative expenses, as well as the cost of
financing these activities. separate divisions maintain
responsibility for monitoring and managing these costs,
including depreciation related to fixed assets utilized by these
divisions and, therefore, they are not included in segment
profits. also excluded from the determination of segment profits
are taxes paid at the joint venture level and a portion of
equity income. additionally, segment profits do not reflect
other expenses from corporate and manufacturing cost centers and
other miscellaneous income (expense). these unallocated items
are reflected in other in the above table. also
included in other are miscellaneous corporate profits, operating
profits related to divested products or businesses, other supply
sales and adjustments to eliminate the effect of double counting
certain items of income and expense.
pharmaceutical segment profits increased 4% in 2006 compared
with 2005 reflecting higher equity income, primarily driven by
the strong performance of the merck/schering-plough partnership,
partially offset by the loss of u.s.marketing exclusivity
for zocor and proscar. pharmaceutical segment
profits declined 3% in 2005 primarily related to the voluntary
worldwide withdrawal of vioxx.
vaccines segment profits increased 16% in 2006 driven by the
launch of three new vaccines and the successful performance of
in-line vaccines. vaccines segment profits declined 13% in 2005
primarily reflecting increased marketing and administrative
costs required to prepare for the launches of three new
vaccines. vaccines segment profits also reflect equity income
from spmsd.
taxes on
income
the companys effective income tax rate was 28.7% in 2006,
37.1% in 2005 and 27.1% in 2004. the higher effective tax rate
in 2005 reflects an unfavorable impact of 9.1percentage
points primarily related to the companys decision to
repatriate $15.9billion of foreign earnings in accordance
with the american jobs creation act of 2004 (ajca).
the 2006 effective tax rate reflects an unfavorable impact of
3.1percentage points related to the non-deductible
acquired research and development costs associated with the
acquisitions of sirna and glycofi. the tax rate in all three
years was favorably impacted by restructuring charges.
net
income and earnings per share
($ in millions except per share
amounts)
change
change
net income
$
4,433.8
%
$
4,631.3
%
$
5,830.1
as a % of sales
19.6
%
21.0
%
25.4
%
as a % of average total assets
9.9
%
10.6
%
14.0
%
earnings per common share assuming
dilution
$
2.03
%
$
2.10
%
$
2.62
net
income and earnings per common share
net income decreased 4% in 2006 and declined 21% in 2005.
earnings per common share assuming dilution declined 3% in 2006
compared to a decline of 20% in 2005. these declines primarily
reflect the impact of acquired research charges, higher
restructuring charges, increased reserves for legal defense
costs and the incremental impact of expensing stock options.
these increased costs were partially offset by growth in equity
income from affiliates in 2006 and the 2005net tax charge
associated with repatriation of foreign earnings in accordance
with the ajca. net income as a percentage of sales was 19.6% in
2006, 21.0% in 2005 and 25.4% in 2004. the decrease in the
percentage of sales ratio in 2006 as compared to 2005 reflects
the same factors discussed above. net income as a percentage of
average total assets was 9.9% in 2006, 10.6% in 2005 and 14.0%
in 2004.
selected
joint venture and affiliate information
to expand its research base and realize synergies from combining
capabilities, opportunities and assets, in previous years the
company formed a number of joint ventures. (see note9 to
the consolidated financial statements.)
merck/schering-plough
partnership
in 2000, the company and schering-plough corporation
(schering-plough) (collectively, the
partners) entered into agreements to create separate
equally-owned partnerships to develop and market in the united
states new prescription medicines in the cholesterol-management
and respiratory therapeutic areas. these agreements generally
provide for equal sharing of development costs and for
co-promotion of approved products by each company. in 2001, the
cholesterol-management partnership agreements were expanded to
include all the countries of the world, excluding japan. in
2002, ezetimibe, the first in a new class of
cholesterol-lowering agents, was launched in the united states
as zetia (marketed as ezetrol outside the united
states). in july 2004, a combination product containing the
active ingredients of both zetia and zocor was
approved in the united states as vytorin (marketed as
inegy outside the united states).
the cholesterol agreements provide for the sharing of operating
income generated by the merck/schering-plough cholesterol
partnership (the msp partnership) based upon
percentages that vary by product, sales level and country. in
the u.s.market, the partners share profits on zetia
and vytorin sales equally, with the exception of the
first $300million of annual zetia sales, on which
schering-plough receives a greater share of profits. operating
income includes expenses that the partners have contractually
agreed to share, such as a portion of manufacturing costs,
specifically identified promotion costs (including
direct-to-consumer
advertising and direct and identifiable
out-of-pocket
promotion) and other agreed upon costs for specific services
such as on-going clinical research, market support, market
research, market expansion, as well as a specialty sales force
and physician education programs. expenses incurred in support
of the msp partnership but not shared between the partners, such
as marketing and administrative expenses (including certain
sales force costs), as well as certain manufacturing costs, are
not included in equity income from affiliates. however, these
costs are reflected in the overall results of the company.
certain research and development expenses are generally shared
equally by the partners, after adjusting for earned milestones.
sales of joint venture products were as follows:
($ in millions)
zetia
$
1,928.8
$
1,396.7
$
1,053.0
vytorin
1,955.3
1,028.3
132.4
$
3,884.1
$
2,425.0
$
1,185.4
global sales of zetia increased 38% over 2005. global
sales of vytorin increased 90% over 2005. vytorin
is the only single tablet cholesterol treatment to provide
ldl cholesterol lowering through the dual inhibition of
cholesterol production and absorption.
in june 2006, the msp partnership announced new data from two
clinical trials. data presented at the international symposium
on atherosclerosis meeting showed that vytorin was
significantly more effective than crestor in reducing ldl
cholesterol across all study dose comparisons and an analysis of
the data showed that, when averaged across all study doses,
vytorin brought more patients at high risk of
cardiovascular disease to ldl cholesterol levels less than
70mg/dl compared to crestor. also in june, new data
released at the american diabetes associations
(ada) 66thannual scientific sessions showed
that at the recommended usual starting doses, vytorin was
superior to lipitor in the lowering of ldl cholesterol in
patients with type 2 diabetes and high cholesterol. these data
were also published in the december 2006 issue of mayo clinic
proceedings.
the results from the companys interest in the msp
partnership are recorded in equity income from affiliates. merck
recognized equity income of $1,218.6million in 2006,
$570.4million in 2005 and $132.0million in 2004.
astrazeneca
lp
in 1982, the company entered into an agreement with astra ab
(astra) to develop and market astra products in the
united states. in 1994, the company and astra formed an
equally-owned joint venture that developed and marketed most of
astras new prescription medicines in the united states
including prilosec, the first in a class of medications
known as proton pump inhibitors, which slows the production of
acid from the cells of the stomach lining.
in 1998, the company and astra restructured the joint venture
whereby the company acquired astras interest in the joint
venture, renamed kbi inc. (kbi), and contributed
kbis operating assets to a new u.s.limited
partnership named astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (the
partnership), in which the company maintains a
limited partner interest. the partnership, renamed astrazeneca
lp (azlp), became the exclusive distributor of the
products for which kbi retained rights.
merck earns ongoing revenue based on sales of current and future
kbi products and such revenue was $1.8billion,
$1.7billion and $1.5billion in 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively, primarily relating to sales of nexium and
prilosec. in addition, merck earns certain partnership
returns, which are recorded in equity income from affiliates.
such returns include a priority return provided for in the
partnership agreement, variable returns based, in
part, upon sales of certain former astra usa, inc. products, and
a preferential return representing mercks share of
undistributed azlp gaap earnings. these returns aggregated
$783.7million, $833.5million and $646.5million
in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
merial
limited
in 1997, merck and rhne-poulenc s.a. (now sanofi-aventis
s.a.) combined their animal health and poultry genetics
businesses to formmerial limited (merial), a
fully integrated animal health company, which is a stand-alone
joint venture, equally owned by each party. merial provides a
comprehensive range of pharmaceuticals and vaccines to enhance
the health, well-being and performance of a wide range of animal
species.
sales of joint venture products were as follows:
($ in millions)
fipronil products
$
886.9
$
757.7
$
679.1
avermectin products
468.7
467.5
452.4
biological products
600.7
533.2
476.5
other products
238.4
228.6
227.8
$
2,194.7
$
1,987.0
$
1,835.8
the broiler and foreign turkey segments of the poultry genetics
business were sold in 2005 and the domestic turkey segment was
divested in 2004. these transactions completed the divestiture
of merials interest in the poultry genetics business. for
comparative purposes the amounts presented above for 2005 and
2004 do not include revenue earned from the poultry genetics
business.
sanofi
pasteur msd
in 1994, merck and pasteur merieux connaught (now sanofi pasteur
s.a.) established a 50% owned joint venture to market vaccines
in europe and to collaborate in the development of combination
vaccines for distribution in europe.
in 2006, merck launched three new vaccines that have been
approved for use in the eu and will be marketed by spmsd in
certain western european countries: gardasil for the
prevention of cervical cancer and genital warts caused by
certain types of hpv; rotateq to help protect against
rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants and children; and
zostavax to help prevent shingles (herpes zoster) in
individuals 60years of age and older.
in september 2005, spmsd entered into a letter of undertaking
(lou), with the emea due to agency concerns
regarding the long-term efficacy of the hepatitis b component of
hexavac. the hepatitis b component of hexavac is
manufactured by merck. the lou requires, in relevant part
(1)suspension of the eu hexavac license;
(2)suspension of hexavac distribution; (3)a
recall of hexavac product in the eu; (4)a recall of
hexavac in a number of non-eu countries; and (5)a
surveillance program and possible future revaccination. spmsd,
which markets and sells hexavac in part of the eu, has
notified merck that it is reserving any rights that it may have
to seek damages from merck and to be defended, indemnified and
held harmless by merck in the event of third party claims.
in september 2005, the emea initiated a formal review of the
long-term efficacy of the hepatitis b vaccine, hbvaxpro,
and of the hepatitis b component of the hepatitis b/hib
combination vaccine, procomvax. both products are
marketed and sold by spmsd in its european territory, and are
sold elsewhere, under different names, by merck. after extensive
review, the emea determined in may 2006 that each vaccine
continues to offer effective protection against hepatitis b and
allowed spmsd to continue marketing each product with minor
label changes.
sales of joint venture products were as follows:
($ in millions)
hepatitis vaccines
$
70.9
$
81.1
$
80.5
viral vaccines
100.1
78.5
54.0
other vaccines
742.9
705.5
672.5
$
913.9
$
865.1
$
807.0
johnson&
johnsonmerck consumer pharmaceuticals company
in 1989, merck formed a joint venture with johnson&
johnson to develop and market a broad range of nonprescription
medicines for u.s.consumers. this 50% owned joint venture
was expanded in europe in 1993, and into canada in 1996. in
march 2004, merck sold its 50% equity stake in its european
joint venture to johnson& johnson for
$244.0million and recorded a $176.8million gain as
other (income) expense, net. merck will continue to benefit
through royalties on certain products and also regained the
rights to potential future products that switch from
prescription to
over-the-counter
status in europe.
sales of joint venture products were as follows:
($ in millions)
2004(1)
gastrointestinal products
$
250.9
$
250.8
$
269.2
other products
1.7
2.5
46.1
$
252.6
$
253.3
$
315.3
(1)
includes sales of the european
joint venture up through march 2004.
capital
expenditures
capital expenditures were $980.2million in 2006 and
$1.4billion in 2005. expenditures in the united states
were $714.7million in 2006 and $938.7million in
2005. expenditures during 2006 included $334.8million for
production facilities, $314.6million for research and
development facilities, $7.9million for environmental
projects, and $322.9million for administrative, safety and
general site projects. capital expenditures for 2007 are
estimated to be $1.2billion.
depreciation expense was $2.1billion in 2006 and
$1.5billion in 2005, of which $1.5billion and
$1.1billion, respectively, applied to locations in the
united states. total depreciation expense in 2006 and 2005
includes accelerated depreciation of $763.8million and
$84.6million, respectively, associated with the global
restructuring plan. additionally, depreciation expense for 2005
reflects $103.1million associated with the closure of the
terlings park basic research center (see note4 to the
consolidated financial statements).
analysis
of liquidity and capital resources
mercks strong financial profile enables the company to
fully fund research and development, focus on external
alliances, support in-line products and maximize upcoming
launches while providing significant cash returns to
shareholders. cash provided by operating activities, which was
$6.8billion in 2006, continues to be the companys
primary source of funds to finance capital expenditures,
treasury stock purchases and dividends paid to stockholders. at
december31, 2006, the total of worldwide cash and
investments was $16.5billion, including $8.7billion
of cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and
$7.8billion of long-term investments.
selected
data
($ in millions)
working capital
$
2,507.5
$
7,806.9
$
1,688.8
total debt to total liabilities
and equity
15.3
%
18.1
%
16.1
%
cash provided by operations to
total debt
1.0:1
0.9:1
1.3:1
during 2006, the company began shifting its mix of investments
from short-term to long-term, resulting in a reduction of
working capital in line with historical levels relative to the
level at december31, 2005. in 2005, to enable execution of
the ajca repatriation, the company changed its mix of
investments from long-term to short-term, resulting in a
significant increase in working capital as of december31,
2005. the ajca created temporary incentives through
december31, 2005 for u.s.multinationals to
repatriate accumulated income earned outside of the united
states as of december31, 2002. in connection with the
ajca, the company repatriated $15.9billion during 2005. as
a result, the company recorded an income tax charge of
$766.5million in taxes on income in 2005 related to this
repatriation, $185million of which was paid in 2005 and
the remainder of which was paid in the first quarter of 2006. as
of december31, 2005, approximately $5.2billion of
the ajca repatriation was invested in fully collateralized
overnight repurchase agreements and was included in short-term
investments in the consolidated balance sheet. in early 2006,
the company began reinvesting its repurchase agreement balances
into other short- and long-term investments. working capital
levels are more than adequate to meet the operating requirements
of the company. the ratios of total debt to total liabilities
and equity and cash provided by operations to total debt reflect
the strength of the companys operating cash flows and the
ability of the company to cover its contractual obligations.
as previously disclosed, the internal revenue service
(irs) has been examining the companys tax
returns for the years 1993 to 2001 and had issued notices of
deficiency with respect to a partnership transaction entered
into in 1993, and two minority interest equity financings
entered into in 1995 and 2000, respectively. the irs has
recently concluded its examination of the years
1993-2001
and will issue a final revenue agents report in the first
quarter. on february13, 2007, the company entered into
closing agreements with the irs covering several specific items,
including the 1993 partnership transaction and the 1995 and 2000
minority interest equity financings. under the terms of the
closing agreements, the company expects to make a payment of
approximately $2.85billion in the first quarter of 2007.
this payment will be offset during 2007 by (i)a tax refund
of $150million for amounts previously paid related to
these matters and (ii)a $400million federal tax
benefit related to interest included in the payment, resulting
in a net cash cost to the company of approximately
$2.3billion. the company has previously established
reserves for these matters and while the conclusion of the irs
examination, including the closing agreements, does not have a
material effect on the companys results of operations,
financial position or liquidity, it will have a material adverse
effect on the companys cash flow for the first quarter of
2007 when the payment is made. the impact for years subsequent
to 2001 of the partnership transaction and the minority interest
equity financings is included in the closing agreements although
those years remain open in all other respects.
as previously disclosed, during october 2006 the company
received a notice of reassessment from the canada revenue agency
(cra) containing adjustments related to certain
intercompany pricing matters which result in additional taxes
due of approximately $1.4billion (u.s.dollars) plus
interest of $360million (u.s.dollars) (see
note17 to the consolidated financial statements). the
company disagrees with the positions taken by the cra and
believes they are without merit. the company intends to contest
the reassessment through the cra appeals process and the courts
if necessary. in connection with the appeals process, in the
notice of reassessment, the company is required to post a
deposit of up to one half of the tax and interest assessed.
during january 2007, the company pledged collateral consisting
of cash and cash equivalents of $802million to a financial
institution which provided a letter of guarantee to the cra.
management believes that resolution of these matters will not
have a material adverse effect on the companys financial
position or liquidity. however, an unfavorable resolution could
have a material adverse effect on the companys results of
operations or cash flows in the quarter in which an adjustment
is recorded or the tax is due.
the companys contractual obligations as of
december31, 2006 are as follows:
payments
due by period
($ in millions)
total
2008 - 2009
2010 -2011
thereafter
purchase obligations
$
1,108.5
$
366.4
$
614.0
$
111.1
$
17.0
loans payable and current portion
of long-term debt
1,285.1
1,285.1
-
-
-
long-term debt
5,551.0
-
1,696.1
529.4
3,325.5
operating leases
211.5
65.8
78.5
33.3
33.9
$
8,156.1
$
1,717.3
$
2,388.6
$
673.8
$
3,376.4
purchase obligations consist primarily of goods and services
that are enforceable and legally binding and include obligations
for minimum inventory contracts, research and development and
advertising. research contracts do not include milestone
payments contingent upon future events. loans payable and
current portion of long-term debt includes $500.0million
of notes which were redeemed by the company in february 2007,
upon notification from the remarketing agent that, due to an
overall rise in interest rates, it would not exercise its annual
option to remarket the notes. loans payable and current portion
of long-term debt also reflects $336.2million of
long-dated notes that are subject to repayment at the option of
the holders on an annual basis. required funding obligations for
2007 relating to the companys pension and other
postretirement benefit plans are not expected to be material.
in december 2004, the company increased the capacity of its
shelf registration statement filed with the securities and
exchange commission (sec) to issue debt securities
by an additional $3.0billion. in february 2005, the
company issued $1.0billion of 4.75% ten-year notes under
the shelf. in november 2006, the company issued
$500million of 5.75% twenty-year notes and
$250million of 5.125% five-year notes under the shelf. the
remaining capacity under the companys shelf registration
statement is approximately $2.0billion.
in april 2006, the company extended the maturity date of its
$1.5billion, five-year revolving credit facility from
february 2010 to april 2011. the facility provides backup
liquidity for the companys commercial paper borrowing
facility and is for general corporate purposes. the company has
not drawn funding from this facility.
the companys long-term credit ratings assigned by
moodys and standard& poors are aa3 and
aa-, respectively, each with a negative outlook. these ratings
continue to allow access to the capital markets and flexibility
in obtaining funds on competitive terms. the company continues
to maintain a conservative financial profile. total cash and
investments of $16.5billion exceeds the sum of loans
payable and long-term debt of $6.8billion. the company
also has long-term credit ratings that remain among the top 4%
of rated non-financial corporations. despite this strong
financial profile, certain contingent events, if realized, which
are discussed in note11 to the consolidated financial
statements, could have a material adverse impact on the
companys liquidity and capital resources. the company does
not participate in any off-balance sheet arrangements involving
unconsolidated subsidiaries that provide financing or
potentially expose the company to unrecorded financial
obligations.
in july 2002, the board of directors approved purchases over
time of up to $10.0billion of merck shares. total treasury
stock purchased under this program in 2006 was
$1.0billion. as of december31, 2006,
$6.5billion remains under the 2002 stock repurchase
authorization approved by the merck board of directors.
financial
instruments market risk disclosures
foreign
currency risk management
while the u.s.dollar is the functional currency of the
companys foreign subsidiaries, a significant portion of
the companys revenues are denominated in foreign
currencies. merck relies on sustained cash flows generated from
foreign sources to support its long-term commitment to
u.s.dollar-based research and development. to the extent
the dollar value of cash flows is diminished as a result of a
strengthening dollar, the companys
ability to fund research and other dollar-based strategic
initiatives at a consistent level may be impaired. the company
has established revenue hedging and balance sheet risk
management programs to protect against volatility of future
foreign currency cash flows and changes in fair value caused by
volatility in foreign exchange rates.
the objective of the revenue hedging program is to reduce the
potential for longer-term unfavorable changes in foreign
exchange to decrease the u.s.dollar value of future cash
flows derived from foreign currency denominated sales, primarily
the euro and japanese yen. to achieve this objective, the
company will partially hedge anticipated third-party sales that
are expected to occur over its planning cycle, typically no more
than three years into the future. the company will layer in
hedges over time, increasing the portion of sales hedged as it
gets closer to the expected date of the transaction, such that
it is probable the hedged transaction will occur. the portion of
sales hedged is based on assessments of cost-benefit profiles
that consider natural offsetting exposures, revenue and exchange
rate volatilities and correlations, and the cost of hedging
instruments. the hedged anticipated sales are a specified
component of a portfolio of similarly denominated foreign
currency-based sales transactions, each of which responds to the
hedged risk in the same manner. merck manages its anticipated
transaction exposure principally with purchased local currency
put options, which provide the company with a right, but not an
obligation, to sell foreign currencies in the future at a
predetermined price. if the u.s.dollar strengthens
relative to the currency of the hedged anticipated sales, total
changes in the options cash flows fully offset the decline
in the expected future u.s.dollar cash flows of the hedged
foreign currency sales. conversely, if the u.s.dollar
weakens, the options value reduces to zero, but the
company benefits from the increase in the value of the
anticipated foreign currency cash flows. while a weaker
u.s.dollar would result in a net benefit, the market value
of the companys hedges would have declined by
$38.7million and $113.0million, respectively, from a
uniform 10% weakening of the u.s.dollar at
december31, 2006 and 2005. the market value was determined
using a foreign exchange option pricing model and holding all
factors except exchange rates constant. because merck
principally uses purchased local currency put options, a uniform
weakening of the u.s.dollar will yield the largest overall
potential loss in the market value of these options. the
sensitivity measurement assumes that a change in one foreign
currency relative to the u.s.dollar would not affect other
foreign currencies relative to the u.s.dollar. although
not predictive in nature, the company believes that a 10%
threshold reflects reasonably possible near-term changes in
mercks major foreign currency exposures relative to the
u.s.dollar. the cash flows from these contracts are
reported as operating activities in the consolidated statement
of cash flows.
the primary objective of the balance sheet risk management
program is to protect the u.s.dollar value of foreign
currency denominated net monetary assets from the effects of
volatility in foreign exchange that might occur prior to their
conversion to u.s.dollars. merck principally utilizes
forward exchange contracts, which enable the company to buy and
sell foreign currencies in the future at fixed exchange rates
and economically offset the consequences of changes in foreign
exchange on the amount of u.s.dollar cash flows derived
from the net assets. merck routinely enters into contracts to
fully offset the effects of exchange on exposures denominated in
developed country currencies, primarily the euro and japanese
yen. for exposures in developing country currencies, the company
will enter into forward contracts on a more limited basis and
only when it is deemed economical to do so based on a
cost-benefit analysis that considers the magnitude of the
exposure, the volatility of the exchange rate and the cost of
the hedging instrument. the company will also minimize the
effect of exchange on monetary assets and liabilities by
managing operating activities and net asset positions at the
local level. the company uses forward contracts to hedge the
changes in fair value of certain foreign currency denominated
available-for-sale
securities attributable to fluctuations in foreign currency
exchange rates. a sensitivity analysis to changes in the value
of the u.s.dollar on foreign currency denominated
derivatives, investments and monetary assets and liabilities
indicated that if the u.s.dollar uniformly weakened by 10%
against all currency exposures of the company at
december31, 2006 and 2005, income before taxes would have
declined by $32.7million and $3.5million,
respectively. because merck is in a net short position relative
to its major foreign currencies after consideration of forward
contracts, a uniform weakening of the u.s.dollar will
yield the largest overall potential net loss in earnings due to
exchange. this measurement assumes that a change in one foreign
currency relative to the u.s.dollar would not affect other
foreign currencies relative to the u.s.dollar. although
not predictive in nature, the company believes that a 10%
threshold reflects reasonably possible near-term changes in
mercks major foreign currency exposures relative to the
u.s.dollar. the cash flows from these contracts are
reported as operating activities in the consolidated statement
of cash flows.
interest
rate risk management
in addition to the revenue hedging and balance sheet risk
management programs, the company may use interest rate swap
contracts on certain investing and borrowing transactions to
manage its net exposure to interest rate changes and to reduce
its overall cost of borrowing. the company does not use
leveraged swaps and, in general, does not leverage any of its
investment activities that would put principal capital at risk.
at december31, 2006, the company was a party to seven
pay-floating, receive-fixed interest rate swap contracts
designated as fair value hedges of fixed-rate notes in which the
notional amounts match the amount of the hedged fixed rate
notes. there is one swap maturing in 2007 with a notional amount
of $350million; two swaps maturing in 2011 with notional
amounts of $125million each; one swap maturing in 2013
with a notional amount of $500million and three swaps
maturing in 2015 with notional amounts of $250million
each. the swaps effectively convert the fixed-rate obligations
to floating-rate instruments. the cash flows from these
contracts are reported as operating activities in the
consolidated statement of cash flows.
the companys investment portfolio includes cash
equivalents and short-term investments, which at
december31, 2006 included repurchase agreements, the
market values of which are not significantly impacted by changes
in interest rates. the market value of the companys
medium- to long-term fixed-rate investments is modestly impacted
by changes in u.s.interest rates. changes in medium- to
long-term u.s.interest rates have a more significant
impact on the market value of the companys fixed-rate
borrowings, which generally have longer maturities. a
sensitivity analysis to measure potential changes in the market
value of the companys investments, debt and related swap
contracts from a change in interest rates indicated that a one
percentage point increase in interest rates at december31,
2006 and 2005 would have positively impacted the net aggregate
market value of these instruments by $111.0million and
$236.2million, respectively. a one percentage point
decrease at december31, 2006 and 2005 would have
negatively impacted the net aggregate market value by
$171.0million and $283.6million, respectively. the
decreased sensitivity is attributable to a change in the mix of
investments from short-term variable rate at december31,
2005 to long-term fixed rate as of december31, 2006. the
fair value of the companys debt was determined using
pricing models reflecting one percentage point shifts in the
appropriate yield curves. the fair value of the companys
investments was determined using a combination of pricing and
duration models.
critical
accounting policies and other matters
the consolidated financial statements include certain amounts
that are based on managements best estimates and
judgments. estimates are used in determining such items as
provisions for sales discounts and returns, depreciable and
amortizable lives, recoverability of inventories produced in
preparation for product launches, amounts recorded for
contingencies, environmental liabilities and other reserves,
pension and other postretirement benefit plan assumptions,
share-based compensation assumptions, acquisitions and taxes on
income. because of the uncertainty inherent in such estimates,
actual results may differ from these estimates. application of
the following accounting policies result in accounting estimates
having the potential for the most significant impact on the
financial statements.
revenue
recognition
revenues from sales of products are recognized when title and
risk of loss passes to the customer. revenues for domestic
pharmaceutical sales are recognized at the time of shipment,
while for many foreign subsidiaries, as well as for vaccine
sales, revenues are recognized at the time of delivery.
recognition of revenue also requires reasonable assurance of
collection of sales proceeds and completion of all performance
obligations. domestically, sales discounts are issued to
customers as direct discounts at the
point-of-sale
or indirectly through an intermediary wholesale purchaser, known
as chargebacks, or indirectly in the form of rebates.
additionally, sales are generally made with a limited right of
return under certain conditions. revenues are recorded net of
provisions for sales discounts and returns, which are
established at the time of sale.
the provision for aggregate indirect customer discounts covers
chargebacks and rebates. chargebacks are discounts that occur
when a contracted customer purchases directly through an
intermediary wholesale purchaser. the contracted customer
generally purchases product at its contracted price plus a
mark-up from
the wholesaler. the wholesaler, in turn, charges the company
back for the difference between the price initially paid by the
wholesaler and the contract price paid to the wholesaler by the
customer. the provision for chargebacks is based on expected
sell-through levels by the companys wholesale customers to
contracted customers, as well as estimated wholesaler inventory
levels. rebates are amounts owed based upon definitive
contractual agreements or legal requirements with private sector
and public sector (medicaid) benefit providers, after the final
dispensing of the product by a pharmacy to a benefit plan
participant. the provision is based on expected payments, which
are driven by patient usage and contract performance by the
benefit provider customers.
the company assumes a
first-in,
first-out movement of inventory within the supply chain for
purposes of estimating its aggregate indirect customer discount
accrual. in addition, the company uses historical customer
segment mix, adjusted for other known events, in order to
estimate the expected provision. amounts accrued for aggregate
indirect customer discounts are evaluated on a quarterly basis
through comparison of information provided by the wholesalers
and other customers to the amounts accrued. adjustments are
recorded when trends or significant events indicate that a
change in the estimated provision is appropriate.
the company continually monitors its provision for aggregate
indirect customer discounts. there were no material adjustments
to estimates associated with the aggregate indirect customer
discount provision in 2006, 2005 or 2004.
summarized information about changes in the aggregate indirect
customer discount accrual is as follows:
($ in millions)
balance, january 1
$
1,166.5
$
1,030.3
current provision
3,519.4
4,419.1
adjustments to prior years
(29.5
)
134.7
payments
(3,899.3
)
(4,417.6
)
balance, december31
$
757.1
$
1,166.5
accruals for chargebacks are reflected as a direct reduction to
accounts receivable and accruals for rebates as accrued
expenses. the accrued balances relative to these provisions
included in accounts receivable and accrued and other current
liabilities were $60.4million and $696.7million,
respectively, at december31, 2006, and $164.3million
and $1.0billion, respectively, at december31, 2005.
the company maintains a returns policy that allows its customers
to return product within a specified period prior to and
subsequent to the expiration date (generally, six months before
and twelve months after product expiration). the estimate of the
provision for returns is based upon historical experience with
actual returns. additionally, the company considers factors such
as levels of inventory in the distribution channel, product
dating and expiration period, whether products have been
discontinued, entrance in the market of additional generic
competition, changes in formularies or launch of
over-the-counter
products, to name a few. the product returns provision, as well
as actual returns, were less than 1.0% of net sales in 2006,
2005 and 2004.
through its distribution program with u.s.wholesalers, the
company encourages wholesalers to align purchases with
underlying demand and maintain inventories within specified
levels. the terms of the program allow the wholesalers to earn
fees upon providing visibility into their inventory levels as
well as by achieving certain performance parameters, such as,
inventory management, customer service levels, reducing shortage
claims and reducing product returns. information provided
through the wholesaler distribution program includes items such
as sales trends, inventory on-hand, on-order quantity and
product returns.
wholesalers generally provide only the above mentioned data to
the company, as there is no regulatory requirement to report lot
level information to manufacturers, which is the level of
information needed to determine the remaining shelf life and
original sale date of inventory. given current wholesaler
inventory levels, which are generally less than a month, the
company believes that collection of order lot information across
all wholesale customers would have limited use in estimating
sales discounts and returns.
inventories
produced in preparation for product launches
the company capitalizes inventories produced in preparation for
product launches sufficient to support initial market demand.
typically, capitalization of such inventory does not begin until
the related product candidates are in phaseiii clinical
trials and are considered to have a high probability of
regulatory approval. the company monitors the status of each
respective product within the regulatory approval process;
however, the company generally does not disclose specific timing
for regulatory approval. if the company is aware of any specific
risks or contingencies other than the normal regulatory approval
process or if there are any specific issues identified during
the research process relating to safety, efficacy,
manufacturing, marketing or labeling, the related inventory
would generally not be capitalized. expiry dates of the
inventory are impacted by the stage of completion. the company
manages the levels of inventory at each stage to optimize the
shelf life of the inventory in relation to anticipated market
demand in order to avoid product expiry issues. for inventories
that are capitalized, anticipated future sales and shelf lives
support the realization of the inventory value as the inventory
shelf life is sufficient to meet initial product launch
requirements. at december31, 2005, inventories produced in
preparation for product launches consisted of three vaccine
products, a new formulation for an existing vaccine product, and
a new compound for type 2 diabetes, all of which the company
launched in 2006. accordingly, there are no significant
inventories produced in preparation for product launches
capitalized at december31, 2006. the
build-up of
inventories produced in preparation for product launches did not
have a material effect on the companys liquidity.
contingencies
and environmental liabilities
the company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings
of a nature considered normal to its business, including product
liability, intellectual property and commercial litigation, as
well as additional matters such as antitrust actions. (see
note11 to the consolidated financial statements.) the
company records accruals for contingencies when it is probable
that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be
reasonably estimated. these accruals are adjusted periodically
as assessments change or additional information becomes
available. for product liability claims, a portion of the
overall accrual is actuarially determined and considers such
factors as past experience, number of claims reported and
estimates of claims incurred but not yet reported. individually
significant contingent losses are accrued when probable and
reasonably estimable.
legal defense costs expected to be incurred in connection with a
loss contingency are accrued when probable and reasonably
estimable. as of december31, 2005, the company had a
reserve of $685million solely for its future legal defense
costs related to the vioxx lawsuits and the vioxx
investigations. during 2006, the company spent $500million
in the aggregate, including $175million in the fourth
quarter, in legal defense costs worldwide related to
(i)the vioxx product liability lawsuits,
(ii)the vioxx shareholder lawsuits, (iii)the
vioxx foreign lawsuits, and (iv)the vioxx
investigations (collectively, the vioxx
litigation). in the third and fourth quarter of 2006,
the company recorded charges of $598million and
$75million, respectively, to increase the reserve solely
for its future legal defense costs related to vioxx to
$858million at december31, 2006. this reserve is
based on certain assumptions and is the best estimate of the
amount that the company believes, at this time, it can
reasonably estimate will be spent through 2008. some of the
significant factors considered in the establishment and ongoing
review of the reserve for the vioxx legal defense costs
were as follows: the actual costs incurred by the company up to
that time; the development of the companys legal defense
strategy and structure in light of the scope of the vioxx
litigation; the number of cases being brought against the
company; the costs and outcomes of completed trials and the most
current information regarding anticipated timing, progression,
and related costs of pre-trial activities and trials in the
vioxx product liability lawsuits. events such as
scheduled trials that are expected to occur throughout 2007 and
into 2008, and the inherent inability to predict the ultimate
outcomes of such trials, limit the companys ability to
reasonably estimate its legal costs beyond the end of 2008.
while the company does not anticipate that it will need to
increase the reserve every quarter, it will continue to monitor
its legal defense costs and review the adequacy of the
associated reserves and may determine to increase its reserves
for legal defense costs at any time in the future if, based upon
the factors set forth, it believes it would be appropriate to do
so.
the company currently anticipates that a number of vioxx
product liability lawsuits will be tried in 2007. a trial in
the oregon securities case is scheduled for 2007, but the
company cannot predict whether this trial will proceed on
schedule or the timing of any of the other vioxx
shareholder lawsuit trials. the company believes that it has
meritorious defenses to the vioxx lawsuits and will
vigorously defend against them. in view of the inherent
difficulty of predicting the outcome of litigation, particularly
where there are many claimants and the
claimants seek indeterminate damages, the company is unable to
predict the outcome of these matters, and at this time cannot
reasonably estimate the possible loss or range of loss with
respect to the vioxx lawsuits. unfavorable outcomes in
the vioxx litigation could have a material adverse effect
on the companys financial position, liquidity and results
of operations. the company has not established any reserves for
any potential liability relating to the vioxx litigation.
as of december31, 2006, the company established a reserve
of approximately $48million solely for its future legal
defense costs for the fosamax litigation. some of the
significant factors considered in the establishment of the
reserve for the fosamax litigation legal defense costs
were as follows: the actual costs incurred by the company thus
far; the development of the companys legal defense
strategy and structure in light of the creation of the
fosamax multidistrict litigation; the number of cases
being brought against the company; and the anticipated timing,
progression, and related costs of pre-trial activities in the
fosamax litigation. the company will continue to monitor
its legal defense costs and review the adequacy of the
associated reserves. due to the uncertain nature of litigation,
the company is unable to estimate its costs beyond the end of
2008. unfavorable outcomes in the fosamax litigation
could have a material adverse effect on the companys
financial position, liquidity and results of operations. the
company has not established any reserves for any potential
liability relating to the fosamax litigation.
the company is a party to a number of proceedings brought under
the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and
liability act, commonly known as superfund, and other federal
and state equivalents. when a legitimate claim for contribution
is asserted, a liability is initially accrued based upon the
estimated transaction costs to manage the site. accruals are
adjusted as feasibility studies and related cost assessments of
remedial techniques are completed, and as the extent to which
other potentially responsible parties (prps) who may
be jointly and severally liable can be expected to contribute is
determined.
the company is also remediating environmental contamination
resulting from past industrial activity at certain of its sites
and takes an active role in identifying and providing for these
costs. a worldwide survey was initially performed to assess all
sites for potential contamination resulting from past industrial
activities. where assessment indicated that physical
investigation was warranted, such investigation was performed,
providing a better evaluation of the need for remedial action.
where such need was identified, remedial action was then
initiated. estimates of the extent of contamination at each site
were initially made at the pre-investigation stage and
liabilities for the potential cost of remediation were accrued
at that time. as more definitive information became available
during the course of investigations
and/or
remedial efforts at each site, estimates were refined and
accruals were adjusted accordingly. these estimates and related
accruals continue to be refined annually.
the company believes that it is in compliance in all material
respects with applicable environmental laws and regulations.
expenditures for remediation and environmental liabilities were
$12.6million in 2006, and are estimated at
$94.2million for the years 2007 through 2011. in
managements opinion, the liabilities for all environmental
matters that are probable and reasonably estimable have been
accrued and totaled $129.0million and $100.4million
at december31, 2006 and december31, 2005,
respectively. these liabilities are undiscounted, do not
consider potential recoveries from insurers or other parties and
will be paid out over the periods of remediation for the
applicable sites, which are expected to occur primarily over the
next 15years. although it is not possible to predict with
certainty the outcome of these matters, or the ultimate costs of
remediation, management does not believe that any reasonably
possible expenditures that may be incurred in excess of the
liabilities accrued should exceed $62.0million in the
aggregate. management also does not believe that these
expenditures should result in a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, results of operations,
liquidity or capital resources for any year.
share-based
compensation
the company recognizes compensation cost relating to share-based
payment transactions in net income using a fair-value
measurement method, in accordance with fas123r, which it
adopted on january1, 2006. fas123r requires all
share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee
stock options, to be recognized in net income as compensation
expense based on fair value over the requisite service period of
the awards. the company determines the fair value of certain
share-based awards using the black-scholes option-pricing model
which uses both historical and current market data to estimate
the fair value. this method
incorporates various assumptions such as the risk-free interest
rate, expected volatility, expected dividend yield and expected
life of the options.
pensions
and other postretirement benefit plans
net pension and other postretirement benefit cost totaled
$563.7million in 2006 and $561.8million in 2005.
pension and other postretirement benefit plan information for
financial reporting purposes is calculated using actuarial
assumptions including a discount rate for plan benefit
obligations and an expected rate of return on plan assets.
the company reassesses its benefit plan assumptions on a regular
basis. for both the pension and other postretirement benefit
plans, the discount rate is evaluated annually and modified to
reflect the prevailing market rate at december31 of a
portfolio of high-quality fixed-income debt instruments that
would provide the future cash flows needed to pay the benefits
included in the benefit obligation as they come due. at
december31, 2006, the company changed its discount rate to
6.00% from 5.75% for its u.s.pension plans and its
u.s.other postretirement benefit plans.
the expected rate of return for both the pension and other
postretirement benefit plans represents the average rate of
return to be earned on plan assets over the period the benefits
included in the benefit obligation are to be paid. in developing
the expected rate of return, the company considers long-term
compound annualized returns of historical market data as well as
actual returns on the companys plan assets and applies
adjustments that reflect more recent capital market experience.
using this reference information, the company develops
forward-looking return expectations for each asset category and
a weighted average expected long-term rate of return for a
targeted portfolio allocated across these investment categories.
the expected portfolio performance reflects the contribution of
active management as appropriate. as a result of this analysis,
for 2007, the companys expected rate of return of 8.75%
remained unchanged from 2006 for its u.s.pension and other
postretirement benefit plans.
the target investment portfolio of the companys
u.s.pension and other postretirement benefit plans is
allocated 45% to 60% in u.s.equities, 20% to 30% in
international equities, 15% to 25% in fixed-income investments,
and up to 8% in cash and other investments. the portfolios
equity weighting is consistent with the long-term nature of the
plans benefit obligation. the expected annual standard
deviation of returns of the target portfolio, which approximates
13%, reflects both the equity allocation and the diversification
benefits among the asset classes in which the portfolio invests.
actuarial assumptions are based upon managements best
estimates and judgment. a reasonably possible change of plus
(minus) 25basis points in the discount rate assumption,
with other assumptions held constant, would have an estimated
$39.8million favorable (unfavorable) impact on net pension
and postretirement benefit cost. a reasonably possible change of
plus (minus) 25 basis points in the expected rate of return
assumption, with other assumptions held constant, would have an
estimated $13.1million favorable (unfavorable) impact on
net pension and postretirement benefit cost. the company does
not expect to have a minimum pension funding requirement under
the internal revenue code during 2007. the preceding
hypothetical changes in the discount rate and expected rate of
return assumptions would not impact the companys funding
requirements.
effective december31, 2006, the company adopted fasb
statement no.158, employers accounting for
defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an
amendment of fasb statements no.87, 106 and 132r
(fas158), except for the requirement to
measure plan assets and benefit obligations as of the
companys fiscal year end balance sheet, which is effective
as of december31, 2008. in connection with the adoption of
fas158, net loss amounts, which reflect experience
differentials primarily relating to differences between expected
and actual returns on plan assets as well as the effects of
changes in actuarial assumptions, are recorded as a component of
accumulated other comprehensive income. expected returns are
based on a calculated market-related value of assets. under this
methodology, asset gains/losses resulting from actual returns
that differ from the companys expected returns are
recognized in the market-related value of assets ratably over a
five-year period. also, net loss amounts in accumulated other
comprehensive income in excess of certain thresholds are
amortized into net pension and other postretirement benefit cost
over the average remaining service life of employees.
amortization of net losses for the companys
u.s.plans at december31, 2006 is expected to
increase net pension and other postretirement benefit cost by
approximately $96.4million annually from 2007 through 2011.
acquisitions
the company accounts for acquired businesses using the purchase
method of accounting in accordance with fas141,
business combinations, which requires that the assets
acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of
acquisition at their respective fair values. any excess of the
purchase price over the estimated fair values of net assets
acquired is recorded as goodwill. if the company determines the
acquired company is a development stage company which has not
commenced its planned principal operations, the acquisition will
be accounted for as an acquisition of assets rather than a
business combination and, therefore, goodwill would not be
recorded. the fair value of intangible assets, including
acquired research, is based on significant judgments made by
management, and accordingly, for significant items, the company
typically obtains assistance from third party valuation
specialists. amounts are allocated to acquired research and
expensed at the date of acquisition if technological feasibility
has not been established and no alternative future use existed.
for projects which can be used immediately in the research
process that have alternative future uses, the company
capitalizes these intangible assets and amortizes them over an
appropriate useful life. the valuations and useful life
assumptions are based on information available near the
acquisition date and are based on expectations and assumptions
that are deemed reasonable by management. the judgments made in
determining estimated fair values assigned to assets acquired
and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, can materially
impact the companys results of operations.
for intangible assets, including acquired research, the company
typically uses the income approach, which estimates fair value
based on each projects projected cash flows. future cash
flows are predominately based on a net income forecast of each
project, consistent with historical pricing, margins and expense
levels of similar products. revenues are estimated based on
relevant market size and growth factors, expected industry
trends, individual project life cycles, and the life of each
research projects underling patent, if any. expected
revenues are then adjusted for the probability of technical and
marketing success and the resulting cash flows are discounted at
a risk -adjusted discount rate.
taxes on
income
the companys effective tax rate is based on pre-tax
income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities
available in the various jurisdictions in which the company
operates. an estimated effective tax rate for a year is applied
to the companys quarterly operating results. in the event
that there is a significant unusual or one-time item recognized,
or expected to be recognized, in the companys quarterly
operating results, the tax attributable to that item would be
separately calculated and recorded at the same time as the
unusual or one-time item. the company considers the resolution
of prior year tax matters to be such items. significant judgment
is required in determining the companys effective tax rate
and in evaluating its tax positions. the company establishes
reserves when, despite its belief that the tax return positions
are fully supportable, certain positions are likely to be
challenged and that it may not succeed. (see note17 to the
consolidated financial statements.) the company adjusts these
reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as
the closing of a tax audit.
tax regulations require items to be included in the tax return
at different times than the items are reflected in the financial
statements. as a result, the effective tax rate reflected in the
financial statements is different than that reported in the tax
return. some of these differences are permanent, such as
expenses that are not deductible on the tax return, and some are
timing differences, such as depreciation expense. timing
differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. deferred
tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax
deduction or credit in the tax return in future years for which
the company has already recorded the tax benefit in the
financial statements. the company establishes valuation
allowances for its deferred tax assets when the amount of
expected future taxable income is not likely to support the use
of the deduction or credit. deferred tax liabilities generally
represent tax expense recognized in the financial statements for
which payment has been deferred or expense for which the company
has already taken a deduction on the tax return, but has not yet
recognized as expense in the financial statements.
as previously disclosed, in october 2004, the ajca was signed
into law. the ajca creates a temporary incentive for
u.s.multinationals to repatriate accumulated income earned
outside of the united states as of december31, 2002. in
connection with the ajca, the company repatriated
$15.9billion during 2005 (see note17 to the
consolidated financial statements). as a result of this
repatriation, the company recorded an income tax charge of
$766.5million in taxes on income in 2005 related to this
repatriation. this charge was partially offset by a
$100million benefit associated with a decision to
implement certain tax planning strategies. the company has not
changed its intention to indefinitely reinvest accumulated
earnings earned subsequent to december31, 2002. at
december31, 2006, foreign earnings of $12.5billion
have been retained indefinitely by subsidiary companies for
reinvestment. no provision will be made for income taxes that
would be payable upon the distribution of such earnings and it
is not practicable to determine the amount of the related
unrecognized deferred income tax liability.
recently
issued accounting standards
in july 2006, the fasb issued interpretation no.48,
accounting for uncertainty in income taxes an
interpretation of fasb statement no.109
(fin48), which is effective january1,
2007. fin48 clarifies the accounting for the uncertainty
in tax positions by requiring companies to recognize in their
financial statements, the impact of a tax position, if that
position is more likely than not of being sustained on audit
based on the technical merits of the position. among other
provisions, fin48 also requires expanded disclosures at
the end of each annual period presented. the company continues
to evaluate the impact of fin48 on its financial position
and results of operations. at this time, the effects of adoption
have not yet been determined.
in september 2006, the fasb issued statement no.157,
fair value measurements (fas157), which
will be effective january1, 2008. this statement clarifies
the definition of fair value, establishes a framework for
measuring fair value, and expands the disclosures on fair value
measurements. the effect of adoption of fas157 on the
companys financial position and results of operations is
not expected to be material.
cautionary
factors that may affect future results
this report and other written reports and oral statements made
from time to time by the company may contain so-called
forward-looking statements, all of which are based
on managements current expectations and are subject to
risks and uncertainties which may cause results to differ
materially from those set forth in the statements. one can
identify these forward-looking statements by their use of words
such as expects, plans,
will, estimates, forecasts,
projects and other words of similar meaning. one can
also identify them by the fact that they do not relate strictly
to historical or current facts. these statements are likely to
address the companys growth strategy, financial results,
product development, product approvals, product potential and
development programs. one must carefully consider any such
statement and should understand that many factors could cause
actual results to differ materially from the companys
forward-looking statements. these factors include inaccurate
assumptions and a broad variety of other risks and
uncertainties, including some that are known and some that are
not. no forward-looking statement can be guaranteed and actual
future results may vary materially.
the company does not assume the obligation to update any
forward-looking statement. one should carefully evaluate such
statements in light of factors, including risk factors,
described in the companys filings with the securities and
exchange commission, especially on
forms10-k,
10-q and
8-k. in
item1. business of this annual report on
form10-k
the company discusses in more detail various important factors
that could cause actual results to differ from expected or
historic results. the company notes these factors for investors
as permitted by the private securities litigation reform act of
1995. one should understand that it is not possible to predict
or identify all such factors. consequently, the reader should
not consider any such list to be a complete statement of all
potential risks or uncertainties.
item7a.
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
the information required by this item is incorporated by
reference to the discussion under financial instruments
market risk disclosures in item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations.
item8.
financial
statements and supplementary data.
(a)
financial
statements
the consolidated balance sheet of merck& co., inc. and
subsidiaries as of december31, 2006 and 2005, and the
related consolidated statements of income, of retained earnings,
of comprehensive income and of cash flows for each of the three
years in the period ended december31, 2006, the notes to
consolidated financial statements, and the report dated
february27, 2007 of pricewaterhousecoopers llp,
independent registered public accounting firm, are as follows:
consolidated
statement of income
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
years ended december31
($ in millions except per share amounts)
sales
$
22,636.0
$
22,011.9
$
22,972.8
costs, expenses and other
materials and production
6,001.1
5,149.6
4,965.7
marketing and administrative
8,165.4
7,155.5
7,238.7
research and development
4,782.9
3,848.0
4,010.2
restructuring costs
142.3
322.2
107.6
equity income from affiliates
(2,294.4
)
(1,717.1
)
(1,008.2
)
other (income) expense, net
(382.7
)
(110.2
)
(344.0
)
16,414.6
14,648.0
14,970.0
income before taxes
6,221.4
7,363.9
8,002.8
taxes on income
1,787.6
2,732.6
2,172.7
net income
$
4,433.8
$
4,631.3
$
5,830.1
basic earnings per common share
$
2.04
$
2.11
$
2.63
earnings per common share assuming
dilution
$
2.03
$
2.10
$
2.62
consolidated
statement of retained earnings
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
years ended december31
($ in millions)
balance, january 1
$
37,980.0
$
36,687.4
$
34,186.4
net income
4,433.8
4,631.3
5,830.1
common stock dividends declared
(3,318.7
)
(3,338.7
)
(3,329.1
)
balance, december31
$
39,095.1
$
37,980.0
$
36,687.4
consolidated
statement of comprehensive income
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
years ended december31
($ in millions)
net income
$
4,433.8
$
4,631.3
$
5,830.1
other comprehensive income (loss)
net unrealized (loss) gain on
derivatives, net of tax and net income realization
(50.9
)
81.3
(31.7
)
net unrealized gain (loss) on
investments, net of tax and net income realization
26.1
50.3
(100.9
)
minimum pension liability, net of
tax
22.5
(7.0
)
(4.9
)
cumulative translation adjustment
relating to equity investees, net of tax
18.9
(26.4
)
26.1
16.6
98.2
(111.4
)
comprehensive income
$
4,450.4
$
4,729.5
$
5,718.7
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
consolidated
balance sheet
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
december31
($ in millions)
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
5,914.7
$
9,585.3
short-term investments
2,798.3
6,052.3
accounts receivable
3,314.8
2,927.3
inventories (excludes inventories
of $416.1 in 2006 and $753.8 in 2005 classified in other
assets see note7)
1,769.4
1,658.1
prepaid expenses and taxes
1,433.0
826.3
total current assets
15,230.2
21,049.3
investments
7,788.2
1,107.9
property, plant and equipment (at
cost)
land
408.9
433.0
buildings
9,745.9
9,479.6
machinery, equipment and office
furnishings
13,172.4
12,785.2
construction in progress
882.3
1,015.5
24,209.5
23,713.3
less allowance for depreciation
11,015.4
9,315.1
13,194.1
14,398.2
goodwill
1,431.6
1,085.7
other intangibles, net
943.9
518.7
other assets
5,981.8
6,686.0
$
44,569.8
$
44,845.8
liabilities and
stockholders equity
current liabilities
loans payable and current portion
of long-term debt
$
1,285.1
$
2,972.0
trade accounts payable
496.6
471.1
accrued and other current
liabilities
6,653.3
5,277.8
income taxes payable
3,460.8
3,691.5
dividends payable
826.9
830.0
total current liabilities
12,722.7
13,242.4
long-term debt
5,551.0
5,125.6
deferred income taxes and
noncurrent liabilities
6,330.3
6,092.9
minority interests
2,406.1
2,407.2
stockholders equity
common stock, one cent par value
authorized
5,400,000,000shares
issued
2,976,223,337shares 2006 and 2005
29.8
29.8
other paid-in capital
7,166.5
6,900.0
retained earnings
39,095.1
37,980.0
accumulated other comprehensive
income
(1,164.3
)
52.3
45,127.1
44,962.1
less treasury stock, at cost
808,437,892shares 2006
794,299,347shares 2005
27,567.4
26,984.4
total stockholders equity
17,559.7
17,977.7
$
44,569.8
$
44,845.8
the accompanying notes are an integral part of this
consolidated financial statement.
consolidated
statement of cash flows
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
years ended december31
($ in millions)
cash flows from operating
activities
net income
$
4,433.8
$
4,631.3
$
5,830.1
adjustments to reconcile net
income to net cash provided by operating activities:
depreciation and amortization
2,268.4
1,708.1
1,450.7
deferred income taxes
(530.2
)
9.0
48.9
equity income from affiliates
(2,294.4
)
(1,717.1
)
(1,008.2
)
dividends and distributions from
equity affiliates
1,931.9
1,101.2
587.0
share-based compensation
312.5
48.0
25.7
acquired research
762.5
125.5
other
18.1
647.5
234.6
net changes in assets and
liabilities:
accounts receivable
(709.3
)
345.9
173.1
inventories
226.5
125.6
331.9
trade accounts payable
16.4
63.6
(323.8
)
accrued and other current
liabilities
461.6
238.2
1,382.3
income taxes payable
(138.2
)
663.2
465.5
noncurrent liabilities
(125.6
)
(412.2
)
(473.7
)
other
131.2
156.2
(50.5
)
net cash provided by operating
activities
6,765.2
7,608.5
8,799.1
cash flows from investing
activities
capital expenditures
(980.2
)
(1,402.7
)
(1,726.1
)
purchases of securities,
subsidiaries and other investments
(20,044.3
)
(125,308.4
)
(82,269.2
)
proceeds from sales of securities,
subsidiaries and other investments
16,143.8
128,981.4
82,363.8
other
(3.0
)
(3.1
)
(6.6
)
net cash (used) provided by
investing activities
(4,883.7
)
2,267.2
(1,638.1
)
cash flows from financing
activities
net change in short-term borrowings
(1,522.8
)
1,296.2
(252.4
)
proceeds from issuance of debt
755.1
1,000.0
405.1
payments on debt
(506.2
)
(1,014.9
)
(37.3
)
redemption of preferred units of
subsidiary
(1,500.0
)
purchases of treasury stock
(1,002.3
)
(1,015.3
)
(974.6
)
dividends paid to stockholders
(3,322.6
)
(3,349.8
)
(3,310.7
)
proceeds from exercise of stock
options
369.9
136.5
240.3
other
(375.3
)
(93.1
)
(161.8
)
net cash used by financing
activities
(5,604.2
)
(3,040.4
)
(5,591.4
)
effect of exchange rate changes on
cash and cash equivalents
52.1
(128.8
)
108.2
net (decrease) increase in cash
and cash equivalents
(3,670.6
)
6,706.5
1,677.8
cash and cash equivalents at
beginning of year
9,585.3
2,878.8
1,201.0
cash and cash equivalents at end
of year
$
5,914.7
$
9,585.3
$
2,878.8
the accompanying notes are an integral part of this
consolidated financial statement.
notes to
consolidated financial statements
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
($ in millions except per share amounts)
1.
nature of
operations
merck is a global research-driven pharmaceutical company that
discovers, develops, manufactures and markets a broad range of
innovative products to improve human and animal health. the
companys operations are principally managed on a products
basis and are comprised of two reportable segments: the
pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines segment. the
pharmaceutical segment includes human health pharmaceutical
products marketed either directly or through joint ventures.
these products consist of therapeutic and preventive agents,
sold by prescription, for the treatment of human disorders.
merck sells these human health pharmaceutical products primarily
to drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals, government
agencies and managed health care providers such as health
maintenance organizations and other institutions. the vaccines
segment includes human health vaccine products marketed either
directly or through a joint venture. these products consist of
preventative pediatric, adolescent and adult vaccines, primarily
administered at physician offices. merck sells these human
health vaccines primarily to physicians, wholesalers, physician
distributors and government entities. the companys
professional representatives communicate the effectiveness,
safety and value of our pharmaceutical and vaccine products to
health care professionals in private practice, group practices
and managed care organizations.
2.
summary
of accounting policies
principles of consolidation the consolidated
financial statements include the accounts of the company and all
of its subsidiaries in which a controlling interest is
maintained. controlling interest is determined by majority
ownership interest and the absence of substantive third-party
participating rights or, in the case of variable interest
entities, by majority exposure to expected losses, residual
returns or both. for those consolidated subsidiaries where merck
ownership is less than 100%, the outside stockholders
interests are shown as minority interests. investments in
affiliates over which the company has significant influence but
not a controlling interest, such as interests in entities owned
equally by the company and a third party that are under shared
control, are carried on the equity basis.
foreign currency translation the
u.s.dollar is the functional currency for the
companys foreign subsidiaries.
cash and cash equivalents cash equivalents
are comprised of certain highly liquid investments with original
maturities of less than three months.
inventories substantially all domestic
inventories are valued at the lower of
last-in,
first-out (lifo) cost or market for both book and
tax purposes. foreign inventories are valued at the lower of
first-in,
first-out (fifo) cost or market. inventories consist
of currently marketed products and certain products awaiting
regulatory approval. in evaluating the recoverability of
inventories produced in preparation for product launches, the
company considers the probability that revenue will be obtained
from the future sale of the related inventory together with the
status of the product within the regulatory approval process.
investments investments classified as
available-for-sale
are reported at fair value, with unrealized gains or losses, to
the extent not hedged, reported net of tax in accumulated other
comprehensive income. investments in debt securities classified
as
held-to-maturity,
consistent with managements intent, are reported at cost.
impairment losses are charged to other (income) expense, net,
for
other-than-temporary
declines in fair value. the company considers available evidence
in evaluating potential impairment of its investments, including
the duration and extent to which fair value is less than cost
and the companys ability and intent to hold the investment.
revenue recognition revenues from sales of
products are recognized when title and risk of loss passes to
the customer. revenues for domestic pharmaceutical sales are
recognized at the time of shipment, while for many foreign
subsidiaries, as well as for vaccine sales, revenues are
recognized at the time of delivery. recognition of revenue also
requires reasonable assurance of collection of sales proceeds
and completion of all performance obligations. domestically,
sales discounts are issued to customers as direct discounts at
the
point-of-sale
or
indirectly through an intermediary wholesale purchaser, known as
chargebacks, or indirectly in the form of rebates. additionally,
sales are generally made with a limited right of return under
certain conditions. revenues are recorded net of provisions for
sales discounts and returns, which are established at the time
of sale. accruals for chargebacks are reflected as a direct
reduction to accounts receivable and accruals for rebates are
recorded as accrued expenses. the accrued balances relative to
these provisions included in accounts receivable and accrued and
other current liabilities were $60.4million and
$696.7million, respectively, at december31, 2006 and
$164.3million and $1.0billion, respectively, at
december31, 2005.
effective january1, 2006, the company began recognizing
revenue from the sale of vaccines to the federal government for
placement into stockpiles related to the pediatric vaccine
stockpile in accordance with securities and exchange commission
(sec) interpretation, commission guidance
regarding accounting for sales of vaccines and bioterror
countermeasures to the federal government for placement into the
pediatric vaccine stockpile or the strategic national stockpile.
the company retrospectively applied the impacts of adopting
the interpretation by reducing accrued and other current
liabilities by $103.4million and increasing income taxes
payable by $42.3million and retained earnings by
$61.1million, respectively, as of december31, 2005.
there was no impact to the companys results of operations
for 2006 or 2005. the impacts of adoption on 2004 results of
operations were increases to the following: sales of
$34.2million, materials and production costs of
$5.9million, taxes on income of $11.6million, net
income of $16.7million and earnings per common share
assuming dilution of $0.01.
depreciation depreciation is provided over
the estimated useful lives of the assets, principally using the
straight-line method. for tax purposes, accelerated methods are
used. the estimated useful lives primarily range from 10 to
50years for buildings, and from 3 to 15years for
machinery, equipment and office furnishings.
acquisitions the company accounts for
acquired businesses using the purchase method of accounting in
accordance with financial accounting standards board
(fasb) statement no.141, business
combinations, which requires that the assets acquired and
liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at
their respective fair values. any excess of the purchase price
over the estimated fair values of net assets acquired is
recorded as goodwill. if the company determines the acquired
company is a development stage company which has not commenced
its planned principal operations, the acquisition will be
accounted for as an acquisition of assets rather than a business
combination and, therefore, goodwill would not be recorded. in
accordance with fasb interpretation no.4, applicability
of fasb statement no.2 to business combinations accounted
for by the purchase method, the company allocates amounts to
acquired research which are expensed at the at the date of
acquisition if technological feasibility has not been
established and no alternative future use existed. for projects
which can be used immediately in the research process that have
alternative future uses, the company capitalizes these
intangible assets and amortizes them over an appropriate useful
life. the operating results of the acquired business are
reflected in the companys consolidated financial
statements and results of operations as of the date of
acquisition.
goodwill and other intangibles goodwill
represents the excess of acquisition costs over the fair value
of net assets of businesses purchased. goodwill is assigned to
reporting units within the companys segments and evaluated
for impairment on at least an annual basis, using a fair value
based test. other acquired intangibles are recorded at cost and
are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated
useful lives ranging from 3 to 20years (see note8).
when events or circumstances warrant a review, the company will
assess recoverability from future operations of other
intangibles using undiscounted cash flows derived from the
lowest appropriate asset groupings, generally the subsidiary
level. impairments are recognized in operating results to the
extent that carrying value exceeds fair value, which is
determined based on the net present value of estimated future
cash flows.
research and development research and
development is expensed as incurred. upfront and milestone
payments made to third parties in connection with research and
development collaborations prior to regulatory approval are
expensed as incurred. payments made to third parties subsequent
to regulatory approval are capitalized and amortized over the
shorter of the remaining license or product patent life.
share-based compensation effective
january1, 2006, the company adopted fasb statement
no.123r, share-based payment
(fas123r) (see note14). fas123r
requires all share-based payments to employees to be expensed
over the requisite service period based on the grant-date fair
value of the awards and
requires that the unvested portion of all outstanding awards
upon adoption be recognized using the same fair value and
attribution methodologies previously determined under fasb
statementno.123, accounting for stock-based
compensation. the company continues to use the black-scholes
valuation method and applied the requirements of fas123r
using the modified prospective method. prior to adoption of
fas123r, employee share-based compensation was recognized
using the intrinsic value method, which measures share-based
compensation expense as the amount at which the market price of
the stock at the date of grant exceeds the exercise price.
accordingly, no compensation expense was recognized for the
companys share-based compensation plans other than for its
performance-based awards, restricted stock units and options
granted to employees of certain equity method investees.
legal defense costs legal defense costs
expected to be incurred in connection with a loss contingency
are accrued when probable and reasonably estimable.
use of estimates the consolidated financial
statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states (gaap) and,
accordingly, include certain amounts that are based on
managements best estimates and judgments. estimates are
used in determining such items as provisions for sales discounts
and returns, depreciable and amortizable lives, recoverability
of inventories produced in preparation for product launches,
amounts recorded for contingencies, environmental liabilities
and other reserves, pension and other postretirement benefit
plan assumptions, share-based compensation, acquisitions and
taxes on income. because of the uncertainty inherent in such
estimates, actual results may differ from these estimates.
reclassifications certain reclassifications
have been made to prior year amounts to conform with the current
year presentation.
recently issued accounting standards the fasb
recently issued interpretation no.48, accounting for
uncertainty in income taxes an interpretation of
fasb statement no.109 (fin48) and
statement no.157, fair value measurements
(fas157).
fin48, which is effective january1, 2007, clarifies
the accounting for the uncertainty in tax positions by requiring
companies to recognize in their financial statements, the impact
of a tax position, if that position is more likely than not of
being sustained on audit based on the technical merits of the
position. among other provisions, fin48 also requires
expanded disclosures at the end of each annual period presented.
the company continues to evaluate the impact of fin48 on
its financial position and results of operations. at this time,
the effects of adoption have not yet been determined.
fas157, which will be effective january1, 2008,
clarifies the definition of fair value, establishes a framework
for measuring fair value, and expands the disclosures on fair
value measurements. the effect of adoption of fas157 on
the companys financial position and results of operations
is not expected to be material.
3.
voluntary
product withdrawal
on september30, 2004, the company announced a voluntary
worldwide withdrawal of vioxx, its arthritis and acute
pain medication. the companys decision, which was
effective immediately, was based on new three-year data from a
prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial,
approve (adenomatous polyp prevention on vioxx).
in connection with the withdrawal, in 2004 the company recorded
an unfavorable adjustment to net income of $552.6million,
or $0.25per share. the adjustment to pre-tax income was
$726.2million. of this amount, $491.6million related
to estimated customer returns of product previously sold and was
recorded as a reduction of sales, $93.2million related to
write-offs of inventory held by the company and was recorded in
materials and production expense, and $141.4million
related to estimated costs to undertake the withdrawal of the
product and was recorded in marketing and administrative
expense. the tax benefit of this adjustment was
$173.6million, which reflects the geographical mix of
vioxx returns and the cost of the withdrawal. the
adjustment did not include charges for future legal defense
costs (see note11). the vioxx withdrawal process
was completed during 2005 and the costs associated with the
withdrawal were in line with the original amounts recorded by
the company in 2004.
4.
restructuring
global
restructuring program
in november 2005, the company announced the initial phase of a
global restructuring program designed to reduce the
companys cost structure, increase efficiency and enhance
competitiveness. the initial steps include the implementation of
a new supply strategy by the merck manufacturing division, which
is intended to create a leaner, more cost-effective and
customer-focused manufacturing model over a three-year period.
as part of this program, merck announced plans to sell or close
five manufacturing sites and two preclinical sites by the end of
2008, and eliminate approximately 7,000 positions company-wide.
the company has also sold or closed certain other facilities and
sold related assets in connection with the restructuring
program. the pre-tax costs of this restructuring program were
$935.5million in 2006, $401.2million in 2005 and are
expected to be $300million to $500million in 2007.
through the end of 2008, when the initial phase of the
restructuring program is expected to be substantially complete,
the cumulative pre-tax costs of the program are expected to
range from $1.9billion to $2.2billion. approximately
70% of the cumulative pre-tax costs are non-cash, relating
primarily to accelerated depreciation for those facilities
scheduled for closure. since the inception of the global
restructuring program through december31, 2006, the
company has recorded total pre-tax accumulated costs of
$1.3billion and eliminated approximately 4,800 positions,
comprised of employee separations and the elimination of
contractors and vacant positions.
the following table summarizes the charges related to the global
restructuring program by type of cost:
separation
accelerated
year ended december31,
costs
depreciation
other
total
materials and
production
$
-
$
707.3
$
29.1
$
736.4
research and
development
-
56.5
0.3
56.8
restructuring costs
113.7
-
28.6
142.3
$
113.7
$
763.8
$
58.0
$
935.5
year ended december31,
materials and production
$
-
$
65.9
$
111.2
$
177.1
research and development
-
18.7
-
18.7
restructuring costs
182.4
-
23.0
205.4
$
182.4
$
84.6
$
134.2
$
401.2
separation costs are associated with actual headcount
reductions, as well as those headcount reductions which were
probable and could be reasonably estimated. approximately 3,700
positions were eliminated in 2006 and approximately 1,100 were
eliminated in 2005 (which are comprised of actual headcount
reductions, and the elimination of contractors and vacant
positions).
accelerated depreciation costs primarily relate to the five
merck-owned manufacturing facilities (ponders end, united
kingdom; okazaki, japan; kirkland, canada; albany, georgia, and
danville, pennsylvania) and the two preclinical sites (in
okazaki and menuma, japan) to be sold or closed by the end of
2008. these actions are in an effort to reduce costs and
consolidate the companys manufacturing and research
facilities. through the end of 2006, three of the manufacturing
facilities had been closed, sold or had ceased operations and
the two preclinical sites were closed. all of the sites have and
will continue to operate up through the respective closure
dates, and since future cash flows are sufficient to recover the
respective book values, merck was required to accelerate
depreciation of the site assets rather than writing them off
immediately. the site assets include manufacturing and research
facilities and equipment.
other activity in 2006 and 2005 includes approximately
$25.0million and $111.2million, respectively,
associated with the impairment of certain fixed assets that will
no longer be used in the business as a result of these
restructuring actions and must therefore, be written off.
additionally, other activity in 2006 and 2005 includes
$34.2million and $23.0million, respectively, related
to curtailment, settlement and termination charges on the
companys pension and other postretirement benefit plans
(see note15). in 2006, other activity also includes
pre-tax gains of $40.7million resulting from the sales of
facilities in connection with the global restructuring program.
other
restructuring programs
as part of a cost-reduction initiative announced in october 2003
and completed at the end of 2004, the company eliminated 5,100
positions. the company completed a similar program in 2005 with
900 positions being eliminated through december31, 2005.
as a result of these restructuring actions, the company recorded
restructuring costs of $116.8million for 2005 and
$107.6million for 2004. of these amounts, in 2005 and
2004, respectively, $91.5million and $84.4million
related to employee severance benefits, $25.3million and
$21.5million related to curtailment, settlement and
termination charges on the companys pension and other
postretirement benefit plans (see note15)and
$1.7million related to a modification in the terms of
certain employees stock option grants in 2004 only.
the following table summarizes the charges and spending relating
to the global restructuring program and other programs:
separation
accelerated
costs(1)
depreciation
other
total
restructuring reserves as of
january1, 2005
$
45.7
$
-
$
-
$
45.7
expense
273.9
84.6
159.5
518.0
(payments) receipts, net
(79.3
)
-
(32.0
)
(111.3
)
non-cash activity
-
(84.6
)
(127.5
)
(212.1
)
restructuring reserves as of
december31, 2005
$
240.3
$
-
$
-
$
240.3
expense
$
113.7
$
763.8
$
58.0
$
935.5
(payments) receipts,
net
(176.3
)
-
(9.4
)(2)
(185.7
)
non-cash activity
-
(763.8
)
(48.6
)
(812.4
)
restructuring reserves as of
december31, 2006
$
177.7
$
-
$
-
$
177.7
(1)
includes separation costs
associated with the global restructuring program as well as
amounts from other restructuring programs. the other
restructuring programs were substantially complete as of the end
of the first quarter of 2006.
(2)includes
proceeds from the sales of facilities in connection with the
global restructuring program.
the company also closed its basic research center in terlings
park, united kingdom in 2006. in anticipation of the closing,
the company incurred additional accelerated depreciation costs
of $103.1million recorded to research and development
expense during 2005 not reflected in the above table, which
reduced the assets of this research center down to their net
realizable values. subsequent to december31, 2005, no
further research and development was performed at this site.
the company records restructuring activities in accordance with
fasb statement no.112, employers accounting for
postemployment benefits an amendment of fasb
statement no.5 and 43 and fasb statement no.88,
employers accounting for settlements and curtailments
of defined benefit pension plans for termination benefits,
and fasb statement no.144, accounting for the
impairment and disposal of long-lived assets and fasb
statement no.146, accounting for costs associated with
exit or disposal activities. for segment reporting,
restructuring charges are recorded in unallocated expense.
5.
research
collaborations, acquisitions and license agreements
merck continues its strategy of establishing strong external
alliances to complement its substantial internal research
capabilities, including research collaborations, acquisitions,
licensing pre-clinical and clinical compounds and technology
transfers to drive both near- and long-term growth. during 2006,
merck signed 53 such agreements.
on december29, 2006, merck completed the acquisition of
sirna therapeutics, inc. (sirna) for $13per
share in cash, for a total value of approximately
$1.1billion, which included the purchase of all
outstanding sirna shares, warrants and stock options. the
aggregate purchase price of $1.1billion was paid on
january3, 2007, and
accordingly, is reflected as a liability within accrued and
other current liabilities in the companys consolidated
balance sheet at december31, 2006. sirna was a
publicly-held biotechnology company that is a leader in
developing a new class of medicines based on rna interference
(rnai) technology, which could significantly alter
the treatment of disease. rnai-based therapeutics selectively
catalyze the destruction of the rna transcribed from an
individual gene. the acquisition of sirna is expected to
increase mercks ability to use rnai technology to turn off
a targeted gene in a human cell, potentially rendering
inoperative a gene responsible for triggering a specific
disease. the transaction was accounted for under the purchase
method of accounting, in which the assets acquired and
the liabilities assumed from sirna at the date of acquisition
were recorded at their respective fair values as of the
acquisition date in the companys consolidated financial
statements. the determination of fair values requires management
to make significant estimates and assumptions. the excess of the
purchase price over the fair value of the acquired net assets
has been recorded as goodwill of $345.9million. the
goodwill was fully allocated to the pharmaceutical segment and
is not deductible for tax purposes. also, the company recorded a
charge of $466.2million for acquired research associated
with sirnas compounds currently under development, for
which, at the acquisition date, technological feasibility had
not been established and no alternative future use existed. the
acquired research charge related to the development of
treatments for both the hepatitis b and hepatitisc
viruses, which are in preclinical development, as well as
licensing agreements held by sirna. the charge, which is not
deductible for tax purposes, was recorded in research and
development expense and was determined based upon the present
value of expected future cash flows of new product candidates
resulting from this technology adjusted for the probability of
its technical and marketing success utilizing an income approach
reflecting appropriate risk-adjusted discount rates of 27.0% to
30.0%. the ongoing activity with respect to each of these
compounds under development is not expected to be material to
the companys research and development expenses. the
allocation of the purchase price also resulted in the
recognition of an intangible asset of $357.8million and a
related deferred tax liability of $146.3million, as well
as other assets and liabilities net of
$112.6million. the intangible asset relates to
sirnas developed technology that can be used immediately
in the research and development process and has alternative
future uses. this intangible asset will be amortized to research
and development expense on a straight line basis over a seven
year useful life. pro forma financial information is not
required because sirnas historical financial results are
not significant when compared with the companys financial
results. the transaction closed on december29, 2006, and
accordingly, sirnas operating results were not reflected
in the companys results of operations for 2006.
also, in december 2006, merck and idera pharmaceuticals
(idera) announced that they had formed a broad
collaboration to research, develop and commercialize
ideras toll-like receptor (tlr) agonists.
under the terms of the agreement, merck will receive worldwide
exclusive rights to a number of ideras agonist compounds
targeting tlr7, 8 and 9 for use in combination with
mercks therapeutic and prophylactic vaccines under
development for oncology, infectious diseases and
alzheimers disease. merck and idera will engage in a
two-year research and development collaboration to generate
novel agonists targeting tlr 7 and tlr 8 and incorporating both
merck and idera chemistry for use in the licensed fields. merck
paid an upfront license fee of $20million to idera, which
was recorded as research and development expense, and purchased
$10million of its common stock at $5.50per share. in
addition, merck will fund the research and development
collaboration. idera is eligible to receive milestone payments
of up to $165million if vaccines are successfully
developed in each of the three fields. additional milestones of
up to $260million would be payable for follow-on
indications in the oncology field and the successful development
of additional vaccines containing ideras tlr agonists.
there is no limit to the number of vaccines to which merck can
apply ideras agonists within the licensed fields. in
addition, idera will receive royalties on products
commercialized under the collaboration.
in november 2006, the company expanded the scope of its existing
strategic collaboration with foxhollow technologies, inc.
(foxhollow) for atherosclerotic plaque analysis.
additionally, merck acquired a stake in foxhollow with the
purchase of $95million of newly-issued shares of foxhollow
common stock for $29.629per share, representing
approximately an 11% stake. these shares are recorded as an
equity method investment in the consolidated balance sheet at
december31, 2006. the existing strategic collaboration,
entered into in 2005, provided for foxhollow to receive an
upfront payment with the opportunity for additional payments if
the collaboration continued. under the terms of the expanded
collaboration agreement, merck will pay $40million to
foxhollow over four years in exchange for foxhollows
agreement to collaborate exclusively with merck in specified
disease areas. merck will also provide a minimum of
$60million in funding to foxhollow over the first
three years of the four year collaboration program term, for
research activities to be conducted by foxhollow under
mercks direction. foxhollow will receive milestone
payments on successful development of drug products or
diagnostic tests utilizing results from the collaboration, as
well as royalties.
in october 2006, merck and ambrilia biopharma inc.
(ambrilia), a biopharmaceutical company developing
innovative therapeutics in the fields of cancer and infectious
diseases, announced they entered into an exclusive licensing
agreement granting merck the worldwide rights to ambrilias
hiv/aids protease inhibitor program. under the terms of the
agreement, ambrilia granted merck the exclusive worldwide rights
to its lead compound, ppl-100, which has completed a
phasei single-dose pharmacokinetic study and is currently
in a phasei repeat dose pharmacokinetic study. in return,
ambrilia received an upfront licensing fee of $17million
on signing, which the company recorded as research and
development expense in 2006, and is eligible for cash payments
totaling up to $215million upon successful completion of
development, clinical, regulatory and sales milestones. ambrilia
will receive royalties on all future product sales.
in june 2006, the company acquired all of the outstanding equity
of glycofi, inc. (glycofi) for approximately
$373million in cash ($400million purchase price net
of $25million in shares already owned and net transaction
costs). glycofi was a privately-held biotechnology company that
is a leader in the field of yeast glycoengineering, which is the
addition of specific carbohydrate modifications to the proteins
in yeast, and optimization of biologic drug molecules.
glycofis technology platform is used in the development of
glycoprotein, as well as the optimization of a glycoprotein
target. in connection with the acquisition, the company recorded
a charge of $296.3million for acquired research associated
with glycofis technology platform to be used in the
research and development process, for which, at the acquisition
date, technological feasibility had not been established and no
alternative future use existed. this charge is not deductible
for tax purposes. the company expects this technology to be
fully developed over the next one to two years. the charge was
recorded in research and development expense and was determined
based upon the present value of expected future cash flows of
new product candidates resulting from this technology adjusted
for the probability of its technical and marketing success
utilizing an income approach reflecting the appropriate
risk-adjusted discount rate. the company also recorded a
$99.4million intangible asset ($57.6million net of
deferred taxes) related to glycofis developed technology
that can be used immediately in the research and development
process and has alternative future uses. this intangible asset
will be amortized to research and development expense on a
straight-line basis over a five year useful life. the remaining
net assets acquired in this transaction were not material.
because glycofi was a development stage company that had not
commenced its planned principal operations, the transaction was
accounted for as an acquisition of assets rather than as a
business combination and, therefore, goodwill was not recorded.
glycofis results of operations have been included with the
companys consolidated financial results since the
acquisition date.
in may 2006, the company acquired all of the equity of abmaxis,
inc. (abmaxis) for approximately $80million in
cash. abmaxis was a privately-held biopharmaceutical company
dedicated to the discovery and optimization of monoclonal
antibody (mab) products for human therapeutics and
diagnostics. abmaxis developed and validated a breakthrough
antibody engineering technology platform, abmaxis in-silico
immunization, which has alternative future uses to the
company with no significant technological or engineering risks
at the date of acquisition. in connection with the acquisition,
the company allocated substantially all of the purchase price to
abmaxis technology platform and recorded an intangible
asset of $135.3million ($78.5million net of deferred
taxes). this intangible asset will be amortized to research and
development expense on a straight-line basis over a five year
useful life. the remaining net assets acquired in this
transaction were not material. because abmaxis was a development
stage company that had not commenced its planned principal
operations, the transaction was accounted for as an acquisition
of assets rather than as a business combination and, therefore,
goodwill was not recorded. abmaxis results of operations
have been included with the companys consolidated
financial results since the acquisition date.
in march 2006, neuromed pharmaceuticals ltd.
(neuromed) and merck signed a research collaboration
and license agreement to research, develop and commercialize
novel compounds for the treatment of pain and other neurological
disorders, including neuromeds lead compound, nmed-160
(mk-6721), which is currently in phaseii development for
the treatment of pain. under the terms of the agreement,
neuromed received an upfront payment of $25million which
the company recorded as research and development expense in
2006. the
successful development and launch of nmed-160 for an initial
single indication on a worldwide basis would trigger milestone
payments totaling $202million. milestones could increase
to approximately $450million if a further indication for
nmed-160 is developed and approved and an additional compound is
developed and approved for two indications. neuromed would also
receive royalties on worldwide sales of nmed-160 and any
additional compounds developed under this agreement.
in 2005, agensys, inc. (agensys), a cancer
biotechnology company, and merck announced the formation of a
global alliance to jointly develop and commercialize ags-psca,
agensys fully human mab to prostate stem cell antigen.
also in 2005, merck entered into an agreement with geron
corporation to develop a cancer vaccine against telomerase, an
enzyme, active in most cancer cells that maintains telomere
length at the ends of chromosomes, which allows the cancer to
grow and metastasize over long periods of time.
in 2004, the company acquired aton pharma, inc.
(aton), a privately-held biotechnology company
focusing on the development of novel treatments for cancer and
other serious diseases. atons clinical pipeline of histone
deacetylase inhibitors represents a class of anti-tumor agents
with potential for efficacy based on a novel mechanism of
action. atons lead product candidate at the time of
acquisition, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, known as
vorinostat, for the treatment of cutaneous t-cell lymphoma was
approved by the food and drug administration in october 2006 and
is marketed as zolinza in the united states.
consideration for the acquisition consisted of an upfront
payment, as well as contingent payments based upon the
regulatory filing, approval and sale of products. in connection
with the transaction, the company recorded a charge of
$125.5million, included in research and development
expense, for acquired research associated with products in
development for which, at the acquisition date, technological
feasibility had not been established and no alternative future
use existed. the remaining net assets acquired in this
transaction were not material. because aton was a development
stage company that had not commenced its planned principal
operations, the transaction was accounted for as an acquisition
of assets rather than as a business combination and, therefore,
goodwill was not recorded. atons results of operations
have been included with the companys since the acquisition
date.
6.
financial
instruments
foreign
currency risk management
while the u.s.dollar is the functional currency of the
companys foreign subsidiaries, a significant portion of
the companys revenues are denominated in foreign
currencies. merck relies on sustained cash flows generated from
foreign sources to support its long-term commitment to
u.s.dollar-based research and development. to the extent
the dollar value of cash flows is diminished as a result of a
strengthening dollar, the companys ability to fund
research and other dollar-based strategic initiatives at a
consistent level may be impaired. the company has established
revenue hedging and balance sheet risk management programs to
protect against volatility of future foreign currency cash flows
and changes in fair value caused by volatility in foreign
exchange rates.
the objective of the revenue hedging program is to reduce the
potential for longer-term unfavorable changes in foreign
exchange to decrease the u.s.dollar value of future cash
flows derived from foreign currency denominated sales, primarily
the euro and japanese yen. to achieve this objective, the
company will partially hedge anticipated third-party sales that
are expected to occur over its planning cycle, typically no more
than three years into the future. the company will layer in
hedges over time, increasing the portion of sales hedged as it
gets closer to the expected date of the transaction, such that
it is probable that the hedged transaction will occur. the
portion of sales hedged is based on assessments of cost-benefit
profiles that consider natural offsetting exposures, revenue and
exchange rate volatilities and correlations, and the cost of
hedging instruments. the hedged anticipated sales are a
specified component of a portfolio of similarly denominated
foreign currency-based sales transactions, each of which
responds to the hedged risk in the same manner. merck manages
its anticipated transaction exposure principally with purchased
local currency put options, which provide the company with a
right, but not an obligation, to sell foreign currencies in the
future at a predetermined price. if the u.s.dollar
strengthens relative to the currency of the hedged anticipated
sales, total changes in the options cash flows fully
offset the decline in the expected future u.s.dollar cash
flows of the hedged foreign currency sales. conversely, if the
u.s.dollar weakens, the options value reduces to
zero, but the company benefits from the increase in the value of
the anticipated foreign currency cash flows.
the designated hedge relationship is based on total changes in
the options cash flows. accordingly, the entire fair value
change in the options is deferred in accumulated other
comprehensive income (aoci) and reclassified into
sales when the hedged anticipated revenue is recognized. the
hedge relationship is perfectly effective and therefore no hedge
ineffectiveness is recorded. the fair values of currency options
are reported in accounts receivable or other assets. the cash
flows from these contracts are reported as operating activities
in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
the primary objective of the balance sheet risk management
program is to protect the u.s.dollar value of foreign
currency denominated net monetary assets from the effects of
volatility in foreign exchange that might occur prior to their
conversion to u.s.dollars. merck principally utilizes
forward exchange contracts, which enable the company to buy and
sell foreign currencies in the future at fixed exchange rates
and economically offset the consequences of changes in foreign
exchange on the amount of u.s.dollar cash flows derived
from the net assets. merck routinely enters into contracts to
fully offset the effects of exchange on exposures denominated in
developed country currencies, primarily the euro and japanese
yen. for exposures in developing country currencies, the company
will enter into forward contracts on a more limited basis, and
only when it is deemed economical to do so based on a
cost-benefit analysis that considers the magnitude of the
exposure, the volatility of the exchange rate and the cost of
the hedging instrument. the company will also minimize the
effect of exchange on monetary assets and liabilities by
managing operating activities and net asset positions at the
local level.
foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities are
remeasured at spot rates in effect on the balance sheet date
with the effects of changes in spot rates reported in other
(income) expense, net. the forward contracts are not designated
as hedges and are marked to market through other (income)
expense, net. accordingly, fair value changes in the forward
contracts help mitigate the changes in the value of the
remeasured assets and liabilities attributable to changes in
foreign currency exchange rates, except to the extent of the
spot-forward differences. these differences are not significant
due to the short-term nature of the contracts, which typically
have average maturities at inception of less than one year.
the company uses forward contracts to hedge the changes in fair
value of certain foreign currency denominated
available-for-sale
securities attributable to fluctuations in foreign currency
exchange rates. changes in the fair value of the hedged
securities due to fluctuations in spot rates are offset in other
(income) expense, net, by the fair value changes in the forward
contracts attributable to spot rate fluctuations. hedge
ineffectiveness was not material during 2006, 2005 and 2004.
changes in the contracts fair value due to spot-forward
differences are excluded from the designated hedge relationship
and recognized in other (income) expense, net. these amounts
were not significant for the years ended december31, 2006,
2005 and 2004.
the fair values of forward exchange contracts are reported in
the following four balance sheet line items: accounts receivable
(current portion of gain position), other assets (non-current
portion of gain position), accrued and other current liabilities
(current portion of loss position), or deferred income taxes and
noncurrent liabilities (non-current portion of loss position).
the cash flows from these contracts are reported as operating
activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
interest
rate risk management
the company may use interest rate swap contracts on certain
investing and borrowing transactions to manage its net exposure
to interest rate changes and to reduce its overall cost of
borrowing. the company does not use leveraged swaps and, in
general, does not leverage any of its investment activities that
would put principal capital at risk.
at december31, 2006, the company was a party to seven
pay-floating, receive-fixed interest rate swap contracts
designated as fair value hedges of fixed-rate notes in which the
notional amounts match the amount of the hedged fixed-rate
notes. there is one swap maturing in 2007 with a notional amount
of $350million; two swaps maturing in 2011 with notional
amounts of $125million each; one swap maturing in 2013
with a notional amount of $500million and three swaps
maturing in 2015 with notional amounts of $250million
each. the swaps effectively convert the fixed-rate obligations
to floating-rate instruments. the fair value changes in the
notes are fully offset in interest expense by the fair value
changes in the swap contracts. the fair values of these
contracts are reported in accounts receivable, other assets,
accrued and other current liabilities, or deferred income taxes
and noncurrent
liabilities. the cash flows from these contracts are reported as
operating activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
fair
value of financial instruments
summarized below are the carrying values and fair values of the
companys financial instruments at december31, 2006
and 2005. fair values were estimated based on market prices,
where available, or dealer quotes.
carrying value
fair value
carrying value
fair value
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
5,914.7
$
5,914.7
$
9,585.3
$
9,585.3
short-term investments
2,798.3
2,798.3
6,052.3
6,052.3
long-term investments
7,788.2
7,788.2
1,107.9
1,107.9
purchased currency options
43.9
43.9
145.4
145.4
forward exchange contracts
11.1
11.1
13.7
13.7
interest rate swaps
26.3
26.3
13.5
13.5
liabilities
loans payable and current portion
of long-term debt
$
1,285.1
$
1,284.3
$
2,972.0
$
2,974.4
long-term debt
5,551.0
5,612.7
5,125.6
5,171.4
forward exchange contracts
25.5
25.5
26.0
26.0
in connection with the american jobs creation act of 2004
(ajca) the company repatriated $15.9billion
during 2005 (see note17). as of december31, 2005,
$5.2billion of the ajca repatriation was invested in fully
collateralized overnight repurchase agreements and was included
in short-term investments in the consolidated balance sheet. in
early 2006, the company reinvested these repurchase agreement
balances into other short- and long-term investments.
a summary of the december31 carrying values and fair
values of the companys investments and gross unrealized
gains and losses on the companys
available-for-sale-investments
recorded, net of tax, in aoci is as follows:
carrying
fair
gross unrealized
value
value
gains
losses
corporate notes and bonds
$
5,189.5
$
5,189.5
$
7.2
$
(5.0
)
u.s.government and agency
securities
2,028.2
2,028.2
2.3
(3.7
)
commercial paper
1,110.2
1,110.2
-
-
municipal securities
708.5
708.5
4.3
(1.3
)
mortgaged-backed securities
615.4
615.4
1.8
(0.7
)
asset-backed securities
456.5
456.5
0.8
(0.4
)
foreign government bonds
191.2
191.2
-
(0.7
)
repurchase agreements
81.5
81.5
-
-
other debt securities
47.1
47.1
8.8
-
equity securities
158.4
158.4
85.5
(0.7
)
total
available-for-sale
$
10,586.5
$
10,586.5
$
110.7
$
(12.5
)
substantially all of the companys unrealized losses at
december31, 2006 were in continuous loss positions for
less than 12months.
carrying
fair
gross unrealized
value
value
gains
losses
repurchase agreements
$
5,214.2
$
5,214.2
$
-
$
-
corporate notes and bonds
755.7
755.7
0.1
-
commercial paper
654.7
654.7
-
-
municipal securities
288.3
288.3
0.5
(1.3
)
u.s.government and agency
securities
51.9
51.9
-
(0.1
)
other debt securities
45.0
45.0
10.1
(0.3
)
equity securities
150.4
150.4
60.0
(4.9
)
total
available-for-sale
$
7,160.2
$
7,160.2
$
70.7
$
(6.6
)
available-for-sale
debt securities maturing within one year totaled
$2.8billion at december31, 2006. of the remaining
debt securities, $6.3billion mature within five years.
concentrations
of credit risk
as part of its ongoing control procedures, the company monitors
concentrations of credit risk associated with corporate issuers
of securities and financial institutions with which it conducts
business. credit risk is minimal as credit exposure limits are
established to avoid a concentration with any single issuer or
institution. four u.s.customers represented, in aggregate,
approximately one-fifth of the companys accounts
receivable at december31, 2006. the company monitors the
creditworthiness of its customers to which it grants credit
terms in the normal course of business. bad debts have been
minimal. the company does not normally require collateral or
other security to support credit sales.
7.
inventories
inventories at december31 consisted of:
finished goods
$
403.8
$
400.0
raw materials and work in process
1,688.9
1,929.8
supplies
92.8
82.1
total (approximates current cost)
2,185.5
2,411.9
reduction to lifo costs
-
-
$
2,185.5
$
2,411.9
recognized as:
inventories
$
1,769.4
$
1,658.1
other assets
$
416.1
$
753.8
inventories valued under the lifo method comprised approximately
62% of inventories at both december31, 2006 and 2005.
amounts recognized as other assets are comprised entirely of raw
materials and work in process inventories, which include
inventories for products not expected to be sold within one
year, principally vaccines, and, as of december31, 2005,
inventories produced in preparation for product launches.
8.
other
intangibles
other intangibles at december31 consisted of:
patents and product rights
$
1,656.3
$
1,656.3
other
775.9
180.4
total acquired cost
$
2,432.2
$
1,836.7
patents and product rights
$
1,321.5
$
1,191.8
other
166.8
126.2
total accumulated amortization
$
1,488.3
$
1,318.0
the increase in other intangibles in 2006 primarily reflects
intangibles in connection with the acquisitions of sirna,
glycofi and abmaxis (see note5). aggregate amortization
expense was $170.3million in 2006, $163.9million in
2005, and $192.0million in 2004. the estimated aggregate
amortization expense for each of the next five years is as
follows: 2007, $235.7million; 2008, $183.8million;
2009, $134.2million; 2010, $132.1million and
$104.6million in 2011.
9.
joint
ventures and other equity method affiliates
equity income from affiliates reflects the performance of the
companys joint ventures and other equity method affiliates
and was comprised of the following:
years ended
december31
merck/schering-plough
$
1,218.6
$
570.4
$
132.0
astrazeneca lp
783.7
833.5
646.5
other(1)
292.1
313.2
229.7
$
2,294.4
$
1,717.1
$
1,008.2
(1)
primarily reflects results from
merial limited, and joint ventures with sanofi pasteur and
johnson& johnson.
merck/schering-plough
in 2000, the company and schering-plough corporation
(schering-plough) (collectively the
partners) entered into agreements to create separate
equally-owned partnerships to develop and market in the united
states new prescription medicines in the cholesterol-management
and respiratory therapeutic areas. these agreements generally
provide for equal sharing of development costs and for
co-promotion of approved products by each company. in 2001, the
cholesterol-management partnership agreements were expanded to
include all the countries of the world, excluding japan. in
2002, ezetimibe, the first in a new class of
cholesterol-lowering agents, was launched in the united states
as zetia (marketed as ezetrol outside the united
states). as reported by the merck/schering-plough cholesterol
partnership (the msp partnership), global sales of
zetia totaled $1.93billion in 2006,
$1.4billion in 2005 and $1.1billion in 2004. in july
2004, a combination product containing the active ingredients of
both zetia and zocor, was approved in the united
states as vytorin (marketed as inegy outside of
the united states). global sales of vytorin were
$1.96billion in 2006, $1.0billion in 2005 and
$132.4million in 2004.
the cholesterol agreements provide for the sharing of operating
income generated by the msp partnership based upon percentages
that vary by product, sales level and country. in the
u.s.market, the partners share profits on zetia and
vytorin equally, with the exception of the first
$300million of annual zetia sales, on which
schering-plough receives a greater share of profits. operating
income includes expenses that the partners have contractually
agreed to share, such as a portion of manufacturing costs,
specifically identified promotion costs (including
direct-to-consumer
advertising and direct and identifiable
out-of-pocket
promotion) and other agreed upon costs for specific services
such as on-going clinical research, market support, market
research, market expansion, as well as a specialty sales force
and physician education programs. expenses incurred in support
of the msp partnership but not shared between the partners, such
as marketing and administrative expenses (including certain
sales force costs), as well as certain manufacturing costs, are
not included in equity income from affiliates.
however, these costs are reflected in the overall results of the
company. certain research and development expenses are generally
shared equally by the partners, after adjusting for earned
milestones.
the respiratory therapeutic agreements provide for the joint
development and marketing by the partners of a once-daily,
fixed-combination tablet containing the active ingredients
montelukast sodium and loratadine. montelukast sodium is sold by
merck as singulair and loratadine is sold by
schering-plough as claritin. in january 2002, the respiratory
partnership reported on results of phaseiii clinical
trials of a fixed-combination tablet containing montelukast
sodium and loratadine. this phaseiii study did not
demonstrate sufficient added benefits in the treatment of
seasonal allergic rhinitis. although the montelukast sodium and
loratadine combination tablet does not have approval in any
country, phaseiii clinical development is ongoing.
astrazeneca
lp
in 1982, merck entered into an agreement with astra ab
(astra) to develop and market astras products
under a royalty-bearing license. in 1993, the companys
total sales of astra products reached a level that triggered the
first step in the establishment of a joint venture business
carried on by astra merck inc. (ami), in which merck
and astra each owned a 50% share. this joint venture, formed in
1994, developed and marketed most of astras new
prescription medicines in the united states including
prilosec, the first of a class of medications known as
proton pump inhibitors, which slows the production of acid from
the cells of the stomach lining.
in 1998, merck and astra completed the restructuring of the
ownership and operations of the joint venture whereby the
company acquired astras interest in ami, renamed kbi inc.
(kbi), and contributed kbis operating assets
to a new u.s.limited partnership, astra pharmaceuticals
l.p. (the partnership), in exchange for a 1% limited
partner interest. astra contributed the net assets of its wholly
owned subsidiary, astra usa, inc., to the partnership in
exchange for a 99% general partner interest. the partnership,
renamed astrazeneca lp (azlp) upon astras 1999
merger with zeneca group plc (the astrazeneca
merger), became the exclusive distributor of the products
for which kbi retained rights.
while maintaining a 1% limited partner interest in azlp, merck
has consent and protective rights intended to preserve its
business and economic interests, including restrictions on the
power of the general partner to make certain distributions or
dispositions. furthermore, in limited events of default,
additional rights will be granted to the company, including
powers to direct the actions of, or remove and replace, the
partnerships chief executive officer and chief financial
officer. merck earns ongoing revenue based on sales of current
and future kbi products and such revenue was $1.8billion,
$1.7billion and $1.5billion in 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively, primarily relating to sales of nexium and
prilosec. in addition, merck earns certain partnership
returns which are recorded in equity income from affiliates as
reflected in the table above. such returns include a priority
return provided for in the partnership agreement, variable
returns based, in part, upon sales of certain former astra usa,
inc. products, and a preferential return representing
mercks share of undistributed azlp gaap earnings. the
astrazeneca merger triggers a partial redemption of mercks
limited partnership interest in 2008. upon this redemption, azlp
will distribute to kbi an amount based primarily on a multiple
of mercks average annual variable returns derived from
sales of the former astra usa, inc. products for the three years
prior to the redemption (the limited partner share of
agreed value).
in conjunction with the 1998 restructuring, for a payment of
$443.0million, which was deferred, astra purchased an
option (the asset option) to buy mercks
interest in the kbi products, excluding the gastrointestinal
medicines nexium and prilosec. the asset option is
exercisable in 2010 at an exercise price equal to the net
present value as of march31, 2008 of projected future
pretax revenue to be received by the company from the kbi
products (the appraised value). merck also has the
right to require astra to purchase such interest in 2008 at the
appraised value. in addition, the company granted astra an
option to buy mercks common stock interest in kbi,
exercisable two years after astras purchase of
mercks interest in the kbi products. the exercise of this
option by astra is also provided for in the year 2017 or if
combined annual sales of the two products fall below a minimum
amount provided, in each case, only so long as either the merck
option in 2008 or astrazenecas option in 2010 has been
exercised. the exercise price is based on the net present value
of estimated future net sales of nexium and prilosec
as determined at the time of exercise.
the 1999 astrazeneca merger constituted a trigger event under
the kbi restructuring agreements. as a result of the merger, in
exchange for mercks relinquishment of rights to future
astra products with no existing or pending u.s.patents at
the time of the merger, astra paid $967.4million (the
advance payment), which is subject to a
true-up
calculation in 2008 that may require repayment of all or a
portion of this amount. the
true-up
amount is directly dependent on the fair market value in 2008 of
the astra product rights retained by the company. accordingly,
recognition of this contingent income has been deferred until
the realizable amount, if any, is determinable, which is not
anticipated prior to 2008.
under the provisions of the kbi restructuring agreements,
because a trigger event has occurred, the sum of the limited
partner share of agreed value, the appraised value and the
true-up
amount is guaranteed to be a minimum of $4.7billion.
distribution of the limited partner share of agreed value and
payment of the
true-up
amount will occur in 2008. astrazenecas purchase of
mercks interest in the kbi products is contingent upon the
exercise of either mercks option in 2008 or
astrazenecas option in 2010 and, therefore, payment of the
appraised value may or may not occur.
sanofi
pasteur msd
in 1994, merck and pasteur mrieux connaught (now sanofi
pasteur s.a.) established an equally-owned joint venture to
market vaccines in europe and to collaborate in the development
of combination vaccines for distribution in europe. joint
venture vaccine sales were $913.9million for 2006,
$865.1million for 2005 and $807.0million for 2004.
merial
limited
in 1997, merck and rhne-poulenc s.a. (now sanofi-aventis
s.a.) combined their animal health and poultry genetics
businesses to formmerial limited (merial), a
fully integrated animal health company, which is a stand-alone
joint venture, equally owned by each party. merial provides a
comprehensive range of pharmaceuticals and vaccines to enhance
the health, well-being and performance of a wide range of animal
species. merial sales were $2.2billion for 2006,
$2.0billion for 2005 and $1.8billion for 2004.
johnson&
johnsonomerck
consumer pharmaceuticals company
in 1989, merck formed a joint venture with johnson&
johnson to develop and market a broad range of nonprescription
medicines for u.s.consumers. this 50% owned venture was
expanded into europe in 1993, and into canada in 1996. in march
2004, merck sold its 50% equity stake in its european joint
venture to johnson& johnson for $244.0million
and recorded a $176.8million gain as other (income)
expense, net (see note16). merck will continue to benefit
through royalties on certain products and also regained the
rights to potential future products that switch from
prescription to
over-the-counter
status in europe. sales of product marketed by the joint
venture, including sales of the european joint venture up
through march 2004, were $252.6million for 2006,
$253.3million for 2005 and $315.3million for 2004.
investments in affiliates accounted for using the equity method,
including the above joint ventures, totaled $3.5billion at
december31, 2006 and $3.0billion at
december31, 2005. these amounts are reported in other
assets.
summarized information for those affiliates is as follows:
years ended
december31
sales
$
14,277.8
$
11,804.6
$
9,821.1
materials and production costs
5,308.7
4,627.4
4,140.9
other expense, net
4,042.9
3,918.0
3,691.4
income before taxes
4,926.2
3,259.2
1,988.8
december31
current assets
$
7,772.7
$
6,389.0
noncurrent assets
1,483.6
1,430.5
current liabilities
4,074.9
3,420.0
noncurrent liabilities
215.6
160.4
10.
loans
payable, long-term debt and other commitments
loans payable at december31, 2006 and 2005 included
$336.2million and $337.5million, respectively, of
long-dated notes that are subject to repayment at the option of
the holders on an annual basis. loans payable at
december31, 2006 and 2005 also included
$500.0million of notes with annual interest rate resets
which were redeemed by the company in february 2007, upon
notification from the remarketing agent that, due to an overall
rise in interest rates, it would not exercise its annual option
to remarket the notes. loans payable at december31, 2006
and 2005, also included $349.8million of fixed-rate notes
due in 2007, and $510.1million of fixed rate notes due in
2006, respectively. in december 2006, a foreign subsidiary of
the company entered into an
18-month,
$100million line of credit with a financial institution.
at december31, 2006, borrowings under the line of credit
were $90million and are included in loans payable. loans
payable at december31, 2005 included $1.6billion of
commercial paper borrowings issued by a foreign subsidiary under
a $3.0billion commercial paper borrowing facility
established in october 2005 to provide funding for a portion of
the companys repatriation in connection with the ajca (see
note17). there was no commercial paper outstanding at
december31, 2006. the weighted average interest rate for
all of these borrowings was 4.9% and 4.3% at december31,
2006 and 2005, respectively.
long-term debt at december31 consisted of:
6.0% astra note due 2008
$
1,380.0
$
1,380.0
4.8%notes due 2015
1,017.0
992.0
4.4%notes due 2013
503.0
509.8
6.4%debentures due 2028
499.2
499.2
5.8%notes due 2036
497.6
-
6.0%debentures due 2028
497.0
496.8
2.5%notes due 2007
-
343.0
variable-rate borrowing due 2009
300.0
300.0
5.1%notes due 2011
249.1
-
6.3%debentures due 2026
247.8
247.6
other
360.3
357.2
$
5,551.0
$
5,125.6
the company was a party to interest rate swap contracts which
effectively convert the 2.5%, the 4.4%, the 5.1% and
$750million of the 4.8% fixed-rate notes to floating-rate
instruments (see note6).
other (as presented in the table above) at december31,
2006 and 2005 consisted primarily of $328.6million of
borrowings at variable rates averaging 4.7% and 3.8%,
respectively. of these borrowings, $158.7million are
subject to repayment at the option of the holders beginning in
2011 and $106.0million are subject to repayment at the
option of the holders beginning in 2010. in both years, other
also included foreign borrowings at varying rates up to 11.6%.
the aggregate maturities of long-term debt for each of the next
five years are as follows: 2007, $449.0million; 2008,
$1.4billion; 2009, $307.2million; 2010,
$6.0million; 2011, $258.7million.
rental expense under the companys operating leases, net of
sublease income, was $201.4million in 2006. the minimum
aggregate rental commitments under noncancellable leases are as
follows: 2007, $65.8million;
2008, $45.4million; 2009, $33.1million; 2010,
$22.9million; 2011, $10.4million and thereafter,
$33.9million. the company has no significant capital
leases.
11.
contingencies
and environmental liabilities
the company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings
of a nature considered normal to its business, including product
liability, intellectual property and commercial litigation, as
well as additional matters such as antitrust actions. the
company records accruals for contingencies when it is probable
that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be
reasonably estimated. these accruals are adjusted periodically
as assessments change or additional information becomes
available. for product liability claims, a portion of the
overall accrual is actuarially determined and considers such
factors as past experience, number of claims reported and
estimates of claims incurred but not yet reported. individually
significant contingent losses are accrued when probable and
reasonably estimable. legal defense costs expected to be
incurred in connection with a loss contingency are accrued when
probable and reasonably estimable.
the companys decision to obtain insurance coverage is
dependent on market conditions, including cost and availability,
existing at the time such decisions are made. as a result of a
number of factors, product liability insurance has become less
available while the cost has increased significantly. the
company has evaluated its risks and has determined that the cost
of obtaining product liability insurance outweighs the likely
benefits of the coverage that is available and as such, has no
insurance for certain product liabilities effective
august1, 2004, including liability for products first sold
after that date. the company will continue to evaluate its
insurance needs and the costs, availability and benefits of
product liability insurance in the future.
vioxx
litigation
product
liability lawsuits
as previously disclosed, individual and putative class actions
have been filed against the company in state and federal courts
alleging personal injury
and/or
economic loss with respect to the purchase or use of
vioxx. all such actions filed in federal court are
coordinated in a multidistrict litigation in the
u.s.district court for the eastern district of louisiana
(the mdl) before district judge eldon e. fallon. a
number of such actions filed in state court are coordinated in
separate coordinated proceedings in state courts in new jersey,
california and texas, and the counties of philadelphia,
pennsylvania and clark county, nevada. as of december31,
2006, the company had been served or was aware that it had been
named as a defendant in approximately 27,400 lawsuits, which
include approximately 46,100 plaintiff groups, alleging personal
injuries resulting from the use of vioxx, and in
approximately 264 putative class actions alleging personal
injuries
and/or
economic loss. (all of the actions discussed in this paragraph
are collectively referred to as the vioxx product
liability lawsuits.) of these lawsuits, approximately
8,300 lawsuits representing approximately 23,700 plaintiff
groups are or are slated to be in the federal mdl and
approximately 16,800 lawsuits representing approximately 16,800
plaintiff groups are included in a coordinated proceeding in new
jersey superior court before judge carol e. higbee.
in addition to the vioxx product liability lawsuits
discussed above, the claims of over 4,025 plaintiffs had been
dismissed as of december31, 2006. of these, there have
been over 1,225 plaintiffs whose claims were dismissed with
prejudice (i.e., they cannot be brought again) either by
plaintiffs themselves or by the courts. over 2,800 additional
plaintiffs have had their claims dismissed without prejudice
(i.e., they can be brought again).
in the mdl, judge fallon in july 2005 indicated that he would
schedule for trial a series of cases during the period november
2005 through 2006, in the following categories: (i)heart
attack with short term use; (ii)heart attack with long
term use; (iii)stroke; and (iv)cardiovascular injury
involving a prescription written after april2002 when the
labeling for vioxx was revised to include the results of
the vigor trial. these trials began in november 2005 and
concluded in december 2006. the next scheduled trial in the mdl
is a re-trial in barnettv. merck on the issue of damages
as discussed below.
merck has entered into a tolling agreement (the tolling
agreement) with the mdl plaintiffs steering
committee that establishes a procedure to halt the running of
the statute of limitations (tolling) as to certain categories of
claims allegedly arising from the use of vioxx by non-new
jersey citizens. the tolling agreement applies to individuals
who have not filed lawsuits and may or may not eventually file
lawsuits and only to those
claimants who seek to toll claims alleging injuries resulting
from a thrombotic cardiovascular event that results in a
myocardial infarction or ischemic stroke. the tolling agreement
provides counsel additional time to evaluate potential claims.
the tolling agreement requires any tolled claims to be filed in
federal court. as of december31, 2006, approximately
14,180 claimants had entered into tolling agreements.
merck voluntarily withdrew vioxx from the market on
september30, 2004. many states have a two-year statute of
limitations for product liability claims, requiring that claims
must be filed within two years after the plaintiffs learned or
could have learned of their potential cause of action. as a
result, some may view september30, 2006 as a deadline for
filing vioxx cases. it is important to note, however,
that the law regarding statutes of limitations can be complex,
varies from state to state, can be fact-specific, and in some
cases, might be affected by the existence of pending class
actions. for example, some states have three year statutes of
limitations and, in some instances, the statute of limitations
is even longer. merck expects that there will be legal arguments
concerning the proper application of these statutes, and the
decisions will be up to the judges presiding in individual cases
in state and federal proceedings.
the company has previously disclosed the outcomes of several
vioxx product liability lawsuits that were tried prior to
september30, 2006 (see chart below).
in august 2006, in barnett v. merck, a case before judge fallon
in the mdl, a jury in new orleans, louisiana returned a
plaintiff verdict in the second federal vioxx case to go
to trial. the jury awarded $50million in compensatory
damages and $1million in punitive damages. on
august30, 2006, judge fallon overturned as excessive the
damages portion of the verdict and ordered a new trial on
damages. judge fallon has set re-trial for october29, 2007
on the issue of damages. merck has filed motions for a new trial
on all issues and for judgment as a matter of law, both of which
are currently pending before the court. plaintiff has opposed
mercks motion and has asked the judge to reduce the amount
of the award rather than re-try the case.
juries found in favor of merck on all counts in the fourth and
fifth cases to go to trial in the mdl. the jury returned its
verdict for merck in masonv. merck on november8,
2006 and in dedrickv. merck on december13, 2006.
on november22, 2006, judge fallon denied a motion filed in
the mdl to certify a nationwide class of all persons who
allegedly suffered personal injury as a result of taking
vioxx.
on december15, 2006, the jury in albright v. merck, a case
tried in state court in birmingham, alabama, returned a verdict
for merck on all counts.
the company previously disclosed that in april 2006, in
garzav. merck, a jury in rio grande city, texas returned a
verdict in favor of the plaintiff. in september 2006, the texas
state court granted the companys request to investigate
possible jury bias because a juror admitted that he had, prior
to the trial, on several occasions borrowed money from the
plaintiff. on december21, 2006, the court entered judgment
for plaintiff in the amount of $7.75million, plus
interest, reduced from the original award of $32million
because of the texas state cap on punitive damages. the company
is seeking a new trial and will appeal the verdict if the court
does not grant a new trial.
on october31, 2006, in california superior court in los
angeles, a consolidated trial began in the cases appellv.
merck and arrigalev. merck. on january18, 2007,
judge victoria chaney declared a mistrial as to both plaintiffs
after the jury reported that it was deadlocked.
on october5, 2006, in the coordinated proceeding in new
jersey superior court, judge higbee dismissed claims of the
united kingdom plaintiffs. these plaintiffs have appealed.
the first case scheduled for trial in the texas coordinated
proceeding, rigbyv. merck, was scheduled to begin trial on
november7, 2006. the rigby case was voluntarily dismissed
on october23, 2006 when the plaintiff filed a notice of
non-suit with the court.
a consolidated trial, hermans v. merck and humestonv.
merck, began on january17, 2007, in the coordinated
proceeding in new jersey superior court before judge higbee.
humestonv. merck was first tried in 2005, but judge higbee
set aside the november 2005 jury verdict in favor of merck and
ordered a new trial on the
grounds of newly discovered evidence. the hermans/humeston trial
is separated into two phases: a general phase regarding
mercks conduct and a plaintiff-specific phase. there will
be jury questions and a deliberation after phasei
regarding mercks conduct. if the jury answers any of the
questions in the affirmative, the case will move to
phaseii. in phaseii each plaintiff will present his
or her specific case. at the end of phaseii, the jury will
deliberate and will answer questions with respect to each of the
two plaintiffs. the jury will answer separate verdict sheets but
in the course of only one deliberation. if the case moves to a
punitive phase, there will be a single presentation for each
side and one jury deliberation for both plaintiffs.
the first case scheduled for trial in the philadelphia
coordinated proceeding, mccoolv. merck, was scheduled to
begin trial on february26, 2007. the plaintiff voluntarily
dismissed with prejudice her case on january16, 2007.
on september28, 2006, the new jersey superior court,
appellate division, heard argument on plaintiffs appeal of
judge higbees dismissal of the sinclairv. merck
case. this putative class action was originally filed in
december 2004 and sought the creation of a medical monitoring
fund. judge higbee had granted the companys motion to
dismiss in may 2005. on january16, 2007, the appellate
division reversed the decision and remanded the case back to
judge higbee for further factual inquiry. the company has
petitioned the new jersey supreme court for review of the
appellate divisions decision.
to date in the vioxx product liability lawsuits, of the
29 plaintiffs whose claims have been scheduled for trial, the
claims of seven were dismissed, the claims of seven were
withdrawn from the trial calendar by plaintiffs, and juries have
decided in mercks favor nine times and in plaintiffs
favor four times. in addition, in the recent california trial
involving two plaintiffs, the jury could not reach a verdict for
either plaintiff and a mistrial was declared. a new jersey state
judge set aside one of the nine merck verdicts. with respect to
the four plaintiffs verdicts, merck already has filed an
appeal or sought judicial review in each of those cases, and in
one of those four, a federal judge overturned the damage award
shortly after trial. in addition, a consolidated trial with two
plaintiffs is currently ongoing in the coordinated proceeding in
new jersey superior court before judge higbee and another trial,
schwallerv. merck, has commenced in state court in madison
county, illinois.
the following chart sets forth the results of all
u.s.vioxx product liability trials to date.
state or
federal
verdict date
plaintiff
court
result
comments
aug.19, 2005
ernst
texas
verdict for plaintiff
jury awarded plaintiff
$253.4million; the court reduced amount to approximately
$26.1million plus interest. the judgment is now on appeal.
nov.3, 2005
humeston
n.j.
verdict for merck;
then judge overturned the verdict
judge has ordered a new trial,
which is currently ongoing.
feb.17, 2006
plunkett
federal
mistrial after jury deadlocked in
first trial; verdict for merck in retrial
merck prevailed in february 2006
retrial.
plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
april5, 2006
mcdarby
n.j.
verdict for plaintiff
plaintiff was awarded
$13.5million in damages. mercks motion for a new
trial is pending, as is plaintiffs motion for
attorneys fees.
april5, 2006
cona
n.j.
verdict for merck on failure to
warn claim
however, the jury awarded plaintiff
the nominal sum of $135 for his consumer fraud act claim.
mercks motion for a new trial on the consumer fraud act
claim is pending, as is plaintiffs motion for
attorneys fees.
april21, 2006
garza
texas
verdict for plaintiff
judge reduced $32million jury
award to $7.75million plus interest. merck has moved for a
new trial.
july13, 2006
doherty
n.j.
verdict for merck
plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
aug.2, 2006
grossberg
california
verdict for merck
plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
aug.17, 2006
barnett
federal
verdict for plaintiff
plaintiff awarded $51million
in damages. the judge ruled the award was grossly
excessive, and has scheduled a new trial on damages in
october 2007. mercks motion for a new trial on the
remaining issues is pending.
sept.26, 2006
smith
federal
verdict for merck
nov.15, 2006
mason
federal
verdict for merck
dec.13, 2006
dedrick
federal
verdict for merck
plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
dec.15, 2006
albright
alabama
verdict for merck
plaintiff has moved for a new trial.
jan.18, 2007
arrigale/appell
california
mistrial declared after the jury
deadlocked
other
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, on july29, 2005, a new jersey
state trial court certified a nationwide class of third-party
payors (such as unions and health insurance plans) that paid in
whole or in part for the vioxx used by their plan members
or insureds. the named plaintiff in that case seeks recovery of
certain vioxx purchase costs (plus penalties) based on
allegations that the purported class members paid more for
vioxx than they would have had they known of the
products alleged risks. merck believes that the class was
improperly certified. the trial courts ruling is
procedural only; it does not address the merits of
plaintiffs allegations, which the company intends to
defend vigorously. on march31, 2006, the new jersey
superior court, appellate division, affirmed the class
certification order. on july19, 2006, the new jersey
supreme court decided to exercise its discretion to hear the
companys appeal of the appellate divisions decision.
on august24, 2006, the appellate division ordered a stay
of the proceedings in superior court pending a ruling by the
supreme court. oral argument before the new jersey supreme court
is scheduled to take place in march2007.
as previously reported, the company has also been named as a
defendant in separate lawsuits brought by the attorneys general
of alaska, louisiana, mississippi, montana, texas and utah.
these actions allege that the company misrepresented the safety
of vioxx and seek (i)recovery of the cost of
vioxx purchased or reimbursed by the state and its
agencies; (ii)reimbursement of all sums paid by the state
and its agencies for medical services for the treatment of
persons injured by vioxx; (iii)damages under
various common law theories;
and/or
(iv)remedies
under various state statutory theories, including state consumer
fraud and/or
fair business practices or medicaid fraud statutes, including
civil penalties.
shareholder
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the vioxx product
liability lawsuits, the company and various current and former
officers and directors are defendants in various putative class
actions and individual lawsuits under the federal securities
laws and state securities laws (the vioxx
securities lawsuits). all of the vioxx
securities lawsuits pending in federal court have been
transferred by the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation
(the jpml) to the united states district court for
the district of new jersey before district judge stanley r.
chesler for inclusion in a nationwide mdl (the shareholder
mdl). judge chesler has consolidated the vioxx
securities lawsuits for all purposes. plaintiffs request
certification of a class of purchasers of company stock between
may21, 1999 and october29, 2004. the complaint
alleges that the defendants made false and misleading statements
regarding vioxx in violation of sections10(b) and
20(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, and seeks
unspecified compensatory damages and the costs of suit,
including attorneys fees. the complaint also asserts a
claim under section20a of the securities and exchange act
against certain defendants relating to their sales of merck
stock. in addition, the complaint includes allegations under
sections11, 12 and 15 of the securities act of 1933 that
certain defendants made incomplete and misleading statements in
a registration statement and certain prospectuses filed in
connection with the merck stock investment plan, a dividend
reinvestment plan. defendants have filed a motion to dismiss the
complaint. oral argument on the motion to dismiss is scheduled
to take place in march2007.
as previously disclosed, on august15, 2005, a complaint
was filed in oregon state court by the state of oregon through
the oregon state treasurer on behalf of the oregon public
employee retirement fund against the company and certain current
and former officers and directors. the complaint, which was
brought under oregon securities law, alleges that plaintiff has
suffered damages in connection with its purchases of merck
common stock at artificially inflated prices due to the
companys alleged violations of law related to disclosures
about vioxx.the current and former officers
and directors have entered into a tolling agreement and, on
june30, 2006, were dismissed without prejudice from the
case. on july19, 2006, the court denied the companys
motion to dismiss the complaint, but required plaintiff to amend
the complaint. plaintiff filed an amended complaint on
september21, 2006. merck filed a motion to require
plaintiffs to make the complaint more definite and certain,
which was denied by the court. merck filed an answer to the
complaint in january 2007.
as previously disclosed, various shareholder derivative actions
filed in federal court were transferred to the shareholder mdl
and consolidated for all purposes by judge chesler (the
vioxx derivative lawsuits). the consolidated
complaint arose out of substantially the same factual
allegations that are made in the vioxx securities
lawsuits. the vioxx derivative lawsuits, which were
purportedly brought to assert rights of the company, assert
claims against certain members of the board past and present and
certain executive officers for breach of fiduciary duty, waste
of corporate assets, unjust enrichment, abuse of control and
gross mismanagement. on may5, 2006, judge chesler granted
defendants motion to dismiss and denied plaintiffs
request for leave to amend their complaint. plaintiffs
appeal of the district courts decision refusing them leave
to amend the complaint is currently pending before the united
states court of appeals for the third circuit.
as previously disclosed, on october29, 2004, two
individual shareholders made a demand on the board of directors
of the company to take legal action against mr.raymond
gilmartin, former chairman, president and chief executive
officer and other individuals for allegedly causing damage to
the company with respect to the allegedly improper marketing of
vioxx. in july 2006, the board received another
shareholder letter demanding that the board take legal action
against the board and management of merck for allegedly causing
damage to the company relating to the companys allegedly
improper marketing of vioxx. in december 2006, each of
these demands was rejected by the board of directors.
as previously announced, the board of directors appointed a
special committee to review the companys actions prior to
its voluntary withdrawal of vioxx, to act for the board
in responding to shareholder litigation matters related to the
withdrawal of vioxx, and to advise the board with respect
to any action that should be taken as a result of the review. in
december 2004, the special committee retained the honorable john
s. martin,jr. of debevoise& plimpton llp to
conduct an independent investigation of senior managements
conduct
with respect to the cardiovascular safety profile of vioxx
during the period vioxx was developed and marketed.
the review was completed in the third quarter of 2006 and the
full report (including appendices) was made public in september
2006.
in addition, as previously disclosed, various putative class
actions filed in federal court under the employee retirement
income security act (erisa) against the company and
certain current and former officers and directors (the
vioxx erisa lawsuits and, together with the
vioxx securities lawsuits and the vioxx derivative
lawsuits, the vioxx shareholder lawsuits)
have been transferred to the shareholder mdl and consolidated
for all purposes. the consolidated complaint asserts claims on
behalf of certain of the companys current and former
employees who are participants in certain of the companys
retirement plans for breach of fiduciary duty. the lawsuits make
similar allegations to the allegations contained in the vioxx
securities lawsuits. on october7, 2005, defendants
moved to dismiss the erisa complaint. on july11, 2006,
judge chesler granted in part and denied in part
defendants motion to dismiss.
international
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the lawsuits discussed
above, the company has been named as a defendant in litigation
relating to vioxx in various countries (collectively, the
vioxx foreign lawsuits) in europe, as well as
canada, brazil, argentina, australia, turkey, and israel.
additional
lawsuits
based on media reports and other sources, the company
anticipates that additional vioxx product liability
lawsuits, vioxx shareholder lawsuits and vioxx
foreign lawsuits (collectively, the vioxx
lawsuits) will be filed against it
and/or
certain of its current and former officers and directors in the
future.
insurance
as previously disclosed, the company has product liability
insurance for claims brought in the vioxx product
liability lawsuits with stated upper limits of approximately
$630million after deductibles and co-insurance. this
insurance provides coverage for legal defense costs and
potential damage amounts that have been or will be incurred in
connection with the vioxx product liability lawsuits. the
company believes that this insurance coverage extends to
additional vioxx product liability lawsuits that may be
filed in the future. the company has directors and officers
insurance coverage applicable to the vioxx securities
lawsuits and vioxx derivative lawsuits with stated upper
limits of approximately $190million. the company has
fiduciary and other insurance for the vioxx erisa
lawsuits with stated upper limits of approximately
$275million. additional insurance coverage for these
claims may also be available under upper-level excess policies
that provide coverage for a variety of risks. there are disputes
with certain insurers about the availability of some or all of
this insurance coverage and there are likely to be additional
disputes. the companys insurance coverage with respect to
the vioxx lawsuits will not be adequate to cover its
defense costs and any losses.
as previously disclosed, the companys upper level excess
insurers (which provide excess insurance potentially applicable
to all of the vioxx lawsuits) have commenced an
arbitration seeking, among other things, to cancel those
policies, to void all of their obligations under those policies
and to raise other coverage issues with respect to the vioxx
lawsuits. merck intends to contest vigorously the
insurers claims and will attempt to enforce its rights
under applicable insurance policies. the amounts actually
recovered under the policies discussed in this section may be
less than the amounts specified in the preceding paragraph.
investigations
as previously disclosed, in november 2004, the company was
advised by the staff of the sec that it was commencing an
informal inquiry concerning vioxx. on january28,
2005, the company announced that it received notice that the sec
issued a formal notice of investigation. also, the company has
received subpoenas from the u.s.department of justice (the
doj) requesting information related to the
companys research, marketing and selling activities with
respect to vioxx in a federal health care investigation
under criminal statutes. in addition, as previously disclosed,
investigations are being conducted by local authorities in
certain cities in europe in order to determine whether any
criminal charges should be brought concerning vioxx. the
company is cooperating with
these governmental entities in their respective investigations
(the vioxx investigations). the company
cannot predict the outcome of these inquiries; however, they
could result in potential civil
and/or
criminal dispositions.
as previously disclosed, the company has received a number of
civil investigative demands (cid) from a group of
attorneys general from 31states and the district of
columbia who are investigating whether the company violated
state consumer protection laws when marketing vioxx. the
company is cooperating with the attorneys general in responding
to the cids.
in addition, the company received a subpoena in september 2006
from the state of california attorney general seeking documents
and information related to the placement of vioxx on
californias medi-cal formulary. the company is cooperating
with the attorney general in responding to the subpoena.
reserves
the company currently anticipates that a number of vioxx
product liability lawsuits will be tried throughout 2007. a
trial in the oregon securities case is scheduled for 2007, but
the company cannot predict whether this trial will proceed on
schedule or the timing of any of the other vioxx
shareholder lawsuit trials. the company believes that it has
meritorious defenses to the vioxx lawsuits and will
vigorously defend against them. in view of the inherent
difficulty of predicting the outcome of litigation, particularly
where there are many claimants and the claimants seek
indeterminate damages, the company is unable to predict the
outcome of these matters, and at this time cannot reasonably
estimate the possible loss or range of loss with respect to the
vioxx lawsuits. the company has not established any
reserves for any potential liability relating to the vioxx
lawsuits or the vioxx investigations, including for
those cases in which verdicts or judgments have been entered
against the company, and are now in post-verdict proceedings or
on appeal. in each of those cases the company believes it has
strong points to raise on appeal and therefore that unfavorable
outcomes in such cases are not probable. unfavorable outcomes in
the vioxx litigation (as defined below) could have a
material adverse effect on the companys financial
position, liquidity and results of operations.
legal defense costs expected to be incurred in connection with a
loss contingency are accrued when probable and reasonably
estimable. as of december31, 2005, the company had a
reserve of $685million solely for its future legal defense
costs related to the vioxx litigation.
during 2006, the company spent $500million in the
aggregate, including $175million in the fourth quarter, in
legal defense costs worldwide related to (i)the vioxx
product liability lawsuits, (ii)the vioxx
shareholder lawsuits, (iii)the vioxx foreign
lawsuits, and (iv)the vioxx investigations
(collectively, the vioxx litigation). in the
third quarter and fourth quarter of 2006, the company recorded
charges of $598million and $75million, respectively,
to increase the reserve solely for its future legal defense
costs related to the vioxx litigation to
$858million at december31, 2006. in increasing the
reserve, the company considered the same factors that it
considered when it previously established reserves for the
vioxx litigation. management now believes it has a better
estimate of the companys expenses and can reasonably
estimate such costs through 2008. some of the significant
factors considered in the establishment and ongoing review of
the reserve for the vioxx legal defense costs were as
follows: the actual costs incurred by the company; the
development of the companys legal defense strategy and
structure in light of the scope of the vioxx litigation;
the number of cases being brought against the company; the costs
and outcomes of completed trials and the most current
information regarding anticipated timing, progression, and
related costs of pre-trial activities and trials in the vioxx
product liability lawsuits. events such as scheduled trials,
that are expected to occur throughout 2007 and into 2008, and
the inherent inability to predict the ultimate outcomes of such
trials, limit the companys ability to reasonably estimate
its legal costs beyond the end of 2008. the company will
continue to monitor its legal defense costs and review the
adequacy of the associated reserves.
other
product liability litigation
as previously disclosed, the company is a defendant in product
liability lawsuits in the united states involving fosamax
(the fosamax litigation). as of
december31, 2006, 104 cases had been filed against merck
in either federal or state court, including 4 cases which seek
class action certification, as well as damages and medical
monitoring. in these actions, plaintiffs allege, among other
things, that they have suffered osteonecrosis of the jaw,
generally subsequent to invasive dental procedures such as tooth
extraction or dental implants,
and/or
delayed healing, in association with the use of fosamax.
on august16, 2006, the jpml ordered that the fosamax
product liability cases pending in federal courts nationwide
should be transferred and consolidated into one multidistrict
litigation (the fosamax mdl) for coordinated
pre-trial proceedings. the fosamax mdl has been
transferred to judge john keenan in the united states district
court for the southern district of new york. as a result of the
jpml order, over 80 cases are before judge keenan. judge keenan
has issued a case management order setting forth a schedule
governing the proceedings which focuses primarily upon resolving
the class action certification motions in 2007. the company
intends to defend against these lawsuits.
as of december31, 2006, the company established a reserve
of approximately $48million solely for its future legal
defense costs for the fosamax litigation. some of the
significant factors considered in the establishment of the
reserve for the fosamax litigation legal defense costs
were as follows: the actual costs incurred by the company thus
far; the development of the companys legal defense
strategy and structure in light of the creation of the
fosamax mdl; the number of cases being brought against
the company; and the anticipated timing, progression, and
related costs of pre-trial activities in the fosamax
litigation. the company will continue to monitor its legal
defense costs and review the adequacy of the associated
reserves. due to the uncertain nature of litigation, the company
is unable to estimate its costs beyond the end of 2008.
unfavorable outcomes in the fosamax litigation could have
a material adverse effect on the companys financial
position, liquidity and results of operations.
commercial
litigation
beginning in 1993, the company was named in a number of
antitrust suits, certain of which were certified as class
actions, instituted by most of the nations retail
pharmacies and consumers in several states. the company settled
the federal class action, which represented the single largest
group of claims and has settled substantially all of the
remaining cases on satisfactory terms. the few remaining cases
have been inactive for several years. the company has not
engaged in any conspiracy and no admission of wrongdoing was
made or included in any settlement agreements.
as previously disclosed, the company was joined in ongoing
litigation alleging manipulation by pharmaceutical manufacturers
of average wholesale prices (awp), which are
sometimes used in calculations that determine public and private
sector reimbursement levels. in 2002, the jpml ordered the
transfer and consolidation of all pending federal awp cases to
federal court in boston, massachusetts. plaintiffs filed one
consolidated class action complaint, which aggregated the claims
previously filed in various federal district court actions and
also expanded the number of manufacturers to include some which,
like the company, had not been defendants in any prior pending
case. in may 2003, the court granted the companys motion
to dismiss the consolidated class action and dismissed the
company from the class action case. subsequent to the
companys dismissal, the plaintiffs filed an amended
consolidated class action complaint, which did not name the
company as a defendant. the company and many other
pharmaceutical manufacturers are defendants in similar
complaints pending in federal and state court brought
individually by a number of counties in the state of new york.
the company and the other defendants are awaiting the final
ruling on their motion to dismiss in the suffolk county case,
which was the first of the new york county cases to be filed. in
addition, as of december31, 2006, the company was a
defendant in state cases brought by the attorneys general of
kentucky, illinois, alabama, wisconsin, mississippi, arizona,
hawaii and alaska, all of which are being defended.
as previously disclosed, the company has been named as a
defendant in antitrust cases in federal court in minnesota and
in state court in california, each alleging an unlawful
conspiracy among different sets of pharmaceutical manufacturers
to protect high prices in the united states by impeding
importation into the united states of lower-priced
pharmaceuticals from canada. the court dismissed the federal
claims in the minnesota case with prejudice and the plaintiffs
filed a notice of appeal. the federal court of appeals for the
eighth circuit affirmed the dismissal of the federal claims. the
state claims in that action were dismissed without prejudice,
but have not been refiled in any jurisdiction.
in the california antitrust action, the parties engaged in
discovery and the defendant manufacturers filed for summary
judgment. in december 2006, the court granted summary judgment
in favor of merck and the other defendants and dismissed the
case. the plaintiffs have filed a notice of appeal in the
california state appeals court.
as previously disclosed, a suit in federal court in alabama by
two providers of health services to needy patients alleges that
15 pharmaceutical companies overcharged the plaintiffs and a
class of those similarly situated, for pharmaceuticals purchased
by the plaintiffs under the program established by
section340b of the public health service act. the company
and the other defendants filed a motion to dismiss the complaint
on numerous grounds which was recently denied by the court.
after denial of the motion to dismiss, the case was dismissed
voluntarily by the parties.
as previously disclosed, in january 2003, the doj notified the
federal court in new orleans, louisiana that it was not going to
intervene at that time in a pending federal false claims act
case that was filed under seal in december 1999 against the
company. the court issued an order unsealing the complaint,
which was filed by a physician in louisiana, and ordered that
the complaint be served. the complaint, which alleged that the
companys discounting of pepcid in certain louisiana
hospitals led to increases in costs to medicaid, was dismissed.
an amended complaint was filed under seal and the case has been
administratively closed by the court until the seal is lifted.
the state of louisiana has filed its own amended complaint,
incorporating the allegations contained in the sealed amended
complaint. the allegations contained in the sealed amended
complaint are unknown.
in april 2005, the company was named in a qui tam lawsuit under
the nevada false claims act. the suit, in which the nevada
attorney general has intervened, alleges that the company
inappropriately offered nominal pricing and other marketing and
pricing inducements to certain customers and also failed to
comply with its obligations under the medicaid best price scheme
related to such arrangements. in may 2006, the companys
motion to dismiss this action was denied by the district court.
the company is defending against this lawsuit.
governmental
proceedings
as previously disclosed, the company has received a subpoena
from the doj in connection with its investigation of the
companys marketing and selling activities, including
nominal pricing programs and samples. the company has also
reported that it has received a cid from the attorney general of
texas regarding the companys marketing and selling
activities relating to texas. as previously disclosed, the
company received another cid from the attorney general of texas
asking for additional information regarding the companys
marketing and selling activities related to texas, including
with respect to certain of its nominal pricing programs and
samples. in april 2004, the company received a subpoena from the
office of the inspector general for the district of columbia in
connection with an investigation of the companys
interactions with physicians in the district of columbia,
maryland, and virginia. in november 2004, the company received a
letter request from the doj in connection with its investigation
of the companys pricing of pepcid. in september
2005, the company received a subpoena from the illinois attorney
general. the subpoena seeks information related to repackaging
of prescription drugs. there was no activity relating to merck
in the illinois matter in 2006.
as previously disclosed, the company has received a letter from
the doj advising it of the existence of a qui tam complaint
alleging that the company violated certain rules related to its
calculations of best price and other federal pricing benchmark
calculations, certain of which may affect the companys
medicaid rebate obligation. the doj has informed the company
that it does not intend to intervene in this action and has
closed its investigation. the lawsuit continues, however.
the company is cooperating with all of these investigations. the
company cannot predict the outcome of these investigations;
however, it is possible that unfavorable outcomes could have a
material adverse effect on the companys financial
position, liquidity and results of operations. in addition, from
time to time, other federal, state or foreign regulators or
authorities may seek information about practices in the
pharmaceutical industry or the companys business practices
in inquiries other than the investigations discussed in this
section. it is not feasible to predict the outcome of any such
inquiries.
as previously disclosed, on february23, 2004, the italian
antitrust authority (ica) adopted a measure
commencing a formal investigation of merck sharp&
dohme (italia) s.p.a. (msd italy) and the company
under
article14 of the italian competition law and
article82 ec to ascertain whether the company and msd
italy committed an abuse of a dominant position by refusing to
grant to acs dobfar s.p.a. (dobfar), an italian
company, a voluntary license under the companys italian
supplementary protection certificate (spc), pursuant
to domestic legislation passed in 2002, to permit dobfar to
manufacture imipenem and cilastatin (i&c), the
active ingredients in tienam, in italy for sale outside
italy in countries where patent protection had expired or never
existed. a hearing before the ica was held on may2, 2005
and on june17, 2005, the ica found, on a preliminary
basis, that the companys refusal to grant the license was
an abuse of a dominant position, and imposed interim measures
requiring the company to grant a license to manufacture i&c
in italy for stockpiling purposes only, until expiration of the
spc. on november16, 2005, the italian administrative court
denied the companys appeal of the icas order. the
companys spc expired in january 2006. proceedings before
the ica continued on the merits of the article82
investigation and, in an effort to resolve the matter, the
company offered a commitment to the ica pursuant to which the
company would grant non-exclusive licenses under its italian spc
for finasteride with respect to finasteride 5mg for the
treatment of benign prostate hyperplasia. the deadline for the
ica to adopt its final decision as to whether the companys
commitment warrants the closure of the case is march16,
2007.
vaccine
litigation
as previously disclosed, the company is a party in claims
brought under the consumer protection act of 1987 in the united
kingdom, which allege that certain children suffer from a
variety of conditions as a result of being vaccinated with
various bivalent vaccines for measles and rubella
and/or
trivalent vaccines for measles, mumps and rubella, including the
companys m-m-r ii. the conditions include autism,
with or without inflammatory bowel disease, epilepsy,
encephalitis, encephalopathy, guillain-barre syndrome and
transverse myelitis. there are now 6 claimants proceeding or, to
the companys knowledge, intending to proceed against the
company. the company will defend against these lawsuits.
as previously disclosed, the company is also a party to
individual and class action product liability lawsuits and
claims in the united states involving pediatric vaccines (e.g.,
hepatitis b vaccine) that contained thimerosal, a preservative
used in vaccines. merck has not distributed
thimerosal-containing pediatric vaccines in the
unitedstates since the fall of 2001. as of
december31, 2006, there were approximately 250 active
thimerosal related lawsuits with approximately 670 plaintiffs.
other defendants include other vaccine manufacturers who
produced pediatric vaccines containing thimerosal as well as
manufacturers of thimerosal. in these actions, the plaintiffs
allege, among other things, that they have suffered neurological
injuries as a result of exposure to thimerosal from pediatric
vaccines. two cases scheduled for trial in 2006 were
dismissed one, a state court case in ohio
voluntarily dismissed by the plaintiffs, and the second, a
federal district court case in texas in which the court entered
summary judgment in favor of defendants in 2005 and plaintiffs
ultimately voluntarily dismissed their appeal. the company will
defend against these lawsuits; however, it is possible that
unfavorable outcomes could have a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, liquidity and results of
operations.
the company has been successful in having cases of this type
either dismissed or stayed on the ground that the action is
prohibited under the national childhood vaccine injury act (the
vaccine act). the vaccine act prohibits any person
from filing or maintaining a civil action (in state or federal
court) seeking damages against a vaccine manufacturer for
vaccine-related injuries unless a petition is first filed in the
united states court of federal claims (hereinafter the
vaccine court). under the vaccine act, before filing
a civil action against a vaccine manufacturer, the petitioner
must either (a)pursue his or her petition to conclusion in
vaccine court and then timely file an election to proceed with a
civil action in lieu of accepting the vaccine courts
adjudication of the petition or (b)timely exercise a right
to withdraw the petition prior to vaccine court adjudication in
accordance with certain statutorily prescribed time periods. the
company is not a party to vaccine court proceedings because the
petitions are brought against the united states department of
health and human services. the cases with trial dates referred
to in the preceding paragraph as having been dismissed were
brought by plaintiffs who claimed to have made a timely
withdrawal of their vaccine court petitions.
the company is aware that there are approximately 4,700 cases
pending in the vaccine court involving allegations that
thimerosal-containing vaccines
and/or the
m-m-r ii vaccine cause autism spectrum disorders. not all
of the thimerosal-containing vaccines involved in the vaccine
court proceeding are company vaccines. the company is the sole
source of the m-m-rii vaccine domestically. in june
2007, the special masters presiding over
the vaccine court proceedings are scheduled to begin a hearing
in which both petitioners and the government will present
evidence on the issue of whether these vaccines can cause autism
spectrum disorders. that hearing is expected to last a number of
weeks. since it is not a party, the company will not participate
in the proceedings.
patent
litigation
from time to time, generic manufacturers of pharmaceutical
products file abbreviated new drug applications
(andas) with the fda seeking to market generic
forms of the companys products prior to the expiration of
relevant patents owned by the company. generic pharmaceutical
manufacturers have submitted andas to the fda seeking to
market in the united states a generic form of fosamax,
prilosec, nexium, propecia, trusopt and cosopt
prior to the expiration of the companys (and
astrazenecas in the case of prilosec and
nexium) patents concerning these products. the generic
companies andas generally include allegations of
non-infringement, invalidity and unenforceability of the
patents. generic manufacturers have received fda approval to
market a generic form of prilosec. the company has filed
patent infringement suits in federal court against companies
filing andas for generic alendronate (fosamax),
finasteride (propecia), dorzolamide (trusopt) and
dorzolamide/timolol (cosopt), and astrazeneca and the
company have filed patent infringement suits in federal court
against companies filing andas for generic omeprazole
(prilosec) and esomeprazole (nexium). similar
patent challenges exist in certain foreign jurisdictions. the
company intends to vigorously defend its patents, which it
believes are valid, against infringement by generic companies
attempting to market products prior to the expiration dates of
such patents. as with any litigation, there can be no assurance
of the outcomes, which, if adverse, could result in
significantly shortened periods of exclusivity for these
products.
in february 2007, schering plough corporation (schering
plough) received a notice from a generic company
indicating that it had filed an anda for zetia and that
it is challenging the u.s.patents that are listed for
zetia. merck and schering plough market zetia
through a joint venture and they are considering the
appropriate response.
on february22, 2007, the company received a notice from a
generic company indicating that it had filed an anda for
montelukast and that it is challenging the u.s. patent that is
listed for singulair. the company is considering the
appropriate response.
as previously disclosed, on january28, 2005, the
u.s.court of appeals for the federal circuit in
washington,d.c. found the companys patent claims for
once-weekly administration of fosamax to be invalid. the
company exhausted all options to appeal this decision in 2005.
based on the court of appeals decision, fosamax and
fosamax plusd will lose market exclusivity in the
united states in february 2008 and april 2008, respectively, and
the company expects a significant decline in
u.s.fosamax and fosamax plusd sales
after each products respective loss of market exclusivity.
in may 2005, the federal court of canada trial division issued a
decision refusing to bar the approval of generic alendronate on
the ground that mercks patent for weekly alendronate was
likely invalid. this decision cannot be appealed and generic
alendronate was launched in canada in june 2005. in july 2005,
merck was sued in the federal court of canada by apotex seeking
damages for lost sales of generic weekly alendronate due to the
patent proceeding.
as previously disclosed, in september 2004, the company appealed
a decision of the opposition division (the opposition
division) of the european patent office (the
epo) that revoked the companys patent in
europe that covers the once-weekly administration of
alendronate. on march14, 2006, the board of appeal of the
epo upheld the decision of the opposition division. thus,
presently the company is not entitled to market exclusivity for
fosamax in most major european markets after 2007. in
addition, mercks basic patent covering the use of
alendronate has been challenged in several european countries.
the company has received adverse decisions in germany, holland
and the united kingdom. the decision in the united kingdom was
upheld on appeal. the company has appealed the decisions in
germany and holland.
in june 2006, the company filed lawsuits in federal court
against barr laboratories, inc. and teva pharmaceutical
industries ltd. (teva) asserting that their
respective manufacturing processes for making their alendronate
products would infringe one or more process patents of the
company.
on october5, 2004, in an action in australia challenging
the validity of the companys australian patent for the
once-weekly administration of alendronate, the patent was found
to be invalid. that decision was upheld on appeal.
in addition, as previously disclosed, in japan a proceeding has
been filed challenging the validity of the companys
japanese patent for the once-weekly administration of
alendronate.
on january18, 2006, the company sued hi-tech pharmacal
co., inc. (hi-tech) of amityville, new york for
patent infringement in response to hi-techs application to
the fda seeking approval of a generic version of mercks
ophthalmic drugs trusopt and cosopt, which are
used for treating elevated intraocular pressure in people with
ocular hypertension or glaucoma. in the lawsuit, merck sued to
enforce a patent covering an active ingredient dorzolamide,
which is present in both trusopt and cosopt. in
that case, the district court entered judgment in mercks
favor and hi-tech appealed. a hearing of the appeal was
conducted in december 2006 and a decision is pending. merck has
elected not to enforce two u.s.patents listed with the fda
which cover the combination of dorzolamide and timolol, the two
active ingredients in cosopt. this lawsuit automatically
stays fda approval of hi-techs andas for
30months from january 2006 or until an adverse court
decision, whichever may occur earlier. the patent covering
dorzolamide provides exclusivity for trusopt and
cosopt until october 2008 (including six months of
pediatric exclusivity). after such time, the company expects
sales of these products to decline.
in the case of omeprazole, the trial court in the united states
rendered an opinion in october 2002 upholding the validity of
the companys and astrazenecas patents covering the
stabilized formulation of omeprazole and ruling that one
defendants omeprazole product did not infringe those
patents. the other three defendants products were found to
infringe the formulation patents. in december 2003, the
u.s.court of appeals for the federal circuit affirmed the
decision of the trial court. with respect to the companys
patent infringement claims against certain other generic
manufacturers omeprazole products, the trial concluded in
june 2006 and a decision is pending.
the company and astrazeneca received notice in october 2005 that
ranbaxy laboratories limited (ranbaxy) has filed an
anda for esomeprazole magnesium. the anda contains
paragraphiv challenges to patents on nexium. on
november21, 2005, the company and astrazeneca sued ranbaxy
in the united states district court in new jersey. accordingly,
fda approval of ranbaxys anda is stayed for 30months
until april 2008 or until an adverse court decision, if any,
whichever may occur earlier. the company and astrazeneca
received notice in january 2006 that ivax pharmaceuticals, inc.,
subsequently acquired by teva, had filed an anda for
esomeprazole magnesium. the anda contains paragraphiv
challenges to patents on nexium.on
march8, 2006, the company and astrazeneca sued teva in the
united states district court in new jersey. accordingly, fda
approval of tevas anda is stayed for 30months until
september 2008 or until an adverse court decision, if any,
whichever may occur earlier.
in the case of finasteride, an anda has been filed seeking
approval of a generic version of propecia and alleging
invalidity of the companys patents. the company filed a
patent infringement lawsuit in the district court of delaware in
september 2004. in 2006, the company reached a settlement with
the generic company, dr.reddys laboratories
(drl), under which drl may sell a generic 1mg
finasteride product beginning in january 2013.
in europe, the company is aware of various companies seeking
registration for generic losartan (the active ingredient for
cozaar). the company has patent rights to losartan via
license from e.i. du pont de nemours and company (du
pont). the company and du pont have filed patent
infringement proceedings against various companies in portugal,
spain and norway.
other
litigation
on july27, 2005, merck was served with a further
shareholder derivative suit filed in the new jersey superior
court for hunterdon county against the company and certain
current and former officers and directors. this lawsuit seeks to
recover or cancel compensation awarded to the companys
executive officers in 2004, and asserts claims for breach of
fiduciary duty, waste and unjust enrichment. on july21,
2006, the court granted defendants motion to dismiss based
on plaintiffs failure to make pre-suit demand on
mercks board of directors and denied plaintiffs
request for leave to amend. thus, this case has been terminated.
in november 2005, an individual shareholder delivered a letter
to the board alleging that the company had sustained damages
through the companys adoption of its change in control
separation benefits plan (the cic plan) in november
2004. the shareholder made a demand on the board to take legal
action against the boards current or former members for
allegedly causing damage to the company with respect to the
adoption of the cic plan. in response to that demand letter, the
independent members of the board determined at the
november22, 2005 board meeting that the board would take
the shareholders request under consideration and it
remains under consideration.
as previously disclosed, on august20, 2004, the united
states district court for the district of new jersey granted a
motion by the company, medco health solutions, inc. (medco
health) and certain officers and directors to dismiss a
shareholder derivative action involving claims related to the
companys revenue recognition practice for retail
co-payments paid by individuals to whom medco health provides
pharmaceutical benefits as well as other allegations. the
complaint was dismissed with prejudice. plaintiffs appealed the
decision. on december15, 2005, the u.s.court of
appeals for the third circuit upheld most of the district
courts decision dismissing the suit, and sent the issue of
whether the companys board of directors properly refused
the shareholder demand relating to the companys treatment
of retail co-payments back to the district court for
reconsideration under a different legal standard. plaintiffs
moved to remand their action to state court on august18,
2006, and the district court granted that motion on
february1, 2007. the shareholder derivative suit is
currently pending before the superior court of new jersey,
chancery division, hunterdon county.
as previously disclosed, prior to the spin-off of medco health,
the company and medco health agreed to settle, on a class action
basis, a series of lawsuits asserting violations of erisa (the
gruer cases). the company, medco health and certain
plaintiffs counsel filed the settlement agreement with the
federal district court in new york, where cases commenced by a
number of plaintiffs, including participants in a number of
pharmaceutical benefit plans for which medco health is the
pharmacy benefit manager, as well as trustees of such plans,
have been consolidated. medco health and the company agreed to
the proposed settlement in order to avoid the significant cost
and distraction of prolonged litigation. the proposed class
settlement has been agreed to by plaintiffs in five of the cases
filed against medco health and the company. under the proposed
settlement, the company and medco health have agreed to pay a
total of $42.5million, and medco health has agreed to
modify certain business practices or to continue certain
specified business practices for a period of five years. the
financial compensation is intended to benefit members of the
settlement class, which includes erisa plans for which medco
health administered a pharmacy benefit at any time since
december17, 1994. the district court held hearings to hear
objections to the fairness of the proposed settlement and
approved the settlement in 2004, but has not yet determined the
number of class member plans that have properly elected not to
participate in the settlement. the settlement becomes final only
if and when all appeals have been resolved. certain class member
plans have indicated that they will not participate in the
settlement. cases initiated by three such plans and two
individuals remain pending in the southern district of new york.
plaintiffs in these cases have asserted claims based on erisa as
well as other federal and state laws that are the same as or
similar to the claims that had been asserted by settling class
members in the gruer cases. the company and medco health are
named as defendants in these cases.
three notices of appeal were filed and the appellate court heard
oral argument in may 2005. on december8, 2005, the
appellate court issued a decision vacating the district
courts judgment and remanding the cases to the district
court to allow the district court to resolve certain
jurisdictional issues. a hearing was held to address such issues
on february24, 2006. the district court issued a ruling on
august10, 2006 resolving such jurisdictional issues in
favor of the settling plaintiffs. the class members and other
party that had previously appealed the district courts
judgment have renewed their appeals. the renewed appeals are
presently being briefed.
after the spin-off of medco health, medco health assumed
substantially all of the liability exposure for the matters
discussed in the foregoing two paragraphs. these cases are being
defended by medco health.
there are various other legal proceedings, principally product
liability and intellectual property suits involving the company,
which are pending. while it is not feasible to predict the
outcome of such proceedings or the proceedings discussed in this
note, in the opinion of the company, all such proceedings are
either adequately covered by insurance or, if not so covered,
should not ultimately result in any liability that would have a
material
adverse effect on the financial position, liquidity or results
of operations of the company, other than proceedings for which a
separate assessment is provided in this note.
environmental
matters
the company is a party to a number of proceedings brought under
the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and
liability act, commonly known as superfund, and other federal
and state equivalents. these proceedings seek to require the
operators of hazardous waste disposal facilities, transporters
of waste to the sites and generators of hazardous waste disposed
of at the sites to clean up the sites or to reimburse the
government for cleanup costs. the company has been made a party
to these proceedings as an alleged generator of waste disposed
of at the sites. in each case, the government alleges that the
defendants are jointly and severally liable for the cleanup
costs. although joint and several liability is alleged, these
proceedings are frequently resolved so that the allocation of
cleanup costs among the parties more nearly reflects the
relative contributions of the parties to the site situation. the
companys potential liability varies greatly from site to
site. for some sites the potential liability is de minimis
and for others the costs of cleanup have not yet been
determined. while it is not feasible to predict the outcome of
many of these proceedings brought by federal or state agencies
or private litigants, in the opinion of the company, such
proceedings should not ultimately result in any liability which
would have a material adverse effect on the financial position,
results of operations, liquidity or capital resources of the
company. the company has taken an active role in identifying and
providing for these costs and such amounts do not include any
reduction for anticipated recoveries of cleanup costs from
insurers, former site owners or operators or other recalcitrant
potentially responsible parties.
on june13, 2006, potassium thiocyanate was accidentally
discharged from the companys plant in west point,
pennsylvania through the upper gwynedd township authoritys
wastewater treatment plant into the wissahickon creek, causing a
fishkill. federal and state agencies are investigating the
discharge and the company is currently cooperating with the
investigations.
in managements opinion, the liabilities for all
environmental matters that are probable and reasonably estimable
have been accrued and totaled $129.0million and
$100.4million at december31, 2006 and 2005,
respectively. these liabilities are undiscounted, do not
consider potential recoveries from insurers or other parties and
will be paid out over the periods of remediation for the
applicable sites, which are expected to occur primarily over the
next 15years. although it is not possible to predict with
certainty the outcome of these matters, or the ultimate costs of
remediation, management does not believe that any reasonably
possible expenditures that may be incurred in excess of the
liabilities accrued should exceed $62.0million in the
aggregate. management also does not believe that these
expenditures should result in a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, results of operations,
liquidity or capital resources for any year.
12.
preferred
stock of subsidiary companies
in december 2004, the company redeemed variable-rate preferred
units of a subsidiary at $1.5billion of par value plus
accrued dividends. because these preferred securities were held
at the subsidiary level, they were previously included in
minority interests in the consolidated financial statements.
in connection with the 1998 restructuring of ami (see
note9), the company assumed a $2.4billion par value
preferred stock obligation with a dividend rate of 5%per
annum, which is carried by kbi and included in minority
interests. while a small portion of the preferred stock carried
by kbi is convertible into kbi common shares, none of the
preferred securities are convertible into the companys
common shares and, therefore, they are not included as common
shares issuable for purposes of computing earnings per common
share assuming dilution (see note18).
13.
stockholders
equity
other paid-in capital increased by $266.5million in 2006
and $30.2million in 2005, and decreased by
$86.8million in 2004. the changes primarily reflect the
impact of shares issued upon exercise of stock options and
related income tax benefits, as well as the issuance of
restricted shares. in addition, the increase in 2006 reflects
the impact of recognizing share-based compensation expense as a
result of the adoption of fas123r (see note14).
a summary of treasury stock transactions (shares in millions) is
as follows:
shares
cost
shares
cost
shares
cost
balance, january 1
794.3
$
26,984.4
767.6
$
26,191.8
754.5
$
25,617.5
purchases
26.4
1,002.3
33.2
1,015.3
24.9
974.6
issuances(1)
(12.3
)
(419.3
)
(6.5
)
(222.7
)
(11.8
)
(400.3
)
balance, december31
808.4
$
27,567.4
794.3
$
26,984.4
767.6
$
26,191.8
(1)
issued primarily under stock
option plans.
at december31, 2006 and 2005, 10million shares of
preferred stock, without par value, were authorized; none were
issued.
14.
share-based
compensation plans
the company has share-based compensation plans under which
employees, non-employee directors and employees of certain of
the companys equity method investees may be granted
options to purchase shares of company common stock at the fair
market value at the time of grant. in addition to stock options,
the company grants performance share units (psus)
and restricted stock units (rsus) to certain
management level employees. these plans were approved by the
companys shareholders. at december31, 2006,
187.7million shares were authorized for future grants
under the companys share-based compensation plans. the
company settles employee share-based compensation awards
primarily with treasury shares.
employee stock options are granted to purchase shares of company
stock at the fair market value at the time of grant. these
awards generally vest one-third each year over a three-year
period, with a contractual term of 10years. rsus are stock
awards that are granted to employees and entitle the holder to
shares of common stock as the awards vest, as well as
non-forfeitable dividend equivalents. the fair value of the
awards is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the
companys stock price. psus are stock awards where the
ultimate number of shares issued will be contingent on the
companys performance against a pre-set objective or set of
objectives. the fair value of each psu is determined on the date
of grant based on the companys stock price. over the
performance period, the number of shares of stock that are
expected to be issued will be adjusted based on the probability
of achievement of a performance target and final compensation
expense will be recognized based on the ultimate number of
shares issued. the company did not recognize compensation
expense in connection with psus in 2006, 2005 or 2004.
both psu and rsu payouts will be in shares of company stock
after the end of a three-year period, subject to the terms
applicable to such awards.
effective january1, 2006, the company adopted
fas123r. employee share-based compensation expense was
previously recognized using the intrinsic value method which
measures share-based compensation expense as the amount at which
the market price of the stock at the date of grant exceeds the
exercise price. fas123r requires the recognition of the
fair value of share-based compensation in net income, which the
company recognizes on a straight-line basis over the requisite
service period. additionally, the company elected the modified
prospective transition method for adopting fas123r, and
therefore, prior periods were not retrospectively adjusted.
under this method, the provisions for fas123r apply to all
awards granted or modified after january1, 2006. in
addition, the unrecognized expense of awards that have not yet
vested at the date of adoption are recognized in net income in
the relevant period after the date of adoption. also effective
january1, 2006, the company adopted fasb staff position
123r-3, transition election related to accounting for the tax
effects of share-based payment awards, which provides the
company an optional short cut method for calculating the
historical pool of windfall tax benefits upon adopting
fas123r.
the following table provides amounts of share-based compensation
cost recorded in the consolidated statement of income
(substantially all of the 2005 and 2004 amounts were related to
rsus):
years ended
december31
pre-tax share-based compensation
expense
$
312.5
$
48.0
$
25.7
income tax benefits
(98.5
)
(16.8
)
(9.0
)
total share-based compensation
expense, net of tax
$
214.0
$
31.2
$
16.7
as a result of the adoption of fas123r, effective
january1, 2006, the incremental impact on the
companys share-based compensation expense reduced the
companys results of operations as follows:
year ended
december31
income before taxes
$
227.8
net income
$
159.0
earnings per common share assuming
dilution
$
0.07
fas123r requires the company to present pro forma
information for periods prior to the adoption as if the company
had accounted for employee share-based compensation under the
fair value method of that statement. for purposes of pro forma
disclosure, the estimated fair value of awards at the date of
grant, including those granted to retirement-eligible employees,
is amortized to expense over the requisite service period. the
following table illustrates the effect on net income and
earnings per common share if the company had applied the fair
value method for recognizing employee share-based compensation
for the years ended december31, 2005 and 2004:
years ended
december31
net income, as reported
$
4,631.3
$
5,830.1
compensation expense, net of tax:
reported
31.2
16.7
fair value method
(357.1
)
(491.8
)
pro forma net income
$
4,305.4
$
5,355.0
earnings per common share:
basic- as reported
$2.11
$2.63
basic- pro forma
$1.96
$2.41
assuming dilution- as
reported
$2.10
$2.62
assuming dilution- pro forma
$1.96
$2.40
the pro forma amounts and the fair value of each option grant
were estimated on the date of grant using the black-scholes
option pricing model. upon the adoption of fas123r,
compensation expense is being recognized immediately for awards
granted to retirement-eligible employees or over the period from
the grant date to the date retirement eligibility is achieved.
this approach is known as the non-substantive vesting period
approach. if the company had been applying this approach for
stock options granted to retirement-eligible employees, the
effect on pro forma earnings per share assuming dilution for the
years ended december31, 2005 and 2004, as provided in the
above table, would not have been significant.
in 2005 and 2004, pro forma compensation expense was calculated
using the black-scholes model utilizing assumptions based on
historical data, such that expense was determined using separate
expected term assumptions for each vesting tranche. as a result,
pro forma compensation expense for any stock options granted
after january1, 2004 but prior to january1, 2006 was
calculated using the accelerated amortization method prescribed
in fasb interpretation no.28, accounting for stock
appreciation rights and other variable stock option or award
plans. upon adoption of fas123r, effective
january1, 2006, the company recognizes compensation
expense using the straight-line method.
the company continues to use the black-scholes option pricing
model for option grants after adoption of fas123r. in
applying this model, the company uses both historical data and
current market data to estimate the fair value of its options.
the black-scholes model requires several assumptions including
expected term of the options, risk-free rate, volatility, and
dividend yield. the expected term represents the expected amount
of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding,
based on historical and forecasted exercise behavior. the
risk-free rate is based on the rate at grant date of zero-coupon
u.s.treasury notes with a term equal to the expected term
of the option. expected volatility is estimated using a blend of
historical and implied volatility. the historical component is
based on historical monthly price changes. the implied
volatility is obtained from market data on the companys
traded options.
the weighted average fair value of options granted in 2006, 2005
and 2004 was $7.25, $6.66 and $10.50per option,
respectively, and were determined using the following
assumptions:
year ended
december31
expected dividend yield
4.2
%
4.8
%
3.4
%
risk-free interest rate
4.6
%
4.0
%
3.1
%
expected volatility
%
%
%
expected life (years)
5.7
5.7
5.7
summarized information relative to the companys stock
option plans (options in thousands) is as follows:
weighted
weighted
average
aggregate
average
remaining
intrinsic
number
exercise
contractual
value
of options
price
term
($000s)
balance at december31, 2005
250,088.0
$
54.52
granted
33,524.2
36.10
exercised
(12,256.8
)
30.18
forfeited
(16,018.7
)
56.77
outstanding at
december31, 2006
255,336.7
$
53.13
5.11
$
666,620.3
exercisable at
december31, 2006
193,798.7
$
58.33
3.35
$
182,489.1
additional information pertaining to the companys stock
option plans is provided in the table below:
year ended
december31
total intrinsic value of stock
options exercised
$
67.3
$
58.8
$
278.9
fair value of stock options vested
$
857.4
$
949.3
$
900.7
cash received from the exercise of
stock options
$
369.9
$
136.5
$
240.3
a summary of the companys nonvested rsus and psus (shares
in thousands) at december31, 2006, is as follows:
rsus
psus
weighted
weighted
average
average
number
grant date
number
grant date
of shares
fair value
of shares
fair value
nonvested at december31, 2005
4,765.1
$
35.93
1,022.2
$
39.73
granted
1,583.9
35.44
523.3
35.14
vested
(76.7
)
34.68
-
-
forfeited
(271.7
)
35.19
(168.7
)
34.75
nonvested at december31,
6,000.6
$
35.85
1,376.8
$
38.59
at december31, 2006, there was $273.8million of
total pre-tax unrecognized compensation expense related to
nonvested stock options, rsu and psu awards which will be
recognized over a weighted average period of 2.0years. for
segment reporting, share-based compensation is recorded in
unallocated expense.
15.
pension
and other postretirement benefit plans
the company has defined benefit pension plans covering eligible
employees in the united states and in certain of its
international subsidiaries. pension benefits in the united
states are based on a formula that considers final average pay
and years of credited service. in addition, the company provides
medical, dental and life insurance benefits, principally to its
eligible u.s.retirees and similar benefits to their
dependents, through its other postretirement benefit plans. the
company uses a december31 measurement date for
substantially all of its pension plans and for its other
postretirement benefit plans.
the net cost for the companys pension and other
postretirement benefit plans consisted of the following
components:
pension benefits
other postretirement benefits
years ended
december31
service cost
$
363.7
$
338.8
$
307.7
$
91.3
$
87.9
$
86.0
interest cost
341.3
310.6
286.0
100.1
106.0
105.7
expected return on plan assets
(436.8
)
(400.7
)
(367.7
)
(112.6
)
(103.0
)
(89.4
)
net amortization
169.4
156.1
130.0
1.9
22.0
31.0
termination benefits
29.7
32.0
18.4
3.6
6.5
3.1
curtailments
-
9.1
-
(2.6
)
0.7
(12.3
)
settlements
14.7
(4.2
)
23.0
-
-
-
net pension and postretirement cost
$
482.0
$
441.7
$
397.4
$
81.7
$
120.1
$
124.1
the net pension cost attributable to u.s.plans included in
the above table was $327.2million in 2006,
$295.3million in 2005 and $283.0million in 2004.
the cost of health care and life insurance benefits for active
employees was $311.6million in 2006, $324.6million
in 2005 and $295.3million in 2004.
in connection with the companys restructuring actions (see
note4), merck recorded termination charges in 2006, 2005
and 2004 on its pension and other postretirement benefit plans
related to expanded eligibility for certain employees exiting
the company. also, in connection with these restructuring
activities, the company recorded curtailment losses in 2005 on
its pension and other postretirement benefit plans.
in 2006 and 2004, amendments that changed participant
contributions and the service recognized for eligibility for
other postretirement benefit plans generated curtailment gains.
in addition, the company recorded settlement losses in 2006 and
2004 and a settlement gain in 2005 on certain of its domestic
pension plans resulting from employees electing to receive their
pension benefits as lump sum payments.
effective december31, 2006, the company adopted fasb
statement no.158, employers accounting for
defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an
amendment of fasb statements no.87, 106 and 132r
(fas158), except for the requirement to
measure plan assets and benefit obligations as of the
companys fiscal year end, which is effective as of
december31, 2008. fas158 required the company to
fully recognize the funded status of its benefit plans. each
overfunded plan is recognized as an asset and each underfunded
plan is recognized as a liability. previously unrecognized net
losses and unrecognized plan changes are recognized as a
component of aoci at december31, 2006 (see note19).
the effects of applying fas158 at december31, 2006
were as follows:
before
after
application of
fas158
application of
fas158
adjustments
fas158
prepaid expenses and taxes
$
1,417.4
$
15.6
$
1,433.0
other assets
7,193.2
(1,211.4
)
5,981.8
accrued and other current
liabilities
(6,654.4
)
1.1
(6,653.3
)
deferred income taxes and
noncurrent liabilities
(6,309.4
)
(20.9
)
(6,330.3
)
accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss)
(51.3
)
1,215.6
1,164.3
summarized information about the changes in plan assets and
benefit obligation, the funded status and the amounts recorded
at december31, 2006 and 2005 is as follows:
pension benefits
other postretirement benefits
fair value of plan assets at
january 1
$
6,070.6
$
5,480.9
$
1,277.4
$
1,165.3
actual return on plan assets
955.7
391.6
209.9
101.9
company contributions
494.4
497.7
36.5
46.3
benefits paid from plan assets
(468.8
)
(306.2
)
(39.6
)
(36.1
)
other
4.8
6.6
-
-
fair value of plan assets at
december31
$
7,056.7
$
6,070.6
$
1,484.2
$
1,277.4
benefit obligation at january 1
$
6,523.5
$
5,879.5
$
1,816.6
$
1,892.4
service cost
363.7
338.8
91.3
87.9
interest cost
341.3
310.6
100.1
106.0
actuarial losses (gains)
150.7
286.3
(16.0
)
(29.3
)
benefits paid
(502.1
)
(329.1
)
(62.0
)
(88.5
)
plan amendments
11.3
18.2
(111.8
)
(159.1
)
curtailments
(22.7
)
(12.2
)
-
0.7
termination benefits
29.7
32.0
3.6
6.5
other
31.4
(0.6
)
-
-
benefit obligation at
december31
$
6,926.8
$
6,523.5
$
1,821.8
$
1,816.6
funded status at december31
$
129.9
$
(452.9
)
$
(337.6
)
$
(539.2
)
unrecognized net loss
$
-
$
2,300.3
$
-
$
682.7
unrecognized plan changes
-
85.4
-
(338.9
)
net amount recorded
$
129.9
$
1,932.8
$
(337.6
)
$
(195.4
)
recognized as:
other assets
$
915.7
$
2,347.4
$
376.5
$
-
accrued and other current
liabilities
(20.0
)
(8.0
)
(24.6
)
(24.9
)
deferred income taxes and
noncurrent liabilities
(765.8
)
(439.3
)
(689.5
)
(170.5
)
accumulated other comprehensive
loss
-
32.7
-
-
the fair value of u.s.pension plan assets included in the
preceding table was $4.4billion in 2006 and
$3.8billion in 2005. the pension benefit obligation of
u.s.plans included in this table was $4.2billion in
2006 and $4.1billion in 2005.
the weighted average asset allocations of the investment
portfolio for the pension and other postretirement benefit plans
at december31 are as follows:
pension benefits
other postretirement benefits
u.s.equities
%
%
%
%
international equities
%
%
%
%
fixed-income investments
%
%
%
%
real estate and other investments
%
%
%
%
cash and cash equivalents
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
the target investment portfolios for the companys pension
plans are determined by country based on the nature of the
liabilities and considering the demographic composition of the
plan participants (average age, years of service and active
versus retiree status) and in accordance with local regulations.
the weighted average target allocation was 38% in
u.s.equities, 34% in international equities, 23% in
fixed-income investments, 4% in real estate and other
investments, and 1% in cash and cash equivalents. other
investments include insurance contracts for certain
international pension plans.
the target investment portfolio for the companys other
postretirement benefit plans is allocated 45% to 60% in
u.s.equities, 20% to 30% in international equities, 15% to
20% in fixed-income investments, and up to 8% in cash and other
investments. the portfolios asset allocation is consistent
with the long-term nature of the plans benefit obligation,
and is well diversified among the asset classes in which the
portfolio invests.
contributions to the pension plans and other postretirement
benefit plans during 2007 are expected to be $115.0million
and $81.0million, respectively.
expected benefit payments are as follows:
other
pension
postretirement
benefits
benefits
$
239.4
$
76.4
261.3
81.8
280.6
88.1
300.7
94.6
336.0
101.3
2012 - 2016
2,185.6
611.5
expected benefit payments are based on the same assumptions used
to measure the benefit obligations and include estimated future
employee service.
at december31, 2006 and 2005, the accumulated benefit
obligation was $5.4billion and $5.0billion,
respectively, for all pension plans and $3.2billion and
$3.1billion, respectively, for u.s.pension plans.
the company recorded a minimum pension liability, representing
the extent to which the accumulated benefit obligation exceeded
plan assets for certain of the companys pension plans, of
$29.9million prior to the adoption of fas158 at
december31, 2006, and had a minimum pension liability of
$34.5million at december31, 2005.
for pension plans with benefit obligations in excess of plan
assets at december31, 2006 and 2005, the fair value of
plan assets was $785.3million and $695.3million,
respectively, and the benefit obligation was $1.6billion
and $1.5billion, respectively. for those plans with
accumulated benefit obligations in excess of plan assets at
december31, 2006 and 2005, the fair value of plan assets
was $187.1million and $144.8million, respectively,
and the accumulated benefit obligation was $535.2million
and $456.5million, respectively.
effective with the adoption of fas158, net loss amounts,
which reflect experience differentials primarily relating to
differences between expected and actual returns on plan assets
as well as the effects of changes in actuarial assumptions, are
recorded as a component of aoci. net loss amounts in excess of
certain thresholds are amortized into net pension and other
postretirement benefit cost over the average remaining service
life of employees. the estimated net loss and prior service cost
(credit) amounts that will be amortized from aoci into net
pension and postretirement benefit cost during 2007 are
$123.1million and $11.2million, respectively, for
pension plans and are $25.4million and
$(43.4)million, respectively, for other postretirement
benefit plans.
the company reassesses its benefit plan assumptions on a regular
basis. the weighted average assumptions used in determining
pension plan and u.s.pension and other postretirement
benefit plan information are as follows:
u.s.pension and other
postretirement
pension plans
benefit plans
december31
net
cost
discount rate
5.15
%
5.40
%
5.65
%
5.75
%
6.00
%(1)
6.25
%
expected rate of return on plan
assets
7.65
%
7.65
%
7.70
%
8.75
%
8.75
%
8.75
%
salary growth rate
4.20
%
4.10
%
4.10
%
4.50
%
4.50
%
4.50
%
benefit
obligation
discount rate
5.35
%
5.15
%
5.40
%
6.00
%
5.75
%
6.00
%
salary growth rate
4.20
%
4.20
%
4.10
%
4.50
%
4.50
%
4.50
%
(1)
5.75% used for other
postretirement benefit plans.
the expected rate of return for both the pension and other
postretirement benefit plans represents the average rate of
return to be earned on plan assets over the period the benefits
included in the benefit obligation are to be paid and is
determined on a country basis. in developing the expected rate
of return within each country, the long-term historical returns
data is considered as well as actual returns on the plan assets
and other capital markets experience. using this reference
information, the long-term return expectations for each asset
category and a weighted average expected return for each
countrys target portfolio is developed, according to the
allocation among those investment categories. the expected
portfolio performance reflects the contribution of active
management as appropriate. for 2007, the companys expected
rate of return of 8.75% will remain unchanged from 2006 for its
u.s.pension and other postretirement benefit plans.
the health care cost trend rate assumptions for other
postretirement benefit plans are as follows:
december31
health care cost trend rate
assumed for next year
9.0
%
9.0
%
rate to which the cost trend rate
is assumed to decline
5.0
%
5.0
%
year that the trend rate reaches
the ultimate trend rate
a one percentage point change in the health care cost trend rate
would have had the following effects:
one percentage point
increase
decrease
effect on total service and
interest cost components
$
35.5
$
(28.2
)
effect on benefit obligation
$
272.5
$
(222.8
)
16.
other
(income) expense, net
years ended
december31
interest income
$
(764.3
)
$
(480.9
)
$
(300.1
)
interest expense
375.1
385.5
293.7
exchange gains
(25.0
)
(16.1
)
(18.4
)
minority interests
120.5
121.8
154.2
other, net
(89.0
)
(120.5
)
(473.4
)
$
(382.7
)
$
(110.2
)
$
(344.0
)
the increase in interest income reflects interest income
generated from the companys investment portfolio derived
from higher interest rates and higher average investment
portfolio balances. interest paid was $387.5million in
2006, $354.1million in 2005 and $284.6million in
2004.
the reduced minority interest in 2005 is attributable to the
redemption of subsidiary variable-rate preferred units (see
note12). other, net in 2004 primarily reflects a
$176.8million gain from the sale of the companys 50%
equity stake in its european joint venture with
johnson& johnson, as well as realized gains on the
companys investment portfolio.
17.
taxes on
income
a reconciliation between the companys effective tax rate
and the u.s.statutory rate is as follows:
tax rate
amount
u.s.statutory rate applied
to income before taxes
$
2,177.5
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
differential arising from:
foreign earnings
(1,024.1
)
(16.5
)
(12.8
)
(10.0
)
tax exemption for puerto rico
operations
(87.6
)
(1.4
)
(1.3
)
(1.6
)
acquired research
266.9
4.3
-
0.5
state taxes
129.6
2.1
2.5
1.3
ajca
-
-
10.4
-
other
325.3
5.2
3.3
1.9
$
1,787.6
28.7
%
37.1
%
27.1
%
other includes the tax effect of minority interests, contingency
reserves, research credits, export incentives and miscellaneous
items. domestic companies contributed approximately 34% in 2006,
43% in 2005 and 36% in 2004 to consolidated income before taxes.
taxes on income consisted of:
years ended
december31
current provision
federal
$
1,618.4
$
1,688.1
$
1,429.1
foreign
458.3
739.6
530.9
state
241.1
295.9
163.8
2,317.8
2,723.6
2,123.8
deferred provision
federal
(374.1
)
97.0
95.6
foreign
(130.3
)
(134.0
)
(32.3
)
state
(25.8
)
46.0
(14.4
)
(530.2
)
9.0
48.9
$
1,787.6
$
2,732.6
$
2,172.7
deferred income taxes at december31 consisted of:
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
other intangibles
$
27.3
$
344.1
$
36.0
$
158.2
inventory related
455.2
177.7
628.1
266.9
accelerated depreciation
-
1,262.2
-
1,539.1
advance payment
338.6
-
338.6
-
equity investments
142.4
863.8
104.5
676.1
pensions and opeb
281.9
188.9
151.3
789.9
compensation related
249.1
-
151.9
-
vioxx
legal defense costs
reserve
306.8
-
241.1
-
net operating losses
448.4
-
314.9
-
other
1,404.0
269.2
1,208.9
426.3
subtotal
3,653.7
3,105.9
3,175.3
3,856.5
valuation allowance
(101.8
)
-
(17.6
)
-
total deferred taxes
$
3,551.9
$
3,105.9
$
3,157.7
$
3,856.5
net deferred income taxes
$
446.0
$
698.8
recognized as:
prepaid expenses and taxes
$
1,177.7
$
662.2
other assets
183.7
68.5
income taxes payable
$
62.8
$
159.7
deferred income taxes and
noncurrent liabilities
852.6
1,269.8
the company has net operating loss (nol)
carryforwards in a number of jurisdictions, the most significant
of which is the united kingdom with nol carryforwards of
$182.8million which have no expiration date. the valuation
allowance in both years primarily relates to certain canadian
nol carryforwards resulting from a legal entity reorganization.
income taxes paid in 2006, 2005 and 2004 were $2.4billion,
$1.7billion and $1.9billion, respectively. stock
option exercises did not have a significant impact on taxes paid
in 2006 or 2005. stock option exercises reduced income taxes
paid in 2004 by $121.7million.
as previously disclosed, the internal revenue service
(irs) has been examining the companys tax
returns for the years 1993 to 2001 and had issued notices of
deficiency with respect to a partnership transaction entered
into in 1993, and two minority interest equity financings
entered into in 1995 and 2000, respectively. the irs has
recently concluded its examination of the years
1993-2001
and will issue a final revenue agents report in the first
quarter. on february13, 2007, the company entered into
closing agreements with the irs covering several specific items,
including the 1993 partnership transaction and the 1995 and 2000
minority interest equity financings. under the terms of the
closing agreements, the company expects to make a payment of
approximately $2.85billion in the first quarter of 2007.
this payment will be offset during 2007 by (i)a tax refund
of $150million for amounts previously paid related to
these matters and (ii)a $400million federal tax
benefit related to interest included in the payment, resulting
in a net cash cost to the company of approximately
$2.3billion. the company has previously established
reserves for these matters and while the conclusion of the irs
examination, including the closing agreements, does not have a
material effect on the companys results of operations,
financial position or liquidity, it will have a material adverse
effect on the companys cash flow for the first quarter of
2007 when the payment is made. the impact for years subsequent
to 2001 of the partnership transaction and the minority interest
equity financings is included in the closing agreements although
those years remain open in all other respects.
as previously disclosed, mercks canadian tax returns for
the years 1998 through 2004 are being examined by the canada
revenue agency (cra). on october10, 2006, cra
issued the company a notice of reassessment containing
adjustments related to certain intercompany pricing matters
which result in additional tax due of approximately
$1.4billion (u.s.dollars) plus interest of
$360million (u.s.dollars). the company disagrees
with the positions taken by cra and believes they are without
merit. the company intends to contest the assessment through the
cra appeals process and the courts if necessary. in connection
with the appeals process, in the notice of reassessment, the
company is required to post a deposit of up to one half of the
tax and interest assessed. during january 2007, the company
pledged collateral consisting of cash and cash equivalents of
$802million to a financial institution which provided a
letter of guarantee to the cra. management believes that
resolution of these matters will not have a material adverse
effect on the companys financial position or liquidity.
however, an unfavorable resolution could have a material adverse
effect on the companys results of operations or cash flows
in the quarter in which an adjustment is recorded or the tax is
due.
as previously disclosed, in october 2004, the ajca was signed
into law. the ajca created temporary incentives for
u.s.multinationals to repatriate accumulated income earned
outside the united states as of december31, 2002. in
accordance with the ajca, the company repatriated
$15.9billion during 2005. the company recorded an income
tax charge of $766.5million in taxes on income in 2005
related to this repatriation, $185million of which was
paid in 2005 and the remainder was paid in the first quarter of
2006. this charge was partially offset by a $100million
benefit associated with a decision to implement certain tax
planning strategies. the company has not changed its intention
to indefinitely reinvest accumulated earnings earned subsequent
to december31, 2002. at december31, 2006, foreign
earnings of $12.5billion have been retained indefinitely
by subsidiary companies for reinvestment. no provision will be
made for income taxes that would be payable upon the
distributions of such earnings and it is not practicable to
determine the amount of the related unrecognized deferred income
tax liability. in addition, the company has subsidiaries
operating in puerto rico and singapore under tax incentive
grants that expire in 2015 and 2026, respectively.
18.
earnings
per share
the weighted average common shares used in the computations of
basic earnings per common share and earnings per common share
assuming dilution (shares in millions) are as follows:
years ended
december31
average common shares outstanding
2,177.6
2,197.0
2,219.0
common shares
issuable(1)
10.1
3.4
7.4
average common shares outstanding
assuming dilution
2,187.7
2,200.4
2,226.4
(1)
issuable primarily under
share-based compensation plans.
in 2006, 2005 and 2004, 222.5million, 242.4million
and 233.1million common shares issuable under the
companys share-based compensation plans were excluded from
the computation of earnings per common share assuming dilution
because the effect would have been antidilutive.
19.
comprehensive
income
the components of other comprehensive income (loss) are as
follows:
pretax(1)
tax
after tax
year ended december31,
net unrealized loss on
derivatives
$
(111.2
)
$
45.2
$
(66.0
)
net loss realization
25.5
(10.4
)
15.1
derivatives
(85.7
)
34.8
(50.9
)
net unrealized gain on
investments
33.9
(7.8
)
26.1
net loss realization
0.2
(0.2
)
-
investments
34.1
(8.0
)
26.1
minimum pension
liability
34.8
(12.3
)
22.5
cumulative translation
adjustment related
to equity investees
29.0
(10.1
)
18.9
$
12.2
$
4.4
$
16.6
year ended december31,
net unrealized gain on derivatives
$
93.6
$
(38.3
)
$
55.3
net loss realization
44.0
(18.0
)
26.0
derivatives
137.6
(56.3
)
81.3
net unrealized loss on investments
(23.5
)
1.6
(21.9
)
net loss realization
71.1
1.1
72.2
investments
47.6
2.7
50.3
minimum pension liability
(11.9
)
4.9
(7.0
)
cumulative translation adjustment
related to
equity investees
(40.6
)
14.2
(26.4
)
$
132.7
$
(34.5
)
$
98.2
pretax(1)
tax
after tax
year ended december31,
net unrealized loss on derivatives
$
(117.8
)
$
48.2
$
(69.6
)
net loss realization
64.2
(26.3
)
37.9
derivatives
(53.6
)
21.9
(31.7
)
net unrealized loss on investments
(38.4
)
(9.6
)
(48.0
)
net income realization
(89.7
)
36.8
(52.9
)
investments
(128.1
)
27.2
(100.9
)
minimum pension liability
(7.2
)
2.3
(4.9
)
cumulative translation adjustment
related to
equity investees
40.2
(14.1
)
26.1
$
(148.7
)
$
37.3
$
(111.4
)
(1)
net of applicable minority
interest.
the components of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
are as follows:
december31
net unrealized (loss) gain on
derivatives
$
(35.3
)
$
15.6
net unrealized gain on investments
85.6
59.5
minimum pension liability
-
(22.5
)
pension plan net loss
(1,103.7
)
-
other postretirement benefit plan
net loss
(315.1
)
-
pension plan changes
(57.8
)
-
other postretirement benefit plan
changes
243.4
-
cumulative translation adjustment
related to
equity investees
18.6
(0.3
)
$
(1,164.3
)
$
52.3
at december31, 2006, $21.8million of the net
unrealized loss on derivatives is associated with options
maturing in the next 12months, which hedge anticipated
foreign currency denominated sales over that same period.
20.
segment
reporting
the companys operations are principally managed on a
products basis and are comprised of two reportable segments: the
pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines segment. during the
fourth quarter of 2006, the vaccines segment, previously
included in all other, met the reportable segment criteria
pursuant to fasb statement no.131, disclosures about
segments of an enterprise and related information. all prior
periods have been recast to reflect vaccines as a reportable
segment.
the pharmaceutical segment includes human health pharmaceutical
products marketed either directly or through joint ventures.
these products consist of therapeutic and preventive agents,
sold by prescription, for the treatment of human disorders.
merck sells these human health pharmaceutical products primarily
to drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals, government
agencies and managed health care providers such as health
maintenance organizations and other institutions. the vaccines
segment includes human health vaccine products marketed either
directly or through a joint venture. these products consist of
preventative pediatric, adolescent and adult vaccines, primarily
administered at physician offices. merck sells these human
health vaccines primarily to physicians, wholesalers, physician
distributors and government entities. the vaccines segment
includes the vast majority of the companys vaccine sales,
but excludes certain sales of vaccines by
non-u.s.subsidiaries
managed
by and included in the pharmaceutical segment. a large component
of the pediatric and adolescent vaccines is funded by the
u.s.government through the u.s.centers for disease
control and prevention vaccines for children program.
all other includes other non-reportable human and animal health
segments. the accounting policies for the segments described
above are the same as those described in note2. revenues
and profits for these segments are as follows:
pharmaceutical
vaccines(1)
all other
total
year ended december31,
segment revenues
$
20,374.8
$
1,705.5
$
162.1
$
22,242.4
segment profits
13,649.4
892.8
380.7
14,922.9
included in segment
profits:
equity income from
affiliates
1,673.1
72.4
315.2
2,060.7
depreciation and
amortization
(153.0
)
(5.0
)
-
(158.0
)
year ended december31,
segment revenues
$
20,678.8
$
984.2
$
161.8
$
21,824.8
segment profits
13,157.9
767.0
355.5
14,280.4
included in segment profits:
equity income from affiliates
1,006.5
108.9
290.1
1,405.5
depreciation and amortization
(148.8
)
(4.2
)
-
(153.0
)
year ended december31,
segment revenues
$
21,591.0
$
972.8
$
185.1
$
22,748.9
segment profits
13,560.3
881.4
278.2
14,719.9
included in segment profits:
equity income from affiliates
512.8
111.3
196.4
820.5
depreciation and amortization
(151.8
)
(4.3
)
-
(156.1
)
(1)
in accordance with segment
reporting requirements, vaccines segment revenues exclude
$153.9million, $119.1million and $97.5million
in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively, of vaccine sales by
certain
non-u.s.subsidiaries
managed by and included in the pharmaceutical segment.
segment profits are comprised of segment revenues less certain
elements of materials and production costs and operating
expenses, including components of equity income (loss) from
affiliates and depreciation and amortization expenses. for
internal management reporting presented to the chief operating
decision maker, the company does not allocate the vast majority
of indirect production costs, research and development expenses
and general and administrative expenses, as well as the cost of
financing these activities. separate divisions maintain
responsibility for monitoring and managing these costs,
including depreciation related to fixed assets utilized by these
divisions and, therefore, they are not included in segment
profits.
a reconciliation of total segment revenues to consolidated sales
is as follows:
years ended
december31
segment revenues
$
22,242.4
$
21,824.8
$
22,748.9
other revenues
393.6
187.1
223.9
$
22,636.0
$
22,011.9
$
22,972.8
other revenues are primarily comprised of miscellaneous
corporate revenues, sales related to divested products or
businesses and other supply sales not included in segment
results.
sales(1)of
the companys products were as follows:
years ended
december31
singulair
$
3,579.0
$
2,975.6
$
2,622.0
cozaar/hyzaar
3,163.1
3,037.2
2,823.7
fosamax
3,134.4
3,191.2
3,159.7
zocor
2,802.7
4,381.7
5,196.5
primaxin
704.8
739.6
640.6
cosopt/trusopt
697.1
617.2
558.8
proscar
618.5
741.4
733.1
vasotec/vaseretic
547.2
623.1
719.2
cancidas
529.8
570.0
430.0
maxalt
406.4
348.4
309.9
propecia
351.8
291.9
270.2
vioxx
-
-
1,489.3
vaccines/biologicals(2)
1,859.4
1,103.3
1,070.3
other
4,241.8
3,391.3
2,949.5
$
22,636.0
$
22,011.9
$
22,972.8
(1)
presented net of discounts and
returns.
(2)
these amounts do not reflect
sales of vaccines sold in most major european markets through
the companys joint venture, sanofi pasteur msd, the
results of which are reflected in equity income from
affiliates.
other primarily includes sales of other human pharmaceuticals,
pharmaceutical and animal health supply sales to the
companys joint ventures and revenue from the
companys relationship with azlp, primarily relating to
sales of nexium and prilosec. revenue from azlp
was $1.8billion, $1.7billion and $1.5billion
in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
consolidated revenues by geographic area where derived are as
follows:
years ended
december31
united states
$
13,776.8
$
12,766.6
$
13,506.2
europe, middle east and africa
4,977.1
5,203.5
5,440.8
japan
1,479.0
1,637.9
1,668.2
other
2,403.1
2,403.9
2,357.6
$
22,636.0
$
22,011.9
$
22,972.8
a reconciliation of total segment profits to consolidated income
before taxes is as follows:
years ended
december31
segment profits
$
14,922.9
$
14,280.4
$
14,719.9
other profits
256.7
175.3
24.6
adjustments
516.3
615.3
481.3
unallocated:
interest income
764.3
480.9
300.1
interest expense
(375.1
)
(385.5
)
(293.7
)
equity income from affiliates
233.7
311.6
187.7
depreciation and amortization
(2,110.4
)
(1,555.1
)
(1,294.6
)
research and development
(4,782.9
)
(3,848.0
)
(4,010.2
)
other expenses, net
(3,204.1
)
(2,711.0
)
(2,112.3
)
$
6,221.4
$
7,363.9
$
8,002.8
other profits are primarily comprised of miscellaneous corporate
profits as well as operating profits related to divested
products or businesses and other supply sales. adjustments
represent the elimination of the effect of double counting
certain items of income and expense. equity income from
affiliates includes taxes paid at the joint venture level and a
portion of equity income that is not reported in segment
profits. other expenses, net, include expenses from corporate
and manufacturing cost centers and other miscellaneous income
(expense), net.
long-lived
assets(1)by
geographic area where located is as follows:
years ended
december31
united states
$
11,542.7
$
11,525.6
$
11,894.5
europe, middle east and africa
1,730.7
1,991.2
2,043.4
japan
942.4
1,074.7
1,127.1
other
1,353.8
1,411.1
1,413.6
$
15,569.6
$
16,002.6
$
16,478.6
(1)
long-lived assets are comprised
of property, plant and equipment, net; goodwill and intangible
assets, net.
the company does not disaggregate assets on a products and
services basis for internal management reporting and, therefore,
such information is not presented.
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
to the stockholders and the
board of directors of merck& co., inc.:
we have completed integrated audits of merck& co.,
inc.s consolidated financial statements and of its
internal control over financial reporting as of
december31, 2006, in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states). our
opinions, based on our audits, are presented below.
consolidated financial statements
in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and
the related consolidated statements of income, of retained
earnings, of comprehensive income and of cash flows present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
merck& co., inc. and its subsidiaries at
december31, 2006 and december31, 2005, and the
results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the
three years in the period ended december31, 2006 in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
united states of america. these financial statements are the
responsibility of the companys management. our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements based on our audits. we conducted our audits of these
statements in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states). those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
free of material misstatement. an audit of financial statements
includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing
the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
as discussed in note14 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company changed the manner in which it accounts
for share-based compensation in 2006.
as discussed in note15 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company changed the manner in which it accounts
for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans
effective december31, 2006.
internal control over financial reporting
also, in our opinion, managements assessment, included in
the accompanying managements report on internal control
over financial reporting, that the company maintained effective
internal control over financial reporting as of
december31, 2006 based on criteria established in
internal control integrated framework issued
by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission (coso), is fairly stated, in all material respects,
based on those criteria. furthermore, in our opinion, the
company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal
control over financial reporting as of december31, 2006,
based on criteria established in internal control
integrated framework issued by the coso. the companys
management is responsible for maintaining effective internal
control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. our
responsibility is to express opinions on managements
assessment and on the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. we
conducted our audit of internal control over financial reporting
in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether effective internal control over
financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. an
audit of internal control over financial reporting includes
obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial
reporting, evaluating managements assessment, testing and
evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal
control, and performing such other procedures as we consider
necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit
provides a reasonable basis for our opinions.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts
and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of
the company; and (iii)provide reasonable assurance
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets
that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
florham park, new jersey
february27, 2007
(b)
supplementary
data
selected quarterly financial data for 2006 and 2005 are
contained in the condensed interim financial data table below.
condensed
interim financial data (unaudited)
($ in millions except per share
amounts)
4thq(1),(2),(3)
3rdq(2)
2ndq(1),(3)
1stq
2006(4),(5)
sales
$
6,044.2
$
5,410.4
$
5,771.7
$
5,409.8
materials and production
costs
1,669.1
1,544.1
1,445.2
1,342.7
marketing and administrative
expenses
2,345.8
2,370.6
1,734.0
1,715.0
research and development
expenses
1,722.9
945.4
1,172.5
942.0
restructuring costs
55.8
49.6
(6.9
)
43.7
equity income from
affiliates
(584.2
)
(595.4
)
(611.3
)
(503.4
)
other (income) expense,
net
(77.1
)
(134.7
)
(70.1
)
(100.6
)
income before taxes
911.9
1,230.8
2,108.3
1,970.4
net income
473.9
940.6
1,499.3
1,520.0
basic earnings per common
share
$0.22
$0.43
$0.69
$0.70
earnings per common share
assuming dilution
$0.22
$0.43
$0.69
$0.69
2005(4)
sales
$
5,765.9
$
5,416.2
$
5,467.5
$
5,362.2
materials and production costs
1,478.8
1,238.8
1,160.6
1,271.4
marketing and administrative
expenses
2,139.1
1,661.4
1,749.5
1,605.5
research and development expenses
1,112.0
942.6
946.8
846.6
restructuring costs
228.9
79.8
5.8
7.8
equity income from affiliates
(586.6
)
(480.1
)
(334.1
)
(316.3
)
other (income) expense, net
(126.3
)
(24.7
)
14.0
26.5
income before taxes
1,520.0
1,998.4
1,924.9
1,920.7
net income
1,119.7
1,420.9
720.6
1,370.1
basic earnings per common share
$0.51
$0.65
$0.33
$0.62
earnings per common share assuming
dilution
$0.51
$0.65
$0.33
$0.62
(1)
amounts for 2006 include
acquired research expenses associated with
acquisitions.
(2)
amounts for fourth and third
quarter 2006 and fourth quarter 2005 include the impact of
additional vioxx
legal defense reserves (see note11). amounts for fourth
quarter 2006 include the impact of fosamax legal defense
reserves (see note11).
(3)
amounts for 2005 include the
impact of the net tax charge primarily associated with the ajca
repatriation (see note17).
(4)
amounts for 2006 and 2005
include the impact of restructuring actions (see
note4).
(5)
amounts for 2006 reflect the
incremental impact of expensing stock options.
item9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure.
not applicable.
item9a.
controls
and procedures.
management of the company, with the participation of its chief
executive officer and chief financial officer, evaluated the
effectiveness of the companys disclosure controls and
procedures. based on their evaluation, as of the end of the
period covered by this
form10-k,
the companys chief executive officer and chief financial
officer have concluded that the companys disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in
rules13a-15(e)
or 15d-15(e)
under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (the
act)) are effective.
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term
is defined in
rule13a-15(f)
of the act. management conducted an evaluation of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting based
on the framework in internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso).
based on this evaluation, management concluded that internal
control over financial reporting was effective as of
december31, 2006 based on criteria in internal
control integrated framework issued by coso.
managements assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting as of december31, 2006
has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent
registered public accounting firm, and pricewaterhousecoopers
llp has issued a report on managements assessment of the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting.
there have been no changes in internal control over financial
reporting for the period covered by this report that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially
affect, the companys internal control over financial
reporting.
managements
report
managements
responsibility for financial statements
responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the
companys financial statements rests with management. the
financial statements report on managements stewardship of
company assets. these statements are prepared in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles and, accordingly,
include amounts that are based on managements best
estimates and judgments. nonfinancial information included in
the annual report on
form10-k
has also been prepared by management and is consistent with the
financial statements.
to assure that financial information is reliable and assets are
safeguarded, management maintains an effective system of
internal controls and procedures, important elements of which
include: careful selection, training and development of
operating and financial managers; an organization that provides
appropriate division of responsibility; and communications aimed
at assuring that company policies and procedures are understood
throughout the organization. a staff of internal auditors
regularly monitors the adequacy and application of internal
controls on a worldwide basis.
to ensure that personnel continue to understand the system of
internal controls and procedures, and policies concerning good
and prudent business practices, the company periodically
conducts the managements stewardship program for key
management and financial personnel. this program reinforces the
importance and understanding of internal controls by reviewing
key corporate policies, procedures and systems. in addition, the
company has compliance programs, including an ethical business
practices program to reinforce the companys long-standing
commitment to high ethical standards in the conduct of its
business.
the financial statements and other financial information
included in the annual report on
form10-k
fairly present, in all material respects, the companys
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. our
formal certification to the securities and exchange commission
is included in this
form10-k
filing. in addition, in may2006, the company submitted to
the new york stock exchange (nyse) a certificate of
the ceo certifying that he was not aware of any violation by the
company of nyse corporate governance listing standards.
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term
is defined in exchange act
rule13a-15(f).
management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework
in internal control integrated framework
issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the
treadway commission (coso). based on this
evaluation, management concluded that internal control over
financial reporting was effective as of december31, 2006
based on criteria in internal control integrated
framework issued by coso. managements assessment of
the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
as of december31, 2006 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, and pricewaterhousecoopers llp has issued a
report on managements assessment of the effectiveness of
the companys internal control over financial reporting,
which is included herein.
richard t. clark
chief executive officer
and president
judy c. lewent
executive vice president
and chief financial officer
item9b.
other
information.
none.
partiii
item10.
directors,
executive officers and corporate governance.
the required information on directors and nominees is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under item1.
election of directors of the companys proxy statement for
the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april24,
2007. information on executive officers is set forth in
parti of this document on pages36 through 39.
the required information on compliance with section16(a)
of the securities exchange act of 1934 is incorporated by
reference from the discussion under the heading
section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance of the companys proxy statement for the
annual meeting of stockholders to be held april24, 2007.
the company has adopted a code of conduct our
values and standards applicable to all employees, including
the principal executive officer, principal financial officer,
and principal accounting officer. the code of conduct is
available on the companys website at
www.merck.com/about/corporategovernance. the company
intends to post on this website any amendments to, or waivers
from, its code of conduct. a printed copy will be sent, without
charge, to any stockholder who requests it by writing to the
chief ethics officer of merck& co., inc., one merck
drive, whitehouse station, nj
08889-0100.
the required information on the identification of the audit
committee and the audit committee financial expert is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
board committees of the companys proxy
statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held
april24, 2007.
item11.
executive
compensation.
the information required on executive compensation is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the headings
compensation discussion and analysis, summary
compensation table, all other
compensation 2006 table, grants of
plan-based awards table, outstanding equity awards
at fiscal year-end table, option exercises and stock
vested table, retirement plan benefits and related
pension benefits table, nonqualified deferred
compensation and related tables, potential payments on
termination or change in control, including the discussion under
the subheadings separation, separation plan
payment and benefit estimates table, individual
agreements, change in control and change
in control payment and benefit estimates table, as well as
all footnote information to the various tables, of the
companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april24, 2007.
the required information on director compensation is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
director compensation and related director
compensation table and schedule of director
fees table of the companys proxy statement for the
annual meeting of stockholders to be held april24, 2007.
the required information under the headings compensation
committee interlocks and insider participation and
compensation committee report is incorporated by
reference from the companys proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held april24, 2007.
item12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters.
information with respect to securities authorized for issuance
under equity compensation plans is incorporated by reference
from the discussion under the heading equity compensation
plan information of the companys proxy statement for
the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april24,
2007. information with respect to security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management is incorporated by reference
from the discussion under the heading security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management of the
companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april24, 2007.
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions, and director
independence.
the required information on transactions with related persons is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
relationships with outside firms and the discussion
with respect to a loan to dr.kim under the subheading
perquisities of the compensation discussion
and analysis of the companys proxy statement for the
annual meeting of stockholders to be held april24, 2007.
the required information on director independence is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
independence of directors of the companys
proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be
held april24, 2007.
item14.
principal
accountant fees and services.
the information required for this item is incorporated by
reference from the discussion under audit committee
beginning with the caption pre-approval policy for
services of independent registered public accounting firm
through all other fees of the companys proxy
statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held
april24, 2007.
partiv
item15.
exhibits
and financial statement schedules.
(a)the following documents are filed as part of this
form10-k
1.financial statements
consolidated statement of income for the
years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
consolidated statement of retained
earnings for the years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and
consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the years
ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
consolidated balance sheet as of
december31, 2006 and 2005
consolidated statement of cash flows for
the years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004
notes to consolidated financial
statements
report of pricewaterhousecoopers llp,
independent registered public accounting firm
2.financial statement schedules
schedules are omitted because they are either
not required or not applicable.
financial statements of affiliates carried on the equity basis
have been omitted because, considered individually or in the
aggregate, such affiliates do not constitute a significant
subsidiary.
3.
exhibits
exhibit
number
description
.1
master restructuring agreement
dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab,
merck& co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc.,
kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises, inc., kbi sub inc., merck
holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this
exhibit are subject to a request for confidential treatment
filed with the commission) incorporated by reference
to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.2
agreement and plan of merger by
and among merck& co., inc., spinnaker acquisition
corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of merck& co., inc.
and sirna therapeutics, inc., dated as of october30,
2006 incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated october30, 2006
.1
restated certificate of
incorporation of merck& co., inc. (october1,
2004) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended september30, 2004
.2
by-laws of merck& co.,
inc. (as amended effective may24, 2005)
incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated may24, 2005
.1
indenture, dated as of
april1, 1991, between merck& co., inc. and
morgan guaranty trust company of new york, as
trustee incorporated by reference to exhibit4
to registration statement on
forms-3
(no.33-39349)
.2
first supplemental indenture
between merck& co., inc. and first trust of new york,
national association, as trustee incorporated by
reference to exhibit4(b) to registration statement on
forms-3
(no.333-36383)
*10
.1
executive incentive plan (as
amended effective february27, 1996)
incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1995
*10
.2
base salary deferral plan (as
adopted on october22, 1996, effective january1,
1997) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1996
*10
.3
merck& co., inc.
deferral program (amended and restated as of september28,
2006) incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated september26, 2006
*10
.4
1996 incentive stock plan (amended
and restated as of december19, 2006)
*10
.5
2001 incentive stock plan (amended
and restated as of december19, 2006)
*10
.6
2004 incentive stock plan (amended
and restated as of december19, 2006)
*10
.7
2007 incentive stock plan (as
amended effective december19, 2006)
*10
.8
merck& co., inc. change
in control separation benefits plan incorporated by
reference to current report on
form8-k
dated november23, 2004
*10
.9
merck& co., inc.
separation benefits plan for nonunion employees (amended and
restated effective as of july11, 2006)
incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated july11, 2006
*10
.10
non-employee directors stock
option plan (as amended and restated february24,
1998) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1997
*10
.11
1996 non-employee directors stock
option plan (as amended april27, 1999)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1999
*10
.12
2001 non-employee directors stock
option plan (as amended april19, 2002)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2002
exhibit
number
description
*10
.13
2006 non-employee directors stock
option plan (effective april25, 2006; as amended and
restated february27, 2007)
*10
.14
supplemental retirement plan (as
amended effective january1, 1995) incorporated
by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*10
.15
retirement plan for the directors
of merck& co., inc. (amended and restated
june21, 1996) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1996
*10
.16
plan for deferred payment of
directors compensation (amended and restated as of
october1, 2006) incorporated by reference to
current report on
form8-k
dated september26, 2006
*10
.17
offer letter between
merck& co., inc. and peter s. kim, dated
december15, 2000 incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003
*10
.18
offer letter between
merck& co., inc. and peter loescher, dated
march15, 2006 incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended march31, 2006
*10
.19
letter agreement between
merck& co., inc. and per wold-olsen, dated
july19, 2006 incorporated by reference to
current report on
form8-k
dated july28, 2006
*10
.20
letter agreement between
merck& co., inc. and bradley t. sheares, dated
august24, 2006
*10
.21
letter agreement between
merck& co., inc. and david w. anstice, dated
december15, 2006
.22
amended and restated license and
option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra ab
and astra merck inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.23
kbi sharesoption agreement
dated as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab,
merck& co., inc. and merck holdings, inc.
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.24
kbi-e asset option agreement dated
as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab, merck&
co., inc., astra merck inc. and astra merck enterprises
inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.25
kbi supply agreement dated as of
july1, 1998 between astra merck inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this exhibit are subject to a
request for confidential treatment filed with the
commission). incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.26
second amended and restated
manufacturing agreement dated as of july1, 1998 among
merck& co., inc., astra ab, astra merck inc. and astra
usa, inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.27
limited partnership agreement
dated as of july1, 1998 between kb usa, l.p. and kbi sub
inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.28
distribution agreement dated as of
july1, 1998 between astra merck enterprises inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.29
agreement to incorporate defined
terms dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab,
merck& co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc.,
kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises inc., kbi sub inc., merck
holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p.
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.30
form of voting agreement made and
entered into as of october30, 2006 by and between
merck& co., inc. and sirna therapeutics,
inc. incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated october30, 2006
computation of ratios of earnings
to fixed charges
subsidiaries of merck&
co., inc.
exhibit
number
description
consent of independent registered
public accounting firm contained on page132 of
this report
.1
power of attorney
.2
certified resolution of board of
directors
.1
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)
certification of chief executive officer
.2
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)
certification of chief financial officer
.1
section1350 certification of
chief executive officer
.2
section1350 certification of
chief financial officer
*
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement
copies of the exhibits may be obtained by stockholders upon
written request directed to the stockholder services department,
merck& co., inc., p.o. box100 ws
3ab-40, whitehouse station, new jersey
08889-0100.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
dated: february 28, 2007
merck& co., inc.
by
richard
t. clark
(chief executive officer and president)
by
celia
a. colbert
celia a. colbert
(attorney-in-fact)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act
of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following
persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on
the dates indicated.
signatures
title
date
richard
t. clark
chief executive officer and
president; principal executive officer; director
february 28, 2007
judy
c. lewent
executive vice president and chief
financial officer; principal financial officer
february 28, 2007
john
canan
vice president, controller;
principal accounting officer
february 28, 2007
lawrence
a. bossidy
director
february 28, 2007
william
g. bowen
director
february 28, 2007
johnnetta
b. cole
director
february 28, 2007
william
b. harrison, jr.
director
february 28, 2007
william
n. kelley
director
february 28, 2007
rochelle
b. lazarus
director
february 28, 2007
thomas
e. shenk
director
february 28, 2007
anne
m. tatlock
director
february 28, 2007
samuel
o. thier
director
february 28, 2007
wendell
p. weeks
director
february 28, 2007
peter
c. wendell
director
february 28, 2007
celia a. colbert, by signing her name hereto, does hereby
sign this document pursuant to powers of attorney duly executed
by the persons named, filed with the securities and exchange
commission as an exhibit to this document, on behalf of such
persons, all in the capacities and on the date stated, such
persons including a majority of the directors of the company.
by
celia
a. colbert
celia a. colbert
(attorney-in-fact)
exhibit23
consent
of independent registered public accounting firm
we hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the
registration statements on
forms-3
(nos.
33-39349,
33-60322,
33-57421,
333-17045,
333-36383,
333-77569,
333-72546,
333-87034
and
333-118186)
and on
forms-8
(nos.
33-21087,
33-21088,
33-51235,
33-53463,
33-64273,
33-64665,
333-91769,
333-30526,
333-31762,
333-53246,
333-56696,
333-72206,
333-65796,
333-101519,
333-109296,
333-117737,
333-117738,
333-139561 and 333-139562) of merck& co., inc. of our
report dated february27, 2007, relating to the
consolidated financial statements, managements assessment
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting and the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting, which is incorporated by reference in this
annual report on
form10-k.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
florham park, new jersey
february27, 2007
exhibitindex
exhibit
number
description
.1
master restructuring agreement
dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab,
merck& co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc.,
kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises, inc., kbi sub inc., merck
holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this
exhibit are subject to a request for confidential treatment
filed with the commission) incorporated by reference
to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.2
agreement and plan of merger by
and among merck& co., inc., spinnaker acquisition
corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of merck& co., inc.
and sirna therapeutics, inc., dated as of october30,
2006 incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated october30, 2006
.1
restated certificate of
incorporation of merck& co., inc. (october1,
2004) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended september30, 2004
.2
by-laws of merck& co.,
inc. (as amended effective may24, 2005)
incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated may24, 2005
.1
indenture, dated as of
april1, 1991, between merck& co., inc. and
morgan guaranty trust company of new york, as
trustee incorporated by reference to exhibit4
to registration statement on
forms-3
(no.33-39349)
.2
first supplemental indenture
between merck& co., inc. and first trust of new york,
national association, as trustee incorporated by
reference to exhibit4(b) to registration statement on
forms-3
(no.333-36383)
*10
.1
executive incentive plan (as
amended effective february27, 1996)
incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1995
*10
.2
base salary deferral plan (as
adopted on october22, 1996, effective january1,
1997) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1996
*10
.3
merck& co., inc.
deferral program (amended and restated as of september28,
2006) incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated september26, 2006
*10
.4
1996 incentive stock plan (amended
and restated as of december19, 2006)
*10
.5
2001 incentive stock plan (amended
and restated as of december19, 2006)
*10
.6
2004 incentive stock plan (amended
and restated as of december19, 2006)
*10
.7
2007 incentive stock plan (as
amended effective december19, 2006)
*10
.8
merck& co., inc. change
in control separation benefits plan incorporated by
reference to current report on
form8-k
dated november23, 2004
*10
.9
merck& co., inc.
separation benefits plan for nonunion employees (amended and
restated effective as of july11, 2006)
incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated july11, 2006
*10
.10
non-employee directors stock
option plan (as amended and restated february24,
1998) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1997
*10
.11
1996 non-employee directors stock
option plan (as amended april27, 1999)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1999
*10
.12
2001 non-employee directors stock
option plan (as amended april19, 2002)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2002
*10
.13
2006 non-employee directors stock
option plan (effective april25, 2006; as amended and
restated february27, 2007)
*10
.14
supplemental retirement plan (as
amended effective january1, 1995) incorporated
by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1994
*10
.15
retirement plan for the directors
of merck& co., inc. (amended and restated
june21, 1996) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1996
*10
.16
plan for deferred payment of
directors compensation (amended and restated as of
october1, 2006) incorporated by reference to
current report on
form8-k
dated september26, 2006
exhibit
number
description
*10
.17
offer letter between
merck& co., inc. and peter s. kim, dated
december15, 2000 incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003
*10
.18
offer letter between
merck& co., inc. and peter loescher, dated
march15, 2006 incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended march31, 2006
*10
.19
letter agreement between
merck& co., inc. and per wold-olsen, dated
july19, 2006 incorporated by reference to
current report on
form8-k
dated july28, 2006
*10
.20
letter agreement between
merck& co., inc. and bradley t. sheares, dated
august24, 2006
*10
.21
letter agreement between
merck& co., inc. and david w. anstice, dated
december15, 2006
.22
amended and restated license and
option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra ab
and astra merck inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.23
kbi sharesoption agreement
dated as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab,
merck& co., inc. and merck holdings, inc.
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.24
kbi-e asset option agreement dated
as of july1, 1998 by and among astra ab, merck&
co., inc., astra merck inc. and astra merck enterprises
inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.25
kbi supply agreement dated as of
july1, 1998 between astra merck inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this exhibit are subject to a
request for confidential treatment filed with the
commission) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.26
second amended and restated
manufacturing agreement dated as of july1, 1998 among
merck& co., inc., astra ab, astra merck inc. and astra
usa, inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.27
limited partnership agreement
dated as of july1, 1998 between kb usa, l.p. and kbi sub
inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.28
distribution agreement dated as of
july1, 1998 between astra merck enterprises inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.29
agreement to incorporate defined
terms dated as of june19, 1998 between astra ab,
merck& co., inc., astra merck inc., astra usa, inc.,
kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises inc., kbi sub inc., merck
holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p.
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.30
form of voting agreement made and
entered into as of october30, 2006 by and between
merck& co., inc. and sirna therapeutics,
inc. incorporated by reference to current report on
form8-k
dated october30, 2006
computation of ratios of earnings
to fixed charges
subsidiaries of merck&
co., inc.
consent of independent registered
public accounting firm contained on page132 of
this report
.1
power of attorney
.2
certified resolution of board of
directors
.1
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)
certification of chief executive officer
.2
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)
certification of chief financial officer
.1
section1350 certification of
chief executive officer
.2
section1350 certification of
chief financial officer
*
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
