10-k
y74217e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
table of contents
as filed with the securities and exchange commission on
february27, 2009
united states
securities and exchange
commission
washington, d. c. 20549
form10-k
(mark one)
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2008
or
o
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from
________ to ________
commission file
no.1-3305
merck& co., inc.
one merck drive
whitehouse station, n. j.
08889-0100
(908)423-1000
incorporated in new jersey
i.r.s. employer
identification no. 22-1109110
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the
act:
name of each exchange
title of each class
on which registered
common stock
($0.01par value)
new york stock exchange
number of shares of common stock ($0.01par value)
outstanding as of january30, 2009: 2,107,712,364.
aggregate market value of common stock ($0.01par value)
held by non-affiliates on june30, 2008 based on closing
price on june30, 2008: $80,729,000,000.
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known
seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities
act.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the
act.yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed
all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding
12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to file such reports), and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item405 of
regulations-k
is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in
partiii of this
form10-k
or any amendment to this
form10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated
filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of
large accelerated filer, accelerated
filer and smaller reporting company in rule
12b-2 of the
exchange act. (check one):
large
accelerated
filer
accelerated
filero
non-accelerated
filero
smaller
reporting
companyo
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company
(as defined in
rule12b-2
of the exchange
act).yesono
documents
incorporated by reference:
document
part of form 10-k
proxy statement for the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april28, 2009, to be filed with
the securities and exchange commission within 120days
after the close of the fiscal year covered by this report
partiii
table of
contents
page
parti
item 1.
business
item 1a.
risk factors
cautionary factors that may affect future
results
item 1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
executive officers of the registrant
partii
item 5.
market for registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
(a)financial statements
notes to
consolidated financial statements
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
(b)supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
managements
report
item 9b.
other information
partiii
item 10.
directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions,
and director independence
item 14.
principal accountant fees and services
partiv
item 15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
independent auditors consent
ex-10.3: deferral program
ex-10.10; special separation program for "separated" employees
ex-10.11: special separation program for "bridged" employees
ex-10.12: special separation program for "separated retirement eligible" employees
ex-10.16: supplemental retirement plan
ex-10.18: plan for deferred payment of directors's compensation
ex-12: computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
ex-21: subsidiaries of merck & co., inc.
ex-24.1: power of attorney
ex-24.2: certified resolution of board of directors
ex-31.1: certification
ex-31.2: certification
ex-32.1: certificaion
ex-32.2: certification
table of contents
parti
item1.
business.
merck& co., inc. (merck or the
company) is a global research-driven pharmaceutical
company that discovers, develops, manufactures and markets a
broad range of innovative products to improve human and animal
health. the companys operations are principally managed on
a products basis and are comprised of two reportable segments:
the pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines and infectious
diseases segment. the pharmaceutical segment includes human
health pharmaceutical products marketed either directly by merck
or through joint ventures. these products consist of therapeutic
and preventive agents, sold by prescription, for the treatment
of human disorders. merck sells these human health
pharmaceutical products primarily to drug wholesalers and
retailers, hospitals, government agencies and managed health
care providers such as health maintenance organizations,
pharmacy benefit managers and other institutions. the vaccines
and infectious diseases segment includes human health vaccine
and infectious disease products marketed either directly by
merck or, in the case of vaccines, also through a joint venture.
vaccine products consist of preventative pediatric, adolescent
and adult vaccines, primarily administered at physician offices.
merck sells these human health vaccines primarily to physicians,
wholesalers, physician distributors and government entities.
infectious disease products consist of therapeutic agents for
the treatment of infection sold primarily to drug wholesalers
and retailers, hospitals and government agencies. the
companys professional representatives communicate the
effectiveness, safety and value of its pharmaceutical and
vaccine products to health care professionals in private
practice, group practices and managed care organizations.
for financial information and other information about the
pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines and infectious diseases
segment, see item7. managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations
and item8. financial statements and supplementary
data below.
overview during 2008, the company continued
to address business challenges in the midst of an evolving
pharmaceutical industry environment. revenue declined by 1% in
2008 driven largely by lower sales of fosamax
(alendronate sodium) for the treatment and prevention of
osteoporosis. fosamax and fosamax plus d
(alendronate sodium/cholecalciferol) lost market exclusivity
for substantially all formulations in the united states in
february 2008 and april 2008, respectively, and as a result the
company is experiencing a significant decline in sales in the
united states within the fosamax franchise. also
contributing to the decline were lower sales of zocor
(simvastatin), the companys statin for
modifying cholesterol which lost u.s. market exclusivity in
2006. partially offsetting these declines were higher sales of
januvia (sitagliptin phosphate) and janumet
(sitagliptin phosphate and metformin hydrochloride) for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes and isentress (raltegravir),
an antiretroviral therapy for the treatment of hiv infection.
to address the business and industry challenges that merck
faces, the company remains focused on innovation and customer
value in order to drive the growth of its business and help
position merck for future success.
the company has made significant progress with re-engineering
its operations through research and development initiatives, the
roll-out of a new commercial model and the continuation of
mercks supply strategy. these activities should enable the
company to optimize its product portfolio and invest in growth
opportunities, such as emerging markets, merck bioventures and
business development.
merck continues its efforts to diversify the companys
scientific portfolio both through internal programs and external
research collaborations. the company is focused on developing
novel,
best-in-class
or follow-on treatments for patients in primary care, specialty
care, and hospital settings. additionally, merck research
laboratories is pursuing a portfolio of treatment modalities
that not only includes small molecules and vaccines, but also
biologics, peptides and rna interference (rnai).
further, merck is moving to diversify its portfolio by creating
a new division, merck bioventures, which leverages a unique
technology platform for both follow-on and novel biologics.
the company has numerous active clinical programs across the
companys major research franchises: bone, respiratory,
immunology and endocrine; cardiovascular; diabetes and obesity;
infectious diseases; neuroscience; oncology and vaccines. the
company currently has nine candidates in phaseiii clinical
development and
table of contents
anticipates submitting two new drug applications
(nda) with the u.s.food and drug
administration (fda) with respect to two of the
candidates in 2009: mk-0974, telcagepant, an investigational
compound for the treatment of migraines, and mk-7418,
rolofylline, an investigational compound for the treatment of
acute heart failure. in addition, the company anticipates
submitting an nda in 2009 for mk-0653c, ezetimibe combined with
atorvastatin, an investigational medication for the treatment of
dyslipidemia being developed by the merck/schering-plough joint
venture. also, the company anticipates regulatory action in 2009
on two supplemental filings that have been submitted to the fda:
one for gardasil, mercks hpv vaccine, for use in
males; and one for isentress, a
first-in-class
integrase inhibitor for the treatment of hiv-1 infection, for an
expanded indication for use in treatment-nave patients.
on the commercial side, the company is rolling out a more
customer-centric selling model that is designed to provide a
competitive advantage, help build trust with customers, and
improve patient outcomes. the strategy employs the use of new
marketing technologies to complement a new, more
customer-centered approach; and moves away from the traditional
frequency-based sales and marketing approach; it also creates
efficiencies by eliminating redundancies in core functions and
across the sales organization.
on the manufacturing side, merck has made significant progress
in the three years since it began re-engineering to create a
lean, flexible, cost-effective capability. the company continues
to address its manufacturing issues and it is working to build
additional capacity in vaccines and biologics, as well as to
support mercks expansion into emerging markets. to assist
this goal, the company is shifting investments from developed
markets into emerging markets commensurate with the size and
strategic importance of the opportunity.
in october 2008, the company announced a global restructuring
program (the 2008 restructuring program) to reduce
its cost structure, increase efficiency, and enhance
competitiveness. as discussed above, merck is rolling out a new,
more customer-centric selling model. additionally, the company
will make greater use of outside technology resources,
centralize common sales and marketing activities, and
consolidate and streamline its operations. mercks
manufacturing division will further focus its capabilities on
core products and outsource non-core manufacturing. also, merck
is expanding its access to worldwide external science through a
basic research global operating strategy, which is designed to
provide a sustainable pipeline and is focused on translating
basic research productivity into late-stage clinical success. to
increase efficiencies, basic research operations will
consolidate work in support of a given therapeutic area into one
of four locations. this will provide a more efficient use of
research facilities and result in the closure of three basic
research sites located in tsukuba, japan; pomezia, italy; and
seattle by the end of 2009. as part of the 2008 restructuring
program, the company expects to eliminate approximately 7,200
positions 6,800 active employees and 400
vacancies across all areas of the company worldwide
by the end of 2011, approximately 1,750 of which the company
eliminated in 2008. about 40% of the total reductions will occur
in the united states. as part of the 2008 restructuring program,
the company is streamlining management layers by reducing its
total number of senior and mid-level executives globally by
approximately 25%. the company, however, continues to hire new
employees as the business requires. the 2008 restructuring
program is expected to be completed by the end of 2011 with the
total pretax costs estimated to be $1.6billion to
$2.0billion. in 2008, the company recorded pretax
restructuring costs of $921.3million related to the 2008
restructuring program. the company estimates that two-thirds of
the cumulative pretax costs will result in future cash outlays,
primarily from employee separation expense. approximately
one-third of the cumulative pretax costs are non-cash, relating
primarily to the accelerated depreciation of facilities to be
closed or divested. merck expects the 2008 restructuring program
to yield cumulative pretax savings of $3.8billion to
$4.2billion from 2008 to 2013.
during 2008, in connection with certain transactions with
astrazeneca lp (azlp), the company recorded an
aggregate pretax gain of $2.2billion which is included in
other (income) expense, net and received net proceeds from azlp
of $2.6billion. see note8 to the consolidated
financial statements for further information.
earnings per common share (eps) assuming dilution
for 2008 were $3.64, including the impact of the gain on
distribution from azlp of $0.66 per share and restructuring
costs of $(0.44) per share. in addition, eps in 2008 reflects
the favorable impact of certain tax items. all of these items
are discussed more fully in the notes to the consolidated
financial statements.
table of contents
product
sales
sales(1)of
the companys products were as follows:
($ in millions)
pharmaceutical:
singulair
$
4,336.9
$
4,266.3
$
3,579.0
cozaar/hyzaar
3,557.7
3,350.1
3,163.1
fosamax
1,552.7
3,049.0
3,134.4
januvia
1,397.1
667.5
42.9
cosopt/trusopt
781.2
786.8
697.1
zocor
660.1
876.5
2,802.7
maxalt
529.2
467.3
406.4
propecia
429.1
405.4
351.8
arcoxia
377.3
329.1
265.4
vasotec/vaseretic
356.7
494.6
547.2
janumet
351.1
86.4
-
proscar
323.5
411.0
618.5
emend
263.8
204.2
130.8
other
pharmaceutical(2)
2,278.9
2,422.9
2,780.5
vaccine and infectious disease product sales included in the
pharmaceutical
segment(3)
2,187.6
1,800.5
1,315.8
pharmaceutical segment revenues
19,382.9
19,617.6
19,835.6
vaccines(4)
and infectious diseases:
gardasil
1,402.8
1,480.6
234.8
proquad/m-m-r ii/varivax
1,268.5
1,347.1
820.1
rotateq
664.5
524.7
163.4
zostavax
312.4
236.0
38.6
hepatitis vaccines
148.3
279.9
248.5
other vaccines
354.6
409.9
354.0
primaxin
760.4
763.5
704.8
cancidas
596.4
536.9
529.8
isentress
361.1
41.3
-
crixivan/stocrin
275.1
310.2
327.3
invanz
265.0
190.2
139.2
other infectious disease
15.5
1.7
-
vaccine and infectious disease product sales included in the
pharmaceutical
segment(3)
(2,187.6
)
(1,800.5
)
(1,315.8
)
vaccines and infectious diseases segment revenues
4,237.0
4,321.5
2,244.7
other segment
revenues(5)
81.8
162.0
162.1
total segment revenues
23,701.7
24,101.1
22,242.4
other(6)
148.6
96.6
393.6
$
23,850.3
$
24,197.7
$
22,636.0
(1)
presented net of discounts and returns.
(2)
other pharmaceutical primarily includes sales of other human
pharmaceutical products and revenue from the companys
relationship with azlp primarily relating to sales of
nexium, as well as prilosec. revenue from azlp was
$1.6billion, $1.7billion and $1.8billion in
2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. in 2006, other pharmaceutical
also reflected certain supply sales, including supply sales
associated with the companys arrangement with
dr.reddys laboratories for the sale of generic
simvastatin.
(3)
sales of vaccine and infectious disease products by
non-u.s.
subsidiaries are included in the pharmaceutical segment.
(4)
these amounts do not reflect sales of vaccines sold in most
major european markets through the companys joint venture,
sanofi pasteur msd, the results of which are reflected in equity
income from affiliates. these amounts do, however, reflect
supply sales to sanofi pasteur msd.
(5)
includes other non-reportable human and animal health
segments.
(6)
other revenues are primarily comprised of miscellaneous
corporate revenue, sales related to divested products or
businesses and other supply sales not included in segment
results.
table of contents
the companys pharmaceutical products include therapeutic
and preventive agents, generally sold by prescription, for the
treatment of human disorders. among these are singulair
(montelukast sodium), a leukotriene receptor antagonist for
the chronic treatment of asthma and for the relief of symptoms
of allergic rhinitis; cozaar (losartan potassium),
hyzaar (losartan potassium and hydrochlorothiazide),
vasotec (enalapril maleate) and vaseretic
(enalapril maleate-hydrochlorothiazide), the
companys most significant hypertension
and/or heart
failure products; fosamax and fosamax plus d,
mercks osteoporosis products for the treatment and, in the
case of fosamax, prevention of osteoporosis; januvia
and janumet for the treatment of type 2 diabetes;
cosopt (dorzolamide hydrochloride and timolol maleate
ophthalmic solution) and trusopt (dorzolamide
hydrochloride ophthalmic solution), mercks
largest-selling ophthalmological products; zocor,
mercks statin for modifying cholesterol; maxalt
(rizatriptan benzoate), an acute migraine product;
propecia (finasteride), a product for the treatment of
male pattern hair loss; arcoxia (etoricoxib) for the
treatment of arthritis and pain; proscar (finasteride), a
urology product for the treatment of symptomatic benign prostate
enlargement; and emend (aprepitant) for the prevention of
chemotherapy-induced and post-operative nausea and vomiting.
the companys vaccine and infectious disease products
include gardasil, a vaccine to help prevent cervical,
vulvar and vaginal cancers, precancerous or dysplastic lesions,
and genital warts caused by hpv types 6, 11, 16 and 18;
varivax (varicella virus vaccine live), a vaccine to help
prevent chickenpox; proquad (measles, mumps, rubella and
varicella virus vaccine live), a pediatric combination vaccine
against measles, mumps, rubella and varicella; m-m-r ii
(measles, mumps and rubella virus vaccine live), a vaccine
against measles, mumps and rubella; rotateq (rotavirus
vaccine live, oral, pentavalent), a vaccine to help protect
against rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants and children;
zostavax (zoster vaccine live), a vaccine to help prevent
shingles (herpes zoster); primaxin (imipenem and
cilastatin sodium) and cancidas (caspofungin acetate),
anti-bacterial/anti-fungal products; isentress,
crixivan (indinavir sulfate) and stocrin
(efavirenz), antiretroviral therapies for the treatment of
hiv infection; and invanz (ertapenem sodium) for the
treatment of infection. for a further discussion of sales of the
companys products, see item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations below.
u.s.product approvals on
january25, 2008, the fda approved emend
(fosaprepitant dimeglumine) for injection, 115mg, for the
prevention of
chemotherapy-induced
nausea and vomiting. emend for injection provides a new
option for day one, as a substitute for emend
(125mg) taken orally, as part of the recommended
three-day
regimen. prior to the fda decision, the european union
(eu) on january11, 2008 granted marketing
approval for emend for injection, known as ivemend
in the eu, an action that applies to all 27 eu member
countries as well as norway and iceland.
on august5, 2008, merck announced that the fda approved an
expanded label for cancidas, which makes it the first and
only echinocandin therapy approved in the united states for the
treatment of pediatric patients aged three months to
17years with indicated fungal infections.
on september12, 2008, the fda approved gardasil for
the prevention of vulvar and vaginal cancers caused by hpv types
16 and 18. the approval is based on data from a combined
analysis of three studies that demonstrated the efficacy and
safety of gardasil in more than 15,000patients.
vioxx u.s.product liability settlement
on september30, 2004, merck announced a
voluntary worldwide withdrawal of vioxx, its arthritis
and acute pain medication. the companys decision, which
was effective immediately, was based on new three-year data from
a prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial,
approve (adenomatous polyp prevention on vioxx).
on november9, 2007, the company announced that it had
entered into an agreement (the settlement agreement)
with the law firms that comprise the executive committee of the
plaintiffs steering committee of the federal multidistrict
vioxx litigation as well as representatives of
plaintiffs counsel in the texas, new jersey and california
state coordinated proceedings to resolve state and federal
myocardial infarction (mi) and ischemic stroke
(is) claims filed as of that date in the united
states. the settlement agreement, which also applies to tolled
claims, was signed by the parties after several meetings with
three of the four judges overseeing the coordination of more
than 95% of the current claims in the vioxx litigation.
the settlement agreement applies only to u.s.legal
residents and those who allege that their mi or is occurred in
the united states.
table of contents
as of october30, 2008, the deadline for enrollment in the
settlement program (as defined below), more than 48,100 of the
approximately 48,325 individuals who were eligible for the
settlement program and whose claims were not 1)dismissed,
2)expected to be dismissed in the near future, or
3)tolled claims that appear to have been abandoned had
submitted some or all of the materials required for enrollment
in the settlement program. this represents approximately 99.8%
of the eligible mi and is claims previously registered with the
settlement program. under the terms of the settlement agreement,
merck could exercise a right to walk away from the settlement
agreement if the thresholds and other requirements were not met.
the company waived that right as of august4, 2008. the
waiver of that right triggered mercks obligation to pay a
fixed total of $4.85billion. payments will be made in
installments into the settlement funds. the first payment of
$500million was made in august 2008 and an additional
payment of $250million was made in october 2008.
additional payments will be made on a periodic basis going
forward, when and as needed to fund payments of claims and
administrative expenses.
joint ventures the company has a number of
joint ventures relating to its pharmaceutical and vaccines and
infectious diseases segments.
pharmaceutical
in 2000, the company and schering-plough corporation
(schering-plough) entered into agreements to create
separate equally-owned partnerships to develop and market in the
united states new prescription medicines in the
cholesterol-management and respiratory therapeutic areas. in
december 2001, the cholesterol-management partnership agreements
were expanded to include all the countries of the world,
excluding japan. in october 2002, zetia (ezetimibe)
(marketed as ezetrol outside the united states), the
first in a new class of cholesterol-lowering agents, was
launched in the united states. in july 2004, vytorin
(marketed as inegy outside the united states), a
combination product containing the active ingredients of both
zetia and zocor, was approved in the united states.
as previously disclosed, in january 2008, the company announced
the results of the effect of combination ezetimibe and high-dose
simvastatin vs. simvastatin alone on the atherosclerotic process
in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
(enhance) clinical trial, an imaging trial in
720patients with heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia, a rare genetic condition that causes very
high levels of ldl bad cholesterol and greatly
increases the risk for premature coronary artery disease. as
previously reported, despite the fact that ezetimibe/simvastatin
10/80 mg (vytorin) significantly lowered ldl
bad cholesterol more than simvastatin 80mg
alone, there was no significant difference between treatment
with ezetimibe/simvastatin and simvastatin alone on the
pre-specified primary endpoint, a change in the thickness of
carotid artery walls over two years as measured by ultrasound.
there also were no significant differences between treatment
with ezetimibe/simvastatin and simvastatin on the four
pre-specified key secondary endpoints: percent of patients
manifesting regression in the average carotid artery
intima-media thickness (ca imt); proportion of
patients developing new carotid artery plaques >1.3 mm;
changes in the average maximum ca imt; and changes in the
average ca imt plus in the average common femoral artery imt. in
enhance, when compared to simvastatin alone,
ezetimibe/simvastatin significantly lowered ldl bad
cholesterol, as well as triglycerides and c-reactive protein
(crp). ezetimibe/simvastatin is not indicated for
the reduction of crp. in the enhance study, the overall safety
profile of ezetimibe/simvastatin was generally consistent with
the product label. the enhance study was not designed nor
powered to evaluate cardiovascular clinical events. the improved
reduction in high-risk subjects presenting with acute coronary
syndrome (improve-it) trial is underway and is
designed to provide cardiovascular outcomes data for
ezetimibe/simvastatin in patients with acute coronary syndrome.
no incremental benefit of ezetimibe/simvastatin on
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality over and above that
demonstrated for simvastatin has been established. in march
2008, the results of enhance were reported at the annual
scientific session of the american college of cardiology.
on july21, 2008, efficacy and safety results from the
simvastatin and ezetimibe in aortic stenosis (seas)
study were announced. seas was designed to evaluate whether
intensive lipid lowering with vytorin
10/40mg
would reduce the need for aortic valve replacement and the risk
of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality versus placebo in
patients with asymptomatic mild to moderate aortic stenosis who
had no indication for statin therapy. vytorin failed to
meet its primary end point for the reduction of major
cardiovascular events. there also was no significant difference
in the key secondary end point of aortic valve events; however,
there was a reduction in the group of patients taking vytorin
compared to placebo in the key secondary end point of
ischemic cardiovascular
table of contents
events. vytorin is not indicated for the treatment of
aortic stenosis. no incremental benefit of vytorin on
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality over and above that
demonstrated for simvastatin has been established. in the study,
patients in the group who took vytorin 10/40mg had
a higher incidence of cancer than the group who took placebo.
there was also a nonsignificant increase in deaths from cancer
in patients in the group who took vytorin versus those
who took placebo. cancer and cancer deaths were distributed
across all major organ systems. the company believes the cancer
finding in seas is likely to be an anomaly that, taken in light
of all the available data, does not support an association with
vytorin. in august 2008, the fda announced that it was
investigating the results from the seas trial. in this
announcement, the fda also cited interim data from two large
ongoing cardiovascular trials of vytorin the
study of heart and renal protection (sharp) and the
improve-it clinical trials in which there was no
increased risk of cancer with the combination of simvastatin
plus ezetimibe. the sharp trial is expected to be completed in
2010. the improve-it trial is scheduled for completion around
2012. the fda determined that, as of that time, these findings
in the seas trial plus the interim data from ongoing trials
should not prompt patients to stop taking vytorin or any
other cholesterol lowering drug.
the company, through merck/schering-plough pharmaceuticals (the
msp partnership), is committed to working with
regulatory agencies to further evaluate the available data and
interpretations of those data; however, the company does not
believe that changes in the clinical use of vytorin are
warranted.
as previously disclosed, the company and its joint venture
partner, schering-plough, have received several letters
addressed to both companies from the house committee on energy
and commerce, its subcommittee on oversight and investigations
(o&i), and the ranking minority member of the
senate finance committee, collectively seeking a combination of
witness interviews, documents and information on a variety of
issues related to the enhance clinical trial, the sale and
promotion of vytorin, as well as sales of stock by
corporate officers. in addition, since august 2008, the
companies have received three additional letters from o&i,
including one dated february19, 2009, seeking certain
information and documents related to the seas clinical trial. as
previously disclosed, the companies have each received subpoenas
from the new york and new jersey state attorneys general offices
and a letter from the connecticut attorney general seeking
similar information and documents. in addition, the company has
received five civil investigative demands (cids)
from a multistate group of 35 state attorneys general who are
jointly investigating whether the companies violated state
consumer protection laws when marketing vytorin. finally,
in september 2008, the company received a letter from the civil
division of the department of justice (doj )
informing it that the doj is investigating whether the
companies conduct relating to the promotion of vytorin
caused false claims to be submitted to federal health care
programs. the company is cooperating with these investigations
and working with schering-plough to respond to the inquiries. in
addition, the company has become aware of or been served with
approximately 145 civil class action lawsuits alleging common
law and state consumer fraud claims in connection with the msp
partnerships sale and promotion of vytorin and
zetia. certain of those lawsuits allege personal injuries
and/or seek
medical monitoring. these actions, which have been filed in or
transferred to federal court, are coordinated in a multidistrict
litigation in the u.s.district court for the district
court of new jersey before district judge dennis m. cavanaugh.
the parties are presently engaged in motions practice and
briefing. also, as previously disclosed, on april3, 2008,
a merck shareholder filed a putative class action lawsuit in
federal court in the eastern district of pennsylvania alleging
that merck and its chairman, president and chief executive
officer, richard t. clark, violated the federal securities laws.
on april22, 2008, a member of a company employee
retirement income security act ( erisa) plan filed a
putative class action lawsuit against the company and certain of
its officers and directors alleging they breached their
fiduciary duties under erisa.
in 1982, the company entered into an agreement with astra ab
(astra) to develop and market astra products in the
united states. in 1994, the company and astra formed an equally
owned joint venture that developed and marketed most of
astras new prescription medicines in the united states
including prilosec (omeprazole), the first in a class of
medications known as proton pump inhibitors, which slows the
production of acid from the cells of the stomach lining.
in 1998, the company and astra restructured the joint venture
whereby the company acquired astras interest in the joint
venture, renamed kbi inc. (kbi), and contributed
kbis operating assets to a new u.s.limited
partnership named astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (the
partnership), in exchange for a 1% limited partner
interest. astra contributed the net assets of its wholly owned
subsidiary, astra usa, inc., to the partnership in exchange for
a
table of contents
99% general partner interest. the partnership, renamed
astrazeneca lp (azlp) upon astras 1999 merger
with zeneca group plc (the astrazeneca merger),
became the exclusive distributor of the products for which kbi
retained rights.
the company earns certain partnership returns as well as ongoing
revenue based on sales of current and future kbi products. the
partnership returns include a priority return provided for in
the partnership agreement, variable returns based, in part, upon
sales of certain former astra usa, inc. products, and a
preferential return representing the companys share of
undistributed partnership gaap earnings. the astrazeneca merger
triggered a partial redemption in march 2008 of mercks
interest in certain azlp product rights. upon this redemption,
merck received $4.3billion from azlp. this amount was
based primarily on a multiple of mercks average annual
variable returns derived from sales of the former astra usa,
inc. products for the three years prior to the redemption (the
limited partner share of agreed value). merck
recorded a $1.5billion pretax gain on the partial
redemption in 2008. the partial redemption of mercks
interest in the product rights did not result in a change in
mercks 1% limited partner interest. as described in
item7. managements discussion and
analysis below, after certain adjustments, the company
recorded an aggregate pretax gain of $2.2billion.
in conjunction with the 1998 restructuring, astra purchased an
option (the asset option) for a payment of
$443.0million, which was recorded as deferred income, to
buy mercks interest in the kbi products, excluding the
gastrointestinal medicines nexium (esomeprazole) and
prilosec (the non-ppi products). the asset
option is exercisable in the first half of 2010 at an exercise
price equal to the net present value as of march31, 2008
of projected future pretax revenue to be received by the company
from the non-ppi products (the appraised value).
merck also had the right to require astra to purchase such
interest in 2008 at the appraised value. in february 2008, the
company advised azlp that it would not exercise the asset
option, thus the $443.0million remains deferred. in
addition, in 1998, the company granted astra an option (the
shares option) to buy mercks common stock
interest in kbi and, therefore, mercks interest in
nexium and prilosec, exercisable two years after
astras exercise of the asset option. astra can also
exercise the shares option in 2017 or if combined annual sales
of the two products fall below a minimum amount provided, in
each case, only so long as astrazenecas asset option has
been exercised in 2010. the exercise price for the shares option
is based on the net present value of estimated future net sales
of nexium and prilosec as determined at the time
of exercise, subject to certain
true-up
mechanisms.
in 1989, the company formed a joint venture with
johnson& johnson to develop and market a broad range
of nonprescription medicines for u.s.consumers. this 50%
owned joint venture also includes canada. significant joint
venture products are pepcid ac (famotidine), an
over-the-counter form of the companys ulcer medication
pepcid (famotidine), as well as pepcid complete,
an over-the-counter product which combines the companys
ulcer medication with antacids (calcium carbonate and magnesium
hydroxide).
vaccines
in 1994, the company and pasteur mrieux connaught (now
sanofi pasteur s.a.) formed a joint venture to market human
vaccines in europe and to collaborate in the development of
combination vaccines for distribution in the then existing eu
and the european free trade association. the company and sanofi
pasteur contributed, among other things, their european vaccine
businesses for equal shares in the joint venture, known as
pasteur mrieux msd, s.n.c. (now sanofi pasteur msd,
s.n.c.). the joint venture maintains a presence, directly or
through affiliates or branches in belgium, italy, germany,
spain, france, austria, ireland, sweden, portugal, the
netherlands, switzerland and the united kingdom, and through
distributors in the rest of its territory.
other
in 1997, the company and rhne-poulenc s.a. (now
sanofi-aventis s.a.) combined their respective animal health
businesses to formmerial limited (merial), a
fully integrated animal health company, which is a stand-alone
joint venture, 50% owned by each party. merial provides a
comprehensive range of pharmaceuticals and vaccines to enhance
the health, well-being and performance of a wide range of animal
species.
competition the markets in which the company
conducts its business are highly competitive and often highly
regulated. global efforts toward health care cost containment
continue to exert pressure on product pricing and access.
table of contents
such competition involves an intensive search for technological
innovations and the ability to market these innovations
effectively. with its long-standing emphasis on research and
development, the company is well prepared to compete in the
search for technological innovations. additional resources to
meet competition include quality control, flexibility to meet
customer specifications, an efficient distribution system and a
strong technical information service. the company is active in
acquiring and marketing products through joint ventures and
licenses and has been refining its sales and marketing efforts
to further address changing industry conditions. to enhance its
product portfolio, the company also continues to pursue external
alliances. however, the introduction of new products and
processes by competitors may result in price reductions and
product replacements, even for products protected by patents.
for example, the number of compounds available to treat diseases
typically increases over time and has resulted in slowing the
growth in sales of certain of the companys products.
legislation enacted in all states in the united states,
particularly in the area of human pharmaceutical products,
allows, encourages or, in a few instances, in the absence of
specific instructions from the prescribing physician, mandates
the use of generic products (those containing the
same active chemical as an innovators product) rather than
brand-name products. governmental and other
pressures toward the dispensing of generic products have
significantly reduced the sales of certain of the companys
products no longer protected by patents, such as zocor,
which lost market exclusivity in the u.s.in 2006 and
the company experienced a significant decline in zocor
sales thereafter. fosamax and fosamax plus d
lost marketing exclusivity in the united states in 2008. as
a result of these events, the company is experiencing
significant declines in fosamax and fosamax plus d
u.s.sales. also, trusopt and cosopt lost
market exclusivity in the united states in october 2008 and as a
result the company is experiencing a significant decline in
sales of these products.
distribution the company sells its human
health pharmaceutical products primarily to drug wholesalers and
retailers, hospitals, government agencies and managed health
care providers such as health maintenance organizations,
pharmacy benefit managers and other institutions. human health
vaccines are sold primarily to physicians, wholesalers,
physician distributors and government entities. the
companys professional representatives communicate the
effectiveness, safety and value of the companys
pharmaceutical and vaccine products to health care professionals
in private practice, group practices and managed care
organizations.
raw materials raw materials and supplies,
which are generally available from multiple sources, are
purchased worldwide and are normally available in quantities
adequate to meet the needs of the companys pharmaceutical
and vaccines and infectious diseases segments.
government regulation and investigation the
pharmaceutical industry is subject to global regulation by
regional, country, state and local agencies. of particular
importance is the fda in the united states, which administers
requirements covering the testing, approval, safety,
effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling and marketing of
prescription pharmaceuticals. in many cases, the fda
requirements have increased the amount of time and money
necessary to develop new products and bring them to market in
the united states. in 1997, the food and drug administration
modernization act (the fda modernization act) was
passed and was the culmination of a comprehensive legislative
reform effort designed to streamline regulatory procedures
within the fda and to improve the regulation of drugs, medical
devices and food. the legislation was principally designed to
ensure the timely availability of safe and effective drugs and
biologics by expediting the premarket review process for new
products. a key provision of the legislation is the
re-authorization of the prescription drug user fee act of 1992,
which permits the continued collection of user fees from
prescription drug manufacturers to augment fda resources
earmarked for the review of human drug applications. this helps
provide the resources necessary to ensure the prompt approval of
safe and effective new drugs.
in the united states, the government expanded health care access
by enacting the medicare prescription drug improvement and
modernization act of 2003, which was signed into law in december
2003. prescription drug coverage began on january1, 2006.
this legislation supports the companys goal of improving
access to medicines by expanding insurance coverage, while
preserving market-based incentives for pharmaceutical
innovation. at the same time, the legislation will ensure that
prescription drug costs will be controlled by competitive
pressures and by encouraging the appropriate use of medicines.
the u.s.congress has considered, and may consider again,
proposals to increase the governments role in
pharmaceutical pricing in the medicare program.
table of contents
these proposals may include removing the current legal
prohibition against the secretary of the health and human
services intervening in price negotiations between medicare drug
benefit program plans and pharmaceutical companies. they may
also include mandating the payment of rebates for some or all of
the pharmaceutical utilization in medicare drug benefit plans.
in addition, congress may again consider proposals to allow,
under certain conditions, the importation of medicines from
other countries.
for many years, the pharmaceutical industry has been under
federal and state oversight with the approval process for new
drugs, drug safety, advertising and promotion, drug purchasing
and reimbursement programs and formularies variously under
review. the company believes that it will continue to be able to
conduct its operations, including the introduction of new drugs
to the market, in this regulatory environment. one type of
federal initiative to contain federal health care spending is
the prospective or capitated payment system, first
implemented to reduce the rate of growth in medicare
reimbursement to hospitals. such a system establishes in advance
a flat rate for reimbursement for health care for those patients
for whom the payor is fiscally responsible. this type of payment
system and other cost containment systems are now widely used by
public and private payors and have caused hospitals, health
maintenance organizations and other customers of the company to
be more cost-conscious in their treatment decisions, including
decisions regarding the medicines to be made available to their
patients. the company continues to work with private and federal
employers to slow increases in health care costs. further, the
companys efforts to demonstrate that its medicines can
help save costs in other areas have encouraged the use of the
companys medicines and have helped offset the effects of
increasing cost pressures.
also, federal and state governments have pursued methods to
directly reduce the cost of drugs and vaccines for which they
pay. for example, federal laws require the company to pay
specified rebates for medicines reimbursed by medicaid, to
provide discounts for outpatient medicines purchased by certain
public health service entities and disproportionate
share hospitals (hospitals meeting certain criteria), and
to provide minimum discounts of 24% off of a defined
non-federal average manufacturer price for purchases
by certain components of the federal government such as the
department of veterans affairs and the department of defense.
initiatives in some states seek rebates beyond the minimum
required by medicaid legislation, in some cases for patients
beyond those who are eligible for medicaid. under the federal
vaccines for children entitlement program, the u.s.centers
for disease control and prevention (cdc) funds and
purchases recommended pediatric vaccines at a public sector
price for the immunization of medicaid-eligible, uninsured,
native american and certain underinsured children. the company
was awarded a cdc contract in 2008 for the supply of pediatric
vaccines for the vaccines for children program. as of
january1, 2006, patients previously eligible for medicaid
who are also medicare beneficiaries (65years and older or
disabled) left the state-administered medicaid system to be
covered by the new medicare prescription drug benefit.
outside the united states, the company encounters similar
regulatory and legislative issues in most of the countries where
it does business. there, too, the primary thrust of governmental
inquiry and action is toward determining drug safety and
effectiveness, often with mechanisms for controlling the prices
of or reimbursement for prescription drugs and the profits of
prescription drug companies. the eu has adopted directives
concerning the classification, labeling, advertising, wholesale
distribution and approval for marketing of medicinal products
for human use. the companys policies and procedures are
already consistent with the substance of these directives;
consequently, it is believed that they will not have any
material effect on the companys business.
in addition, certain countries within the eu, recognizing the
economic importance of the research-based pharmaceutical
industry and the value of innovative medicines to society, are
working with industry representatives to improve the competitive
climate through a variety of means including market deregulation.
in january 2008, the european commission (ec)
launched a sector inquiry in the pharmaceutical markets under
the rules of eu competition law. as part of its inquiry, the
companys offices in germany were inspected by the
authorities in january 2008. the preliminary report of the ec
was issued on november28, 2008, in which the ec stated
that it had confirmed its original hypothesis that competition
in the pharmaceutical sector may be restricted or distorted, as
indicated by a decline in innovation measured by the number of
novel medicines reaching the market, and by alleged instances of
delayed market entry of generic medicines. the public
consultation period with respect to the preliminary report
expired on january31, 2009, and the ec has issued further
inquiries in respect of the subject of the investigation. the ec
has not alleged that the company or any of its subsidiaries have
table of contents
engaged in any unlawful practices. the final report is planned
for later in 2009. the company is cooperating with the ec in
this sector inquiry.
the company is subject to the jurisdiction of various regulatory
agencies and is, therefore, subject to potential administrative
actions. such actions may include seizures of products and other
civil and criminal sanctions. under certain circumstances, the
company on its own may deem it advisable to initiate product
recalls. the company believes that it should be able to compete
effectively within this environment.
the company is subject to a number of privacy and data
protection laws and regulations globally. the legislative and
regulatory landscape for privacy and data protection continues
to evolve, and there has been an increasing amount of focus on
privacy and data protection issues with the potential to affect
directly the companys business, including recently enacted
laws in a majority of u.s.states requiring security breach
notification.
patents, trademarks and licenses patent
protection is considered, in the aggregate, to be of material
importance in the companys marketing of human health
products in the united states and in most major foreign markets.
patents may cover products per se, pharmaceutical
formulations, processes for or intermediates useful in the
manufacture of products or the uses of products. protection for
individual products extends for varying periods in accordance
with the legal life of patents in the various countries. the
protection afforded, which may also vary from country to
country, depends upon the type of patent and its scope of
coverage.
the fda modernization act includes a pediatric exclusivity
provision that may provide an additional six months of market
exclusivity in the united states for indications of new or
currently marketed drugs if certain agreed upon pediatric
studies are completed by the applicant. these exclusivity
provisions were re-authorized by the prescription drug user fee
act passed in september 2007. current u.s.patent law
provides additional patent term under patent term restoration
for periods when the patented product was under regulatory
review before the fda.
patent portfolios developed for products introduced by the
company normally provide market exclusivity. the company has the
following key u.s.patent protection (including patent term
restoration and pediatric exclusivity) for major marketed
products:
product
year of expiration (in
u.s.)
cancidas
comvax
cozaar
crixivan
2012 (compound)/2018 (formulation)
emend
gardasil
hyzaar
invanz
2016 (compound)/2017 (composition)
isentress
januvia/janumet
2022 (compound)/2026 (salt)
maxalt
2012 (compound)/2014 (other)
primaxin
propecia
recombivax
rotateq
2019 (with pending patent term restoration)
singulair
zetia/vytorin
2017 (ezetimibecomponent in both products)
zolinza
zostavax
table of contents
a basic patent is also in effect for sustiva/stocrin.
bristol-myers squibb company, under an exclusive license
from the company, sells sustiva in the united states, canada and
certain european countries. the company markets stocrin
in other countries throughout the world.
while the expiration of a product patent normally results in a
loss of market exclusivity for the covered pharmaceutical
product, commercial benefits may continue to be derived from:
(i)later-granted patents on processes and intermediates
related to the most economical method of manufacture of the
active ingredient of such product; (ii)patents relating to
the use of such product; (iii)patents relating to novel
compositions and formulations; and (iv)in the united
states and certain other countries, market exclusivity that may
be available under relevant law. the effect of product patent
expiration on pharmaceutical products also depends upon many
other factors such as the nature of the market and the position
of the product in it, the growth of the market, the complexities
and economics of the process for manufacture of the active
ingredient of the product and the requirements of new drug
provisions of the federal food, drug and cosmetic act or similar
laws and regulations in other countries.
additions to market exclusivity are sought in the united states
and other countries through all relevant laws, including laws
increasing patent life. some of the benefits of increases in
patent life have been partially offset by a general increase in
the number of incentives for and use of generic products.
additionally, improvements in intellectual property laws are
sought in the united states and other countries through reform
of patent and other relevant laws and implementation of
international treaties.
for further information with respect to the companys
patents, see patent litigation and risk
factors below.
worldwide, all of the companys important products are sold
under trademarks that are considered in the aggregate to be of
material importance. trademark protection continues in some
countries as long as used; in other countries, as long as
registered. registration is for fixed terms and can be renewed
indefinitely.
royalties received during 2008 on patent and know-how licenses
and other rights amounted to $209.3million. the company
also paid royalties amounting to $1.318billion in 2008
under patent and know-how licenses it holds.
research
and development
the companys business is characterized by the introduction
of new products or new uses for existing products through a
strong research and development program. approximately
11,000people are employed in the companys research
activities. research and development expenses were
$4.8billion in 2008, $4.9billion in 2007 and
$4.8billion in 2006. the company maintains its ongoing
commitment to research over a broad range of therapeutic areas
and clinical development in support of new products.
the company maintains a number of long-term exploratory and
fundamental research programs in biology and chemistry as well
as research programs directed toward product development.
mercks research and development model is designed to
increase productivity and improve the probability of success by
prioritizing the companys research and development
resources on disease areas of unmet medical needs, scientific
opportunity and commercial opportunity. merck is managing its
research and development portfolio across diverse approaches to
discovery and development by balancing investments appropriately
on novel, innovative targets with the potential to have a major
impact on human health, on developing
best-in-class
approaches, and on delivering maximum value of the
companys new medicines and vaccines through new
indications and new formulations. another important component of
mercks science-based diversification is based on expanding
the companys portfolio of modalities to include not only
small molecules and vaccines, but also biologics, peptides and
rnai. further, merck is moving to diversify its portfolio by
creating a new division, merck bioventures, which leverages a
unique platform for both follow-on and novel biologics. the
company will continue to pursue appropriate external licensing
opportunities.
during 2008, the company began implementing a new model for its
basic research global operating strategy. the new model will
align franchise and function through clear roles and
responsibilities, align resources
table of contents
with disease area priorities and balance capacity across
discovery phases and allow the company to act upon those
programs with the highest probability of success. additionally,
the strategy is designed to expand the companys access to
worldwide external science and incorporate external research as
a key component of the companys early discovery pipeline
in order to translate basic research productivity into
late-stage clinical success.
in the development of human health products, industry practice
and government regulations in the unitedstates and most
foreign countries provide for the determination of effectiveness
and safety of new chemical compounds through preclinical tests
and controlled clinical evaluation. before a new drug or vaccine
may be marketed in the united states, recorded data on
preclinical and clinical experience are included in the nda for
a drug or the biologics license application (bla)
for a vaccine submitted to the fda for the required approval.
once the companys scientists discover a new small molecule
compound that they believe has promise to treat a medical
condition, the company commences preclinical testing with that
compound. preclinical testing includes laboratory testing and
animal safety studies to gather data on chemistry, pharmacology
and toxicology. pending acceptable preclinical data, the company
will initiate clinical testing in accordance with established
regulatory requirements. the clinical testing begins with phase
i studies, which are designed to assess safety, tolerability,
pharmacokinetics, and preliminary pharmacodynamic activity of
the compound in humans. if favorable, additional, larger
phaseii studies are initiated to determine the efficacy of
the compound in the affected population, define appropriate
dosing for the compound, as well as identify any adverse effects
that could limit the compounds usefulness. if data from
the phaseii trials are satisfactory, the company commences
large-scale phaseiii trials to confirm the compounds
efficacy and safety. upon completion of those trials, if
satisfactory, the company submits regulatory filings with the
appropriate regulatory agencies around the world to have the
product candidate approved for marketing. there can be no
assurance that a compound that is the result of any particular
program will obtain the regulatory approvals necessary for it to
be marketed.
vaccine development follows the same general pathway as for
drugs. preclinical testing focuses on the vaccines safety
and ability to elicit a protective immune response
(immunogenicity). pre-marketing vaccine clinical trials are
typically done in three phases. initial phase i clinical studies
are conducted in normal subjects to evaluate the safety,
tolerability and immunogenicity of the vaccine candidate.
phaseii studies are dose-ranging studies and may enroll
hundreds of subjects. finally, phaseiii trials typically
enroll thousands of individuals and provide the necessary data
on effectiveness and safety. if successful, the company submits
regulatory filings with the appropriate regulatory agencies.
also during this stage, the proposed manufacturing facility
undergoes a pre-approval inspection during which production of
the vaccine as it is in progress is examined in detail.
in the united states, the fda review process begins once a
complete nda is submitted and received by the fda. pursuant to
the prescription drug user fee act, the fda review period
targets for ndas or supplemental ndas is either six months, for
priority review, or ten months, for a standard review. within
60days after receipt of an nda, the fda determines if the
application is sufficiently complete to permit a substantive
review. the fda also assesses, at that time, whether the
application will be granted a priority review or standard
review. once the review timelines are defined, the fda will
generally act upon the application within those timelines,
unless a major amendment has been submitted (either at the
companys own initiative or the fdas request) to the
pending application. if this occurs, the fda may extend the
review period to allow for review of the new information, but by
no more than 180days. extensions to the review period are
communicated to the company. the fda can act on an application
by issuing an approval letter or a complete response letter.
the company anticipates filing an nda with the fda in 2009 for
mk-0974, telcagepant, an investigational oral calcitonin
gene-related peptide receptor antagonist, which represents a new
mechanism for the treatment of migraine and has demonstrated
efficacy comparable to zolmitriptan, an effective triptan, in
the phaseiii clinical program.
the company also anticipates filing an nda with the fda in 2009
for mk-7418, rolofylline, a potential
first-in-class
selective adenosine a1 antagonist, which is a phaseiii
investigational drug being evaluated for the treatment of acute
heart failure.
table of contents
additionally, the company anticipates filing an nda with the fda
in 2009 for mk-0653c, ezetimibe combined with atorvastatin, an
investigational medication for the treatment of dyslipidemia
being developed by the merck/schering-plough joint venture.
the company also anticipates regulatory action in 2009 on two
supplemental filings that have been submitted to the fda: one
for gardasil, mercks hpv vaccine, for use in males;
and one for isentress, a
first-in-class
integrase inhibitor for the treatment of hiv-1 infection, for an
expanded indication for use in treatment-nave patients.
in january 2009, the company received a second complete response
letter from fda regarding the supplemental bla
(sbla) for the use of gardasil in women
ages27 though 45. the agency has completed its review of
the response that merck provided in july 2008 and has
recommended that merck submit additional data when the
48month study has been completed. the initial sbla
included data collected through an average of 24months
from enrollment into the study, which is when the number of
pre-specified endpoints had been met. following a review of the
final results of the study, merck anticipates providing a
response to the agency in the fourth quarter of 2009. the letter
does not affect current indications for gardasil in
females ages9 through 26 nor does the letter relate to the
sbla that was submitted in december 2008 for the use of
gardasil in males.
in february 2009, data on several phaseiii isentress
studies were presented at the
16thconference
on retroviruses and opportunistic infections in montreal,
canada. in new subgroup analyses of a phaseiii study
(startmrk) that compared isentress to efavirenz (one of
the leading antiretrovirals prescribed for previously untreated
(treatment-nave) hiv-infected patients), isentress
was found to be as effective as efavirenz at suppressing
viral load and provided improvements in immune system function
across a broad spectrum of patient subpopulations through
48weeks. the use of isentress in previously
untreated hiv-infected patients is an investigational use of the
drug. both medicines were taken in combination with
tenofovir/emtricitabine. in addition, results from two
phaseiii studies (switchmrk-1 and -2) evaluating the
effect of switching patients whose hiv is controlled on a
lopinavir/ritonavir-based regimen to a regimen containing
isentress tablets showed that isentress
significantly improved total cholesterol, triglycerides and
non-hdl-cholesterol. the study also showed that isentress
did not demonstrate non-inferior virologic efficacy at
maintaining viral load suppression. as a result of the viral
load findings in these trials, merck discontinued these two
studies.
merck currently has nine products in phaseiii development
(including mk-0974 and mk-7418 discussed above):
mk-8669, deforolimus, is a novel mtor (mammalian target of
rapamycin) inhibitor being evaluated for the treatment of
cancer. the drug candidate is being jointly developed and
commercialized with ariad pharmaceuticals, inc., under an
agreement reached in 2007. a phaseiii study (succeed) in
patients with metastatic soft-tissue or bone sarcomas is under
way. the company continues to anticipate filing an nda with the
fda in 2010.
v503 is a nine-valent hpv vaccine in development to expand
protection against cancer-causing hpv types. the phaseiii
clinical program is underway and merck anticipates filing a bla
with the fda in 2012.
mk-0822, odanacatib, is a highly selective inhibitor of the
cathepsin k enzyme, which is being evaluated for the treatment
of osteoporosis. the phaseiii program is ongoing. merck
continues to anticipate filing an nda with the fda in 2012.
mk-0524a is a drug candidate that combines extended-release
(er) niacin and a novel flushing inhibitor,
laropiprant. mk-0524a has demonstrated the ability to lower
ldl-cholesterol (ldl-c), raise hdl-cholesterol
(hdl-c) and lower triglycerides with significantly
less flushing than traditional extended release niacin alone.
high ldl-c, low hdl-c and elevated triglycerides are risk
factors associated with heart attacks and strokes. in april
2008, merck received a non-approvable action letter from the fda
in response to its nda for mk-0524a. at a meeting to the discuss
the letter, the fda stated that additional efficacy and safety
data were required and suggested that the company wait for the
results of the treatment of hdl to reduce the incidence of
vascular events (hps2-thrive) cardiovascular
outcomes study, which is expected to be completed in january
2012. merck anticipates filing an nda with the fda for mk-0524a
in 2012.
table of contents
in july 2008, the company announced that tredaptive (also
known as mk-0524a) was approved for marketing in the 27
countries of the eu, iceland and norway. tredaptive is
approved for the treatment of dyslipidemia, particularly in
patients with combined mixed dyslipidemia (characterized by
elevated levels of ldl-c and triglycerides and low hdl-c) and in
patients with primary hypercholesterolemia (heterozygous
familial and non-familial). tredaptive should be used in
patients in combination with statins, when the cholesterol
lowering effects of statin monotherapy is inadequate.
tredaptive can be used as monotherapy only in patients in
whom statins are considered inappropriate or not tolerated. the
launch of tredaptive in europe and other markets has been
delayed due to a manufacturing-related issue. merck is committed
to quickly resolving the issue and to making tredaptive
available in europe as soon as possible. in other countries
around the world, merck continues to pursue regulatory approvals
for mk-0524a.
mk-0524b is a drug candidate that combines the novel approach to
raising hdl-c and lowering triglycerides from er niacin combined
with laropiprant with the proven benefits of simvastatin in one
combination product. merck will not seek approval for mk-0524b
in the united states until it files its complete response
relating to mk-0524a.
mk-0859, anacetrapib, is an inhibitor of the cholesteryl ester
transfer protein that has shown promise in lipid management by
raising hdl-c and reducing ldl-c without raising blood pressure.
a phaseiii study was initiated in 2008 and enrollment in a
cardiovascular outcomes study is planned to begin in 2010. the
company anticipates filing an nda with the fda beyond 2014.
mk-0431c combines januvia with pioglitazone, another type
2 diabetes therapy. the company anticipates filing an nda with
the fda in 2011.
in october 2008, merck announced it will not seek regulatory
approval for taranabant, an investigational medicine, to treat
obesity and has discontinued its phaseiii clinical
development program for taranabant for obesity. available
phaseiii data showed that both efficacy and adverse events
were dose related, with greater efficacy and more adverse events
in the higher doses. therefore, after careful consideration, the
company determined that the overall profile of taranabant did
not support further development for obesity.
in december 2008, the company terminated its collaboration with
dynavax technologies corporation (dynavax) for the
development of v270, an investigational hepatitis b vaccine,
which was entered into in 2007. in october 2008, merck and
dynavax received notification from the fda regarding the two
companies response to the agencys request for safety
information relating to the clinical hold on the two
investigational new drug (ind) applications for
v270. in issuing the clinical hold in march 2008, the fda
requested a review of clinical and safety data including all
available information about a single case of wegeners
granulomatosis, an uncommon disease in which the blood vessels
are inflamed, reported in a phaseiii clinical trial.
dynavax and merck had previously provided a response to the fda
in september 2008. in its october 2008 correspondence, the fda
advised the companies that the balance of risk versus potential
benefit no longer favored continued clinical evaluation of v270
in healthy adults and children.
the companys clinical pipeline includes candidates in
multiple disease areas, including anemia, atherosclerosis,
cancer, diabetes, heart failure, hypertension, infectious
diseases, migraine, neurodegenerative diseases, psychiatric
diseases, osteoporosis, pain, and respiratory disease. the
company supplements its internal research with an aggressive
licensing and external alliance strategy focused on the entire
spectrum of collaborations from early research to late-stage
compounds, as well as new technologies. the company completed a
number of transactions in 2008, including research
collaborations, preclinical and clinical compounds, and
technology transactions across a broad range of therapeutic
categories.
in september 2008, merck and japan tobacco inc. (jt)
signed a worldwide licensing agreement to develop and
commercialize jtt-305, an investigational oral osteoanabolic
(bone growth stimulating) agent for the treatment of
osteoporosis, a disease which reduces bone density and strength
and results in an increased risk of bone fractures. jtt-305 is
an investigational oral calcium sensing receptor antagonist that
is currently being evaluated by jt in phaseii clinical
trials in japan for its effect on increasing bone density and is
in phase i clinical trials outside of japan. under the terms of
the agreement, merck gained worldwide rights, except for japan,
to develop and commercialize jtt-305 and certain other related
compounds. jt received an upfront payment of $85million,
which
table of contents
the company recorded as research and development expense, and is
eligible to receive additional cash payments upon achievement of
certain milestones associated with the development and approval
of a drug candidate covered by this agreement. jt will also be
eligible to receive royalties from sales of any drug candidates
that receive marketing approval. the license agreement between
merck and jt will remain in effect until expiration of all
royalty and milestone obligations, and may be terminated in the
event of an uncured material breach by the other party. the
agreement may also be terminated by merck without cause before
initial commercial sale of jtt-305 by giving six months prior
notice to jt, and thereafter by giving one year prior notice
thereof to jt. the license agreement may also be terminated
immediately by merck if merck determines due to safety
and/or
efficacy concerns based on available scientific evidence to
cease development of jtt-305
and/or to
withdraw jtt-305 from the market on a permanent basis.
in february 2009, merck entered into a definitive agreement with
insmed inc. (insmed) to purchase insmeds
portfolio of follow-on biologic therapeutic candidates and its
commercial manufacturing facilities located in boulder,
colorado. under the terms of the agreement, merck will pay
insmed an aggregate of $130million in cash to acquire all
rights to the boulder facilities  and insmeds pipeline of
follow-on biologic candidates. insmeds follow-on biologics
portfolio includes two clinical candidates: ins-19, an
investigational recombinant granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor (g-csf) that will be evaluated for its
ability to prevent infections in patients with cancer receiving
chemotherapy, and ins-20, a pegylated recombinant g-csf designed
to allow for less frequent dosing. the agreement provides for
initial payments of up to $10million for ins-19 and
ins-20. merck will pay insmed the remaining balance upon closing
of the transaction, which is expected by the end of the first
quarter of 2009, without any further milestone or royalty
obligations.
the chart below reflects the companys current research
pipeline as of february15, 2009. candidates shown in
phaseiii include specific products. candidates shown in
phase i andii include the most advanced compound with a
specific mechanism in a given therapeutic area. small molecules
and biologics are given mk-number designations and vaccine
candidates are given v-number designations.
back-up
compounds, regardless of their phase of development, additional
indications in the same therapeutic area and additional claims,
line extensions or formulations for in-line products are not
shown. all clinical programs in merck bioventures division are
included.
phasei
alzheimers
disease
v950
anemia
mk-2578
cancer
mk-0752
mk-1775
mk-2206
mk-4101
mk-4827
mk-5108
mk-8033
v934/v935
cardiovascular
mk-1597
mk-3614
mk-8984
phasei
diabetes
mk-4074
infectious disease
mk-3281
neurologic
mk-5395
neutropenia
ins-19
ins-20
psychiatric disease
mk-0594
mk-8368
mk-8998
respiratory disease
mk-5932
phaseii
atherosclerosis
mk-1903
mk-6213
cancer
mk-0646
diabetes
mk-0893
mk-0941
mk-8245
infectious disease
mk-7009
v419
v710
insomnia
mk-4305
neurologic
mk-0249
osteoporosis
mk-5442 (jtt-305)
psychiatric disease
mk-5757
respiratory disease
mk-0476c
mk-0633
sarcopenia
mk-2866
phaseiii
acute heart failure
mk-7418
(rolofylline)
atherosclerosis
mk-0524a
(extended-release
niacin/laropiprant)
mk-0524b
(extended-release
niacin/laropiprant/
simvastatin)
mk-0859
(anacetrapib)
cancer
mk-8669
(deforolimus;
ap23573)
diabetes
mk-0431c
hpv
v503
migraine
mk-0974
(telcagepant)
osteoporosis
mk-0822
(odanacatib)
table of contents
all product or service marks appearing in type form different
from that of the surrounding text are trademarks or service
marks owned by or licensed to merck, its subsidiaries or
affiliates (including zetia and vytorin,
trademarks owned by entities of the merck/schering-plough
partnership), except as noted. cozaar and hyzaar
are registered trademarks of e.i. du pont de nemours and
company, wilmington, de and prilosec and nexium
are trademarks of the astrazeneca group. the
u.s.trademarks for vasotec and vaseretic are
owned by biovail laboratories incorporated.
employees
as of december31, 2008, the company had approximately
55,200employees worldwide, with approximately 28,800
employed in the united states, including puerto rico.
approximately 21% of worldwide employees of the company are
represented by various collective bargaining groups.
in october 2008, the company announced a global restructuring
program (the 2008 restructuring program) to reduce
its cost structure, increase efficiency, and enhance
competitiveness. as part of the 2008 restructuring program, the
company expects to eliminate approximately 7,200
positions 6,800 active employees and 400
vacancies across all areas of the company worldwide
by the end of 2011. about 40% of the total reductions will occur
in the united states. as part of the 2008 restructuring program,
the company is streamlining management layers by reducing its
total number of senior and mid-level executives globally by
approximately 25%. merck will rollout a new, more
customer-centric selling model designed to provide merck with a
meaningful competitive advantage and help physicians, patients
and payers improve patient outcomes. the company also will make
greater use of outside technology resources, centralize common
sales and marketing activities, and consolidate and streamline
its operations. mercks manufacturing division will further
focus its capabilities on core products and outsource non-core
manufacturing. in addition, merck is expanding its access to
worldwide external science through a basic research global
operating strategy, which is designed to provide a sustainable
pipeline and is focused on translating basic research
productivity into late-stage clinical success. to increase
efficiencies, basic research operations will consolidate work in
support of a given therapeutic area into one of four locations.
this will provide a more efficient use of research facilities
and result in the closure of three basic research sites in
tsukuba, japan; pomezia, italy; and seattle by the end of 2009.
environmental
matters
the company believes that it is in compliance in all material
respects with applicable environmental laws and regulations. in
2008, the company incurred capital expenditures of approximately
$18.7million for environmental protection facilities. the
company is also remediating environmental contamination
resulting from past industrial activity at certain of its sites.
expenditures for remediation and environmental liabilities were
$34.5million in 2008, $19.5million in 2007,
$12.6million in 2006, and are estimated at
$47.1million for the years 2009 through 2013. these
amounts do not consider potential recoveries from other parties.
the company has taken an active role in identifying and
providing for these costs and, in managements opinion, the
liabilities for all environmental matters which are probable and
reasonably estimable have been accrued and totaled
$89.5million at december31, 2008. although it is not
possible to predict with certainty the outcome of these
environmental matters, or the ultimate costs of remediation,
management does not believe that any reasonably possible
expenditures that may be incurred in excess of the liabilities
accrued should exceed $70.0million in the aggregate.
management also does not believe that these expenditures should
have a material adverse effect on the companys financial
position, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources
for any year.
geographic
area information
the companys operations outside the united states are
conducted primarily through subsidiaries. sales worldwide by
subsidiaries outside the united states were 44% of sales in
2008  and 39% of sales in 2007 and 2006.
the companys worldwide business is subject to risks of
currency fluctuations, governmental actions and other
governmental proceedings abroad. the company does not regard
these risks as a deterrent to further expansion of its
operations abroad. however, the company closely reviews its
methods of operations and adopts strategies responsive to
changing economic and political conditions.
table of contents
in recent years, the company has been expanding its operations
in countries located in latin america, the middle east, africa,
eastern europe and asia pacific where changes in government
policies and economic conditions are making it possible for the
company to earn fair returns. business in these developing
areas, while sometimes less stable, offers important
opportunities for growth over time.
financial information about geographic areas of the
companys business is discussed in item8.
financial statements and supplementary data below.
available
information
the companys internet website address is
www.merck.com. the company will make available,
free of charge at the investor information portion
of its website, its annual report on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
current reports on
form8-k,
and all amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant
to section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934, as amended, as soon as reasonably practicable after such
reports are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the
securities and exchange commission (sec).
the companys corporate governance guidelines and the
charters of the board of directors six standing committees
are available on the companys website at
www.merck.com/about/corporategovernance and all
such information is available in print to any stockholder who
requests it from the company.
item1a.
risk
factors.
you should carefully consider all of the information set forth
in this
form10-k,
including the following risk factors, before deciding to invest
in any of the companys securities. the risks below are not
the only ones the company faces. additional risks not currently
known to the company or that the company presently deems
immaterial may also impair its business operations. the
companys business, financial condition, results of
operations or prospects could be materially adversely affected
by any of these risks. this
form10-k
also contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and
uncertainties. the companys results could materially
differ from those anticipated in these forward-looking
statements as a result of certain factors, including the risks
it faces as described below and elsewhere. see cautionary
factors that may affect future results below.
the company faces significant litigation related to
vioxx.
on september30, 2004, the company voluntarily withdrew
vioxx, its arthritis and acute pain medication, from the
market worldwide. as of december31, 2008, approximately
10,800 product liability lawsuits, involving approximately
26,800 plaintiff groups, alleging personal injuries resulting
from the use of vioxx, have been filed against the
company in state and federal courts in the united states. the
company is also a defendant in approximately 242 purported class
actions related to the use of vioxx. (all of these suits
are referred to as the vioxx product liability
lawsuits.) as discussed above, on november9, 2007,
the company announced that it had entered into an agreement (the
settlement agreement) with the law firms that
comprise the executive committee of the plaintiffs
steering committee of the federal multidistrict vioxx
litigation as well as representatives of plaintiffs
counsel in the texas, new jersey and california state
coordinated proceedings to resolve state and federal mi and is
claims filed as of that date in the united states. the
settlement agreement, which also applies to tolled claims, was
signed by the parties after several meetings with three of the
four judges overseeing the coordination of more than 95% of the
current claims in the vioxx product liability litigation.
the settlement agreement applies only to u.s.legal
residents and those who allege that their mi or is occurred in
the united states.
as of october30, 2008, the deadline for enrollment in the
settlement program, more than 48,100 of the approximately 48,325
individuals who were eligible for the settlement program and
whose claims were not 1)dismissed, 2)expected to be
dismissed in the near future, or 3)tolled claims that
appear to have been abandoned had submitted some or all of the
materials required for enrollment in the settlement program.
this represents approximately 99.8% of the eligible mi and is
claims previously registered with the settlement program. under
the terms of the settlement agreement, merck could exercise a
right to walk away from the settlement agreement if the
thresholds and other requirements were not met. the company
waived that right as of august4, 2008. the waiver of that
right triggered mercks obligation to pay a fixed total of
$4.85billion. payments will be made in installments into
the settlement funds. the first payment of $500million was
made in august 2008 and an additional payment of
table of contents
$250million was made in october 2008. additional payments
will be made on a periodic basis going forward, when and as
needed to fund payments of claims and administrative expenses.
of the plaintiff groups described above, most are currently in
the vioxx settlement program. as of december31,
2008, 70 plaintiff groups who were otherwise eligible for the
settlement program have not participated and their claims
remained pending against merck. in addition, the claims of 1,400
plaintiff groups who are not eligible for the program remained
pending against merck. a number of the 1,400 plaintiff groups
are subject to motions to dismiss for failure to comply with
court-ordered deadlines. since december31, 2008, hundreds
of these plaintiff groups have since been dismissed.
claims of certain individual third-party payors remain pending
in the new jersey court, and counsel purporting to represent a
large number of third-party payors has threatened to file
numerous additional such actions. discovery is currently ongoing
in these cases, and a status conference with the court took
place in january 2009 to discuss scheduling issues, including
the selection of early trial pool cases.
there are also pending in various u.s.courts putative
class actions purportedly brought on behalf of individual
purchasers or users of vioxx and claiming either
reimbursement of alleged economic loss or an entitlement to
medical monitoring. all of these cases are at early procedural
stages, and no class has been certified. in new jersey, the
trial court dismissed the complaint in the case of sinclair, a
purported statewide medical monitoring class. the appellate
division reversed the dismissal, and the issue was appealed to
the new jersey supreme court. that court heard argument on
october22, 2007. on june4, 2008, the new jersey
supreme court reversed the appellate division and dismissed this
action.
in addition to the vioxx product liability lawsuits,
various purported class actions and individual lawsuits have
been brought against the company and several current and former
officers and directors of the company alleging that the company
made false and misleading statements regarding vioxx in
violation of the federal and state securities laws (all of these
suits are referred to as the vioxx securities
lawsuits). on april12, 2007, judge chesler granted
defendants motion to dismiss the complaint with prejudice.
plaintiffs appealed judge cheslers decision to the united
states court of appeals for the third circuit. on
september9, 2008, the third circuit issued an opinion
reversing judge cheslers order and remanding the case to
the district court. on september23, 2008, merck filed a
petition seeking rehearing en banc, which was denied. the
case was remanded to the district court in october 2008, and
plaintiffs have filed their consolidated and fifth amended
classaction complaint. in addition, various putative class
actions have been brought against the company and several
current and former employees, officers, and directors of the
company alleging violations of erisa. (all of these suits are
referred to as the vioxx erisa lawsuits.) in
addition, shareholder derivative suits that were previously
filed and dismissed are now on appeal and several shareholders
have filed demands with the company asserting claims against the
board members and company officers. (all of these suits and
demands are referred to as the vioxx derivative
lawsuits and, together with the vioxx securities
lawsuits and the vioxx erisa lawsuits, the vioxx
shareholder lawsuits.) the company has also been named
as a defendant in actions in various countries outside the
united states. (all of these suits are referred to as the
vioxx foreign lawsuits.) the company has also
been sued by ten states, five counties and new york city with
respect to the marketing of vioxx. the company
anticipates that additional lawsuits relating to vioxx
may be filed against it
and/or
certain of its current and former officers and directors in the
future.
the sec is conducting a formal investigation of the company
concerning vioxx. the doj has issued a subpoena
requesting information relating to the companys research,
marketing and selling activities with respect to vioxx in
a federal health care investigation under criminal statutes.
this investigation includes subpoenas for witnesses to appear
before a grand jury. there are also ongoing investigations by
local authorities in europe. the company is cooperating with
authorities in all of these investigations. (all of these
investigations are referred to as the vioxx
investigations.) the company cannot predict the
outcome of any of these investigations; however, they could
result in potential civil
and/or
criminal liability.
juries have now decided in favor of the company twelve times and
in plaintiffs favor five times. one merck verdict was set
aside by the court and has not been retried. another merck
verdict was set aside and retried, leading to one of the five
plaintiffs verdicts. there have been two unresolved
mistrials. with respect to the five plaintiffs verdicts,
merck filed an appeal or sought judicial review in each of those
cases. in one of those five, an
table of contents
intermediate appellate court overturned the trial verdict and
directed that judgment be entered for merck, and in another, an
intermediate appellate court overturned the trial verdict,
entering judgment for merck on one claim and ordering a new
trial on the remaining claims. the vioxx product
liability litigation is discussed more fully in item3.
legal proceedings below.
the outcomes of these vioxx product liability trials
should not be interpreted to indicate any trend or what outcome
may be likely in future vioxx trials.
a trial in a representative action in australia is scheduled to
commence on march30, 2009, in the federal court of
australia. the named plaintiff, who alleges he suffered a mi,
seeks to represent others in australia who ingested vioxx
and suffered a mi, thrombotic stroke, unstable angina,
transient ischemic attack or peripheral vascular disease. on
november24, 2008, the company filed a motion for an order
that the proceeding no longer continue as a representative
proceeding. during a hearing on december5, 2008, the court
dismissed that motion and, on january9, 2009, issued its
reasons for that decision. on february17, 2009, the
companys motion for leave to appeal that decision was
denied and the parties were directed to prepare proposed lists
of issues to be tried.
the company currently anticipates that two u.s.vioxx
product liability lawsuits will be tried in 2009. except
with respect to the product liability trial scheduled to be held
in australia, the company cannot predict the timing of any other
trials related to the vioxx litigation. the company
believes that it has meritorious defenses to the vioxx
product liability lawsuits, vioxx shareholder
lawsuits and vioxx foreign lawsuits (collectively, the
vioxx lawsuits) and will vigorously defend
against them. the companys insurance coverage with respect
to the vioxx lawsuits will not be adequate to cover its
defense costs and any losses.
during 2008, the company spent approximately $305million
in the aggregate in legal defense costs worldwide related to
(i)the vioxx product liability lawsuits,
(ii)the vioxx shareholder lawsuits, (iii)the
vioxx foreign lawsuits, and (iv)the vioxx
investigations (collectively, the vioxx
litigation). in the fourth quarter of 2008, the company
recorded a charge of $62million to add to the reserve
solely for its future legal defense costs related to the
vioxx litigation which was $522million at
december31, 2007 and $279million at
december31, 2008. in addition, in 2007, the company
recorded a pretax charge of $4.85billion equal to the
aggregate amount to be paid to the qualifying claimants in the
settlement program. during 2008, the company paid
$750million into the settlement funds for the settlement
program. thus, the companys total reserve for the vioxx
litigation at december31, 2008 was $4.379billion
(the vioxx reserve). the amount of the
vioxx reserve allocated to defense costs is based on
certain assumptions, described below under legal
proceedings, and is the best estimate of the minimum
amount that the company believes will be incurred in connection
with the remaining aspects of the vioxx litigation,
however, events such as additional trials in the vioxx
litigation and other events that could arise in the course of
the vioxx litigation could affect the ultimate amount of
defense costs to be incurred by the company.
the company is not currently able to estimate any additional
amount of damages that it may be required to pay in connection
with the vioxx lawsuits or vioxx investigations.
these proceedings are still expected to continue for years and
the company has very little information as to the course the
proceedings will take. in view of the inherent difficulty of
predicting the outcome of litigation, particularly where there
are many claimants and the claimants seek unspecified damages,
the company is unable to predict the outcome of these matters,
and at this time cannot reasonably estimate the possible loss or
range of loss with respect to the vioxx lawsuits not
included in the settlement program. the company has not
established any reserves for any potential liability relating to
the vioxx lawsuits not included in the settlement program
or the vioxx investigations.
a series of unfavorable outcomes in the vioxx lawsuits or
the vioxx investigations, resulting in the payment of
substantial damages or fines or resulting in criminal penalties,
in excess of the vioxx reserve, could have a material
adverse effect on the companys business, cash flow,
results of operations, financial position and prospects.
certain of the companys major products are going to
lose patent protection in the near future and, when that occurs,
the company expects a significant decline in sales of those
products.
the company depends upon patents to provide it with exclusive
marketing rights for its products for some period of time. as
product patents for several of the companys products have
recently expired, or are about to expire, in the united states
and in other countries, the company faces strong competition
from lower price generic
table of contents
drugs. loss of patent protection for one of the companys
products typically leads to a rapid loss of sales for that
product, as lower priced generic versions of that drug become
available. in the case of products that contribute significantly
to the companys sales, the loss of patent protection can
have a material adverse effect on the companys business,
cash flow, results of operations, financial position and
prospects.
fosamax and fosamax plus d lost marketing
exclusivity in the united states in 2008. as a result of these
events, the company is experiencing significant declines in
fosamax and fosamax plus d u.s.sales. sales
of fosamax outside the united states have already been
adversely affected by the availability of generic alendronate
sodium products in some markets, including the united kingdom,
canada and germany. also, trusopt and cosopt lost
market exclusivity in the united states in october 2008 and as a
result the company is experiencing a significant decline in
sales of these products.
the patent that provides u.s. market exclusivity for
primaxin expires in september 2009. after such time, the
company expects a significant decline in u.s. sales of
primaxin. in addition, cozaar and hyzaar
will each lose patent protection in the united states in april
2010. the company expects significant declines in u.s. sales of
these products after that time.
a chart listing the u.s.patent protection for the
companys major marketed products is set forth above in
item1. business patents, trademarks and
licenses.
the companys research and development efforts may not
succeed in developing commercially successful products and the
company may not be able to acquire commercially successful
products in other ways; in consequence, the company may not be
able to replace sales of successful products that have lost
patent protection.
like other major pharmaceutical companies, in order to remain
competitive, the company must continue to launch new products
each year. declines in sales of products such as zocor
and fosamax after the loss of marketing exclusivity
mean that the companys future success is dependent on its
pipeline of new products, including new products which it
develops through joint ventures and products which it is able to
obtain through license or acquisition. to accomplish this, the
company commits substantial effort, funds and other resources to
research and development, both through its own dedicated
resources, and through various collaborations with third
parties. to support its research and development efforts the
company must make ongoing, substantial expenditures, without any
assurance that the efforts it is funding will result in a
commercially successful product. the company must also commit
substantial efforts, funds and other resources to recruiting and
retaining high quality scientists and other personnel with
pharmaceutical research and development expertise.
for a description of the research and development process, see
research and development above. each phase of
testing is highly regulated, and during each phase there is a
substantial risk that the company will encounter serious
obstacles or will not achieve its goals, and accordingly the
company may abandon a product in which it has invested
substantial amounts of time and money. some of the risks
encountered in the research and development process include the
following: pre-clinical testing of a new compound may yield
disappointing results; clinical trials of a new drug may not be
successful; a new drug may not be effective or may have harmful
side effects; a new drug may not be approved by the fda for its
intended use; it may not be possible to obtain a patent for a
new drug; or sales of a new product may be disappointing.
the company cannot state with certainty when or whether any of
its products now under development will be approved or launched;
whether it will be able to develop, license or otherwise acquire
compounds, product candidates or products; or whether any
products, once launched, will be commercially successful. the
company must maintain a continuous flow of successful new
products and successful new indications or brand extensions for
existing products sufficient both to cover its substantial
research and development costs and to replace sales that are
lost as profitable products, such as zocor and
fosamax, lose patent protection or are displaced by
competing products or therapies. failure to do so in the short
term or long term would have a material adverse effect on the
companys business, results of operations, cash flow,
financial position and prospects.
table of contents
issues concerning vytorin and the enhance and seas
clinical trials have had an adverse effect on sales of
vytorin and zetia in the u.s.
the company and schering-plough sell vytorin and zetia
through their joint venture company, the msp partnership. on
january14, 2008, the msp partnership announced the primary
endpoint and other results of the enhance trial. enhance was a
surrogate endpoint trial conducted in 720patients with
heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, a rare condition
that affects approximately 0.2% of the population. the primary
endpoint was the mean change in the intima-media thickness
measured at three sites in the carotid arteries (the right and
left common carotid, internal carotid and carotid bulb) between
patients treated with ezetimibe/simvastatin 10/80 mg versus
patients treated with simvastatin 80mg alone over a two
year period. there was no statistically significant difference
between treatment groups on the primary endpoint. there was also
no statistically significant difference between the treatment
groups for each of the components of the primary endpoint,
including the common carotid artery.
as previously disclosed, the company and its joint venture
partner, schering-plough, have received several letters
addressed to both companies from the house committee on energy
and commerce, its subcommittee on oversight and investigations
(o&i), and the ranking minority member of the
senate finance committee, collectively seeking a combination of
witness interviews, documents and information on a variety of
issues related to the enhance clinical trial, the sale and
promotion of vytorin, as well as sales of stock by
corporate officers. in addition, since august 2008, the
companies have received three additional letters from o&i,
including one dated february19, 2009, seeking certain
information and documents related to the seas clinical trial,
which is described in more detail below. the companies have each
received subpoenas from the new york and new jersey state
attorneys general offices and a letter from the connecticut
attorney general seeking similar information and documents. in
addition, the company has received five civil investigative
demands (cids) from a multistate group of 35 state
attorneys general who are jointly investigating whether the
companies violated state consumer protection laws when marketing
vytorin. finally, in september 2008, the company received
a letter from the civil division of the doj informing it that
the doj is investigating whether the companies conduct
relating to the promotion of vytorin caused false claims
to be submitted to federal health care programs. the company is
cooperating with these investigations and working with
schering-plough to respond to the inquiries. in addition, the
company has become aware of or been served with approximately
145 civil class action lawsuits alleging common law and state
consumer fraud claims in connection with the msp
partnerships sale and promotion of vytorin and
zetia. certain of those lawsuits allege personal injuries
and/or seek
medical monitoring. also, as previously disclosed, on
april3, 2008, a merck shareholder filed a putative class
action lawsuit in federal court in the eastern district of
pennsylvania alleging that merck and its chairman, president and
chief executive officer, richard t. clark, violated the federal
securities laws. on april22, 2008, a member of a merck
erisa plan filed a putative class action lawsuit against the
company and certain of its officers and directors alleging they
breached their fiduciary duties under erisa.
in january 2009, the fda announced that it had completed its
review of the final clinical study report of enhance. the fda
stated that the results from enhance did not change its position
that an elevated ldl cholesterol is a risk factor for
cardiovascular disease and that lowering ldl cholesterol reduces
the risk for cardiovascular disease. the fda also stated that,
based on current available data, patients should not stop taking
vytorin or other cholesterol lowering medications and
should talk to their doctor if they have any questions about
vytorin, zetia, or the enhance trial.
in july 2008, efficacy and safety results from the seas study
were announced. seas was designed to evaluate whether intensive
lipid lowering with vytorin would reduce the need for
aortic valve replacement and the risk of cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality versus placebo in patients with
asymptomatic mild to moderate aortic stenosis who had no
indication for statin therapy. vytorin failed to meet its
primary end point for the reduction of major cardiovascular
events. there also was no significant difference in the key
secondary end point of aortic valve events; however, there was a
reduction in the group of patients taking vytorin
compared to placebo in the key secondary end point of
ischemic cardiovascular events. in the study, patients in the
group who took vytorin had a higher incidence of cancer
than the group who took placebo. there was also a nonsignificant
increase in deaths from
table of contents
cancer in patients in the group who took vytorin versus
those who took placebo. cancer and cancer deaths were
distributed across all major organ systems.
in august 2008, the fda announced that it was investigating the
results from the seas trial. in this announcement, the fda also
cited interim data from two large ongoing cardiovascular trials
of vytorin the study of heart and renal
protection (sharp) and the improve-it clinical
trials in which there was no increased risk of
cancer with the combination of simvastatin plus ezetimibe. the
sharp trial is expected to be completed in 2010. the improve-it
trial is scheduled for completion around 2012. the fda
determined that, as of that time, these findings in the seas
trial plus the interim data from ongoing trials should not
prompt patients to stop taking vytorin or any other
cholesterol lowering drug.
following the announcements of the enhance and seas clinical
trial results, sales of vytorin and zetia declined
in 2008 in the u.s.these issues concerning the enhance and
seas clinical trials have had an adverse effect on the msp
partnerships sales of vytorin and zetia and
could continue to have an adverse effect on such sales. if sales
of such products are materially adversely affected, the
companys business, cash flow, results of operations,
financial position and prospects could also be materially
adversely affected. in addition, unfavorable outcomes resulting
from the government investigations or the litigation concerning
the sale and promotion of these products could have a material
adverse effect on the companys business, cash flow,
results of operations, financial position and prospects.
the companys products, including products in
development, can not be marketed unless the company obtains and
maintains regulatory approval.
the companys activities, including research, preclinical
testing, clinical trials and manufacturing and marketing its
products, are subject to extensive regulation by numerous
federal, state and local governmental authorities in the united
states, including the fda, and by foreign regulatory
authorities, including the european commission. in the united
states, the fda is of particular importance to the company, as
it administers requirements covering the testing, approval,
safety, effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling and marketing of
prescription pharmaceuticals. in many cases, the fda
requirements have increased the amount of time and money
necessary to develop new products and bring them to market in
the united states. regulation outside the united states also is
primarily focused on drug safety and effectiveness and, in many
cases, cost reduction. the fda and foreign regulatory
authorities have substantial discretion to require additional
testing, to delay or withhold registration and marketing
approval and to mandate product withdrawals.
even if the company is successful in developing new products, it
will not be able to market any of those products unless and
until it has obtained all required regulatory approvals in each
jurisdiction where it proposes to market the new products. once
obtained, the company must maintain approval as long as it plans
to market its new products in each jurisdiction where approval
is required. the companys failure to obtain approval,
significant delays in the approval process, or its failure to
maintain approval in any jurisdiction will prevent it from
selling the new products in that jurisdiction until approval is
obtained, if ever. the company would not be able to realize
revenues for those new products in any jurisdiction where it
does not have approval.
the company is dependent on its patent rights, and if its
patent rights are invalidated or circumvented, its business
would be adversely affected.
patent protection is considered, in the aggregate, to be of
material importance in the companys marketing of human
health products in the united states and in most major foreign
markets. patents covering products that it has introduced
normally provide market exclusivity, which is important for the
successful marketing and sale of its products. the company seeks
patents covering each of its products in each of the markets
where it intends to sell the products and where meaningful
patent protection is available.
even if the company succeeds in obtaining patents covering its
products, third parties or government authorities may challenge
or seek to invalidate or circumvent its patents and patent
applications. it is important for the companys business to
defend successfully the patent rights that provide market
exclusivity for its products. the company is often involved in
patent disputes relating to challenges to its patents or
infringement and similar claims against the company. the company
aggressively defends its important patents both within and
outside the united states, including by filing claims of
infringement against other parties. see item3. legal
proceedings patent
table of contents
litigation below. in particular, manufacturers of generic
pharmaceutical products from time to time file abbreviated new
drug applications (anda) with the fda seeking to
market generic forms of the companys products prior to the
expiration of relevant patents owned by the company. the company
normally responds by vigorously defending its patent, including
by filing lawsuits alleging patent infringement. patent
litigation and other challenges to the companys patents
are costly and unpredictable and may deprive the company of
market exclusivity for a patented product or, in some cases,
third party patents may prevent the company from marketing and
selling a product in a particular geographic area.
as discussed below in item3. legal
proceedings patent litigation, the company has
received a notice from teva pharmaceuticals, inc.
(teva), a generic company, indicating that it had
filed an anda for montelukast and that it is challenging the
u.s.patent that is listed for singulair. on
april2, 2007, the company filed a patent infringement
action against teva. the lawsuit automatically stays fda
approval of tevas anda until august 2009 or until an
adverse court decision, if any, whichever may occur earlier. a
trial in this matter commenced on february23, 2009.
if one or more important products lose patent protection in
profitable markets, sales of those products are likely to
decline significantly as a result of generic versions of those
products becoming available. the companys results of
operations may be adversely affected by the lost sales unless
and until the company has successfully launched commercially
successful replacement products.
the company faces intense competition from lower-cost generic
products.
in general, the company faces increasing competition from
lower-cost generic products. the patent rights that protect its
products are of varying strengths and durations. in addition, in
some countries, patent protection is significantly weaker than
in the united states or the eu. in the united states, political
pressure to reduce spending on prescription drugs has led to
legislation which encourages the use of generic products.
although it is the companys policy to actively protect its
patent rights, generic challenges to the companys products
can arise at any time, and it may not be able to prevent the
emergence of generic competition for its products.
loss of patent protection for a product typically is followed
promptly by generic substitutes, reducing the companys
sales of that product. availability of generic substitutes for
the companys drugs may adversely affect its results of
operations and cash flow. in addition, proposals emerge from
time to time in the united states and other countries for
legislation to further encourage the early and rapid approval of
generic drugs. any such proposal that is enacted into law could
worsen this substantial negative effect on the companys
sales and, potentially, its business, cash flow, results of
operations, financial position and prospects.
the company faces intense competition from new products.
the companys products face intense competition from
competitors products. this competition may increase as new
products enter the market. in such an event, the
competitors products may be safer or more effective or
more effectively marketed and sold than the companys
products. alternatively, in the case of generic competition,
they may be equally safe and effective products which are sold
at a substantially lower price than the companys products.
as a result, if the company fails to maintain its competitive
position, this could have a material adverse effect on its
business, cash flow, results of operations, financial position
and prospects.
the company faces pricing pressure with respect to its
products.
the companys products are subject to increasing price
pressures and other restrictions worldwide, including in the
united states. in the united states, these include
(i)practices of managed care groups and institutional and
governmental purchasers and (ii)u.s.federal laws and
regulations related to medicare and medicaid, including the
medicare prescription drug improvement and modernization act of
2003 (the 2003 act). the 2003 act included a
prescription drug benefit for individuals which first went into
effect on january1, 2006. the increased purchasing power
of entities that negotiate on behalf of medicare beneficiaries
could result in further pricing pressures.
outside the united states, numerous major markets have pervasive
government involvement in funding healthcare, and in that
regard, fix the pricing and reimbursement of pharmaceutical and
vaccine products.
table of contents
consequently, in those markets, the company is subject to
government decision making and budgetary actions with respect to
its products.
the company expects pricing pressures to increase in the future.
the company is experiencing difficulties and delays in the
manufacturing of certain of its products.
as previously disclosed, the company has experienced
difficulties in manufacturing certain of its vaccines and other
products. the company is working on these issues, but there can
be no assurance of when or if these issues will be finally
resolved.
in addition to the difficulties that the company is experiencing
currently, the company may experience difficulties and delays
inherent in manufacturing its products, such as (i)failure
of the company or any of its vendors or suppliers to comply with
current good manufacturing practices and other applicable
regulations and quality assurance guidelines that could lead to
manufacturing shutdowns, product shortages and delays in product
manufacturing; (ii)construction delays related to the
construction of new facilities or the expansion of existing
facilities, including those intended to support future demand
for the companys products; and (iii)other
manufacturing or distribution problems including changes in
manufacturing production sites and limits to manufacturing
capacity due to regulatory requirements, changes in types of
products produced, or physical limitations that could impact
continuous supply. manufacturing difficulties can result in
product shortages, leading to lost sales.
pharmaceutical products can develop unexpected safety or
efficacy concerns.
unexpected safety or efficacy concerns can arise with respect to
marketed products, whether or not scientifically justified,
leading to product recalls, withdrawals, or declining sales, as
well as product liability, consumer fraud
and/or other
claims.
the company has no product liability insurance for products
first sold after august1, 2004.
as a result of a number of factors, product liability insurance
has become less available while the cost has increased
significantly. the company has evaluated its risks and has
determined that the cost of obtaining product liability
insurance outweighs the likely benefits of the coverage that is
available and, as such, has no insurance for certain product
liabilities effective august1, 2004, including liability
for products first sold after that date.
changes in laws and regulations could adversely affect the
companys business.
all aspects of the companys business, including research
and development, manufacturing, marketing, pricing, sales,
litigation and intellectual property rights, are subject to
extensive legislation and regulation. changes in applicable
federal and state laws and agency regulations could have a
material adverse effect on the companys business.
the recent financial crisis and current uncertainty in global
economic conditions could negatively affect the companys
operating results.
the current financial crisis and uncertainty in global economic
conditions have resulted in substantial volatility in the credit
markets and a low level of liquidity in many financial markets.
these conditions may result in a further slowdown to the global
economy that could affect the companys business by
reducing the prices that drug wholesalers and retailers,
hospitals, government agencies and managed health care providers
may be able or willing to pay for the companys products or
by reducing the demand for the companys products, which
could in turn negatively impact the companys sales and
revenue generation and result in a material adverse effect on
the companys business, cash flow, results of operations,
financial position and prospects.
reliance on third party relationships and outsourcing
arrangements could adversely affect the companys
business.
the company depends on third parties, including suppliers,
alliances with other pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies
and third party service providers, for key aspects of its
business including development, manufacture and
commercialization of its products and support for its
information technology systems. failure of these third parties
to meet their contractual, regulatory and other obligations to
the company or the development of factors that materially
disrupt the relationships between the company and these third
parties, could have a material adverse effect on the
companys business.
table of contents
the company is increasingly dependent on sophisticated
information technology
and infrastructure.
the company is increasingly dependent on sophisticated
information technology and infrastructure. any significant
breakdown, intrusion, interruption or corruption of these
systems or data breaches could have a material adverse effect on
our business. in addition, the company currently is proceeding
with a multi-year implementation of an enterprise wide resource
planning system, which includes modification to the design,
operation and documentation of its internal controls over
financial reporting, and intends to implement the resource
planning system in the u.s.in 2009. any material problems
in the implementation could have a material adverse effect on
the companys business.
cautionary
factors that may affect future results
(cautionary statements under the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995)
this report, including the annual report, and other written
reports and oral statements made from time to time by the
company may contain so-called forward-looking
statements, all of which are based on managements
current expectations and are subject to risks and uncertainties
which may cause results to differ materially from those set
forth in the statements. one can identify these forward-looking
statements by their use of words such as expects,
plans, will, estimates,
forecasts, projects and other words of
similar meaning. one can also identify them by the fact that
they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts.
these statements are likely to address the companys growth
strategy, financial results, product development, product
approvals, product potential, and development programs. one must
carefully consider any such statement and should understand that
many factors could cause actual results to differ materially
from the companys forward-looking statements. these
factors include inaccurate assumptions and a broad variety of
other risks and uncertainties, including some that are known and
some that are not. no forward-looking statement can be
guaranteed and actual future results may vary materially. the
company does not assume the obligation to update any
forward-looking statement. the company cautions you not to place
undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. although it
is not possible to predict or identify all such factors, they
may include the following:
significant litigation related to vioxx.
competition from generic products as the companys products
lose patent protection.
increased brand competition in therapeutic areas
important to the companys long-term business performance.
the difficulties and uncertainties inherent in new product
development. the outcome of the lengthy and complex process of
new product development is inherently uncertain. a drug
candidate can fail at any stage of the process and one or more
late-stage product candidates could fail to receive regulatory
approval. new product candidates may appear promising in
development but fail to reach the market because of efficacy or
safety concerns, the inability to obtain necessary regulatory
approvals, the difficulty or excessive cost to manufacture
and/or the
infringement of patents or intellectual property rights of
others. furthermore, the sales of new products may prove to be
disappointing and fail to reach anticipated levels.
pricing pressures, both in the united states and abroad,
including rules and practices of managed care groups, judicial
decisions and governmental laws and regulations related to
medicare, medicaid and health care reform, pharmaceutical
reimbursement and pricing in general.
changes in government laws and regulations and the enforcement
thereof affecting the companys business.
efficacy or safety concerns with respect to marketed products,
whether or not scientifically justified, leading to product
recalls, withdrawals or declining sales.
legal factors, including product liability claims, antitrust
litigation and governmental investigations, including tax
disputes, environmental concerns and patent disputes with
branded and generic competitors, any of which could preclude
commercialization of products or negatively affect the
profitability of existing products.
lost market opportunity resulting from delays and uncertainties
in the approval process of the fda and foreign regulatory
authorities.
table of contents
increased focus on privacy issues in countries around the world,
including the united states and the eu. the legislative and
regulatory landscape for privacy and data protection continues
to evolve, and there has been an increasing amount of focus on
privacy and data protection issues with the potential to affect
directly the companys business, including recently enacted
laws in a majority of u.s.states requiring security breach
notification.
changes in tax laws including changes related to the taxation of
foreign earnings.
changes in accounting pronouncements promulgated by
standard-setting or regulatory bodies, including the financial
accounting standards board and the sec, that are adverse to the
company.
economic factors over which the company has no control,
including changes in inflation, interest rates and foreign
currency exchange rates.
this list should not be considered an exhaustive statement of
all potential risks and uncertainties. see risk
factors above.
item1b.
unresolved
staff comments.
none
item2.
properties.
the companys corporate headquarters is located in
whitehouse station, new jersey. the companys
u.s.commercial operations are headquartered in upper
gwynedd, pennsylvania. the companys
u.s.pharmaceutical business is conducted through
divisional headquarters located in upper gwynedd and whitehouse
station, new jersey. the companys vaccines business is
conducted through divisional headquarters located in west point,
pennsylvania. principal research facilities for human health
products are located in rahway, new jersey and west point. the
company also has production facilities for human health products
at seven locations in the united states and puerto rico. outside
the united states, through subsidiaries, the company owns or has
an interest in manufacturing plants or other properties in
australia, canada, japan, singapore, south africa, and other
countries in western europe, central and south america, and asia.
capital expenditures for 2008 were $1.3billion compared
with $1.0billion for 2007. in the united states, these
amounted to $946.6million for 2008 and $788.0million
for 2007. abroad, such expenditures amounted to
$351.7million for 2008 and $223.0million for 2007.
the company and its subsidiaries own their principal facilities
and manufacturing plants under titles which they consider to be
satisfactory. the company considers that its properties are in
good operating condition and that its machinery and equipment
have been well maintained. plants for the manufacture of
products are suitable for their intended purposes and have
capacities and projected capacities adequate for current and
projected needs for existing company products. some capacity of
the plants is being converted, with any needed modification, to
the requirements of newly introduced and future products.
item3.
legal
proceedings.
the company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings
of a nature considered normal to its business, including product
liability, intellectual property, and commercial litigation, as
well as additional matters such as antitrust actions.
vioxx
litigation
product
liability lawsuits
as previously disclosed, individual and putative class actions
have been filed against the company in state and federal courts
alleging personal injury
and/or
economic loss with respect to the purchase or use of
vioxx. all such actions filed in federal court are
coordinated in a multidistrict litigation in the
u.s.district court for the eastern district of louisiana
(the mdl) before district judge eldon e. fallon. a
number of such actions filed in state court are coordinated in
separate coordinated proceedings in state courts in new jersey,
california and texas,
table of contents
and the counties of philadelphia, pennsylvania and washoe and
clark counties, nevada. as of december31, 2008, the
company had been served or was aware that it had been named as a
defendant in approximately 10,800 lawsuits, which include
approximately 26,800 plaintiff groups, alleging personal
injuries resulting from the use of vioxx, and in
approximately 242 putative class actions alleging personal
injuries
and/or
economic loss. (all of the actions discussed in this paragraph
and in other lawsuits below are collectively
referred to as the vioxx product liability
lawsuits.) of these lawsuits, approximately 8,850 lawsuits
representing approximately 22,050 plaintiff groups are or are
slated to be in the federal mdl and approximately 165 lawsuits
representing approximately 165plaintiff groups are
included in a coordinated proceeding in new jersey superior
court before judge carol e. higbee.
of the plaintiff groups described above, most are currently in
the vioxx settlement program, described below. as of
december31, 2008, 70 plaintiff groups who were otherwise
eligible for the settlement program have not participated and
their claims remained pending against merck. in addition, the
claims of 1,400 plaintiff groups who are not eligible for the
settlement program remained pending against merck. a number of
the 1,400 plaintiff groups are subject to motions to dismiss for
failure to comply with court-ordered deadlines. since
december31, 2008, hundreds of these plaintiff groups have
since been dismissed.
in addition to the vioxx product liability lawsuits
discussed above, the claims of over 27,400 plaintiffs had been
dismissed as of december31, 2008. of these, there have
been over 4,925 plaintiffs whose claims were dismissed with
prejudice (i.e., they cannot be brought again) either by
plaintiffs themselves or by the courts. over 22,475 additional
plaintiffs have had their claims dismissed without prejudice
(i.e., subject to the applicable statute of limitations, they
can be brought again). of these, approximately 13,750 plaintiff
groups represent plaintiffs who had lawsuits pending in the new
jersey superior court at the time of the settlement agreement
described below and who enrolled in the program established by
the settlement agreement (the settlement program),
judge higbee has dismissed these cases without prejudice for
administrative reasons.
on november9, 2007, merck announced that it had entered
into an agreement (the settlement agreement) with
the law firms that comprise the executive committee of the
plaintiffs steering committee (psc) of the
federal vioxx mdl as well as representatives of
plaintiffs counsel in the texas, new jersey and california
state coordinated proceedings to resolve state and federal mi
and is claims filed as of that date in the united states. the
settlement agreement, which also applies to tolled claims, was
signed by the parties after several meetings with three of the
four judges overseeing the coordination of more than 95% of the
u.s.vioxx product liability lawsuits. the
settlement agreement applies only to u.s.legal residents
and those who allege that their mi or is occurred in the united
states.
the entire settlement agreement, including accompanying
exhibits, may be found at www.merck.com. the
company has included this website address only as an inactive
textual reference and does not intend it to be an active link to
its website nor does it incorporate by reference the information
contained therein. under the settlement agreement, merck will
pay a fixed aggregate amount of $4.85billion into two
funds ($4.0billion for mi claims and $850million for
is claims) for qualifying claims that enter into the settlement
program. individual claimants will be examined by administrators
of the settlement program to determine qualification based on
objective, documented facts provided by claimants, including
records sufficient for a scientific evaluation of independent
risk factors. the conditions in the settlement agreement also
require claimants to pass three gates: an injury gate, a
duration gate, and a proximity gate (each as defined in the
settlement agreement).
the settlement agreement provides that merck does not admit
causation or fault. the settlement agreement provided that
mercks payment obligations would be triggered only if,
among other conditions, (1)law firms on the federal and
state pscs and firms that have tried cases in the coordinated
proceedings elect to recommend enrollment in the program to 100%
of their clients who allege either mi or is, and (2)by
june30, 2008, plaintiffs enroll in the settlement program
at least 85% of each of all currently pending and tolled
(i)mi claims, (ii)is claims, (iii)eligible mi
and is claims together which involve death, and
(iv)eligible mi and is claims together which allege more
than 12months of use. under the terms of the settlement
agreement, merck could exercise a right to walk away from the
settlement agreement if the thresholds and other requirements
were not met. the company waived that right as of august4,
2008. the waiver of that right triggered mercks obligation
to pay a fixed total of $4.85billion. payments will be
made in installments into the settlement funds. the first
payment of
table of contents
$500million was made in august 2008 and an additional
payment of $250million was made in october 2008. interim
payments have been made to certain plaintiffs who alleged that
they suffered an mi and the company anticipates that interim
payments to is claimants will begin shortly. additional payments
will be made on a periodic basis going forward, when and as
needed to fund payments of claims and administrative expenses.
mercks total payment for both funds of $4.85billion
is a fixed amount to be allocated among qualifying claimants
based on their individual evaluation. the distribution of
interim payments to qualified claimants began in august 2008 and
will continue on a rolling basis until all claimants who qualify
for an interim payment are paid. final payments will be made
after the examination of all of the eligible claims has been
completed.
after the settlement agreement was announced on november9,
2007, judges in the federal mdl, california, texas and new
jersey state coordinated proceedings entered a series of orders.
the orders: (1)temporarily stayed their respective
litigations; (2)required plaintiffs to register their
claims by january15, 2008; (3)required plaintiffs
with cases pending as of november9, 2007 to preserve and
produce records and serve expert reports; and (4)required
plaintiffs who file thereafter to make similar productions on an
accelerated schedule. the clark county, nevada and washoe
county, nevada coordinated proceedings were also generally
stayed.
as of october30, 2008, the deadline for enrollment in the
settlement program, more than 48,100 of the approximately 48,325
individuals who were eligible for the settlement program and
whose claims were not 1)dismissed, 2)expected to be
dismissed in the near future, or 3)tolled claims that
appear to have been abandoned had submitted some or all of the
materials required for enrollment in the settlement program.
this represents approximately 99.8% of the eligible mi and is
claims previously registered with the settlement program.
on april14, 2008 and june3, 2008, two groups of
various private insurance companies and health plans filed suit
against browngreer, the claims administrator for the settlement
program (the claims administrator), and
u.s.bancorp, escrow agent for the settlement program (the
avmed and greater new york benefit fund
suits). the private insurance companies and health plans claim
to have paid healthcare costs on behalf of some of the enrolling
claimants and seek to enjoin the claims administrator from
paying enrolled claimants until their claims for reimbursement
from the enrolled claimants are resolved. each group sought
temporary restraining orders and preliminary injunctions. judge
fallon denied these requests. in avmed, the defendants moved to
sever the claims of the named plaintiffs and, in greater new
york benefit fund, to strike the class allegations. judge fallon
granted these motions. avmed appealed both of these decisions.
the fifth circuit heard argument on avmeds appeal on
november4, 2008. on november17, 2008, the court of
appeals affirmed the district courts ruling that denied
the two motions for preliminary injunctive relief. greater new
york benefit fund has served a notice of appeal. on
january22, 2009, the psc and counsel for certain private
insurers announced that they reached a settlement agreement. the
agreement provides a program for resolution of liens asserted by
private insurers against payments received by certain claimants
who have enrolled in the settlement program. the agreement can
be terminated by the private insurers if fewer than 90% of
eligible claimants participate. the plaintiffs in the avmed and
greater newyork benefit fund lawsuits have agreed to
participate in the settlement.
there are two u.s.vioxx product liability lawsuits
currently scheduled for trial in 2009. the company maintains a
list of such trials at its website at
www.merck.com, which it will periodically update
as appropriate. the company has included its website address
only as an inactive textual reference and does not intend it to
be an active link to its website nor does it incorporate by
reference the information contained therein.
the company has previously disclosed the outcomes of several
vioxx product liability lawsuits that were tried prior to
2008.
juries have now decided in favor of the company twelve times and
in plaintiffs favor five times. one merck verdict was set
aside by the court and has not been retried. another merck
verdict was set aside and retried, leading to one of the five
plaintiffs verdicts. there have been two unresolved
mistrials. with respect to the five plaintiffs verdicts,
merck filed an appeal or sought judicial review in each of those
cases. in one of those five, an intermediate appellate court
overturned the trial verdict and directed that judgment be
entered for merck, and in another, an intermediate appellate
court overturned the trial verdict, entering judgment for merck
on one claim and ordering a new trial on the remaining claims.
table of contents
all but the following three cases that went to trial are now
resolved: mcdarbyv. merck, ernstv. merck, and
garzav. merck.
the first, mcdarby, was originally tried along with a second
plaintiff, cona, in april 2006, in superior court of new jersey,
law division, atlantic county. the jury returned a split
verdict. the jury determined that vioxx did not
substantially contribute to the heart attack of mr.cona,
but did substantially contribute to the heart attack of
mr.mcdarby. the jury also concluded that, in each case,
merck violated new jerseys consumer fraud statute, which
allows plaintiffs to receive their expenses for purchasing the
drug, trebled, as well as reasonable attorneys fees. the
jury awarded $4.5million in compensatory damages to
mr.mcdarby and his wife, who also was a plaintiff in that
case, as well as punitive damages of $9million. on
june8, 2007, judge higbee denied mercks motion for a
new trial. on june15, 2007, judge higbee awarded
approximately $4million in the aggregate in
attorneys fees and costs. the company has appealed the
judgments in both cases and the appellate division held oral
argument on both cases on january16, 2008. on may29,
2008, the new jersey appellate division vacated the consumer
fraud awards in both cases on the grounds that the product
liability act provides the sole remedy for personal injury
claims. the appellate division also vacated the mcdarby punitive
damage award on the ground of federal preemption and vacated the
attorneys fees and costs awarded under the consumer fraud
act in both cases. the court upheld the mcdarby compensatory
award. the company has filed with the supreme court of
newjersey a petition to appeal those parts of the trial
courts rulings that the appellate division affirmed.
plaintiffs filed a cross-petition to appeal those parts of the
trial courts rulings that the appellate division reversed.
on october8, 2008, the supreme court of new jersey granted
mercks petition for certification of appeal, limited
solely to the issue of whether the federal food, drug and
cosmetic act preempts state law tort claims predicated on the
alleged inadequacy of warnings contained in vioxx
labeling that was approved by the fda. the court denied the
plaintiffs cross-petition. on december4, 2008, the
new jersey supreme court granted mercks motion to stay the
appeal pending the issuance of a decision from united states
supreme court in wyethv. levine.
as previously reported, in september 2006, merck filed a notice
of appeal of the august 2005 jury verdict in favor of the
plaintiff in the texas state court case, ernstv. merck. on
may29, 2008, the texas court of appeals reversed the trial
courts judgment and issued a judgment in favor of merck.
the court of appeals found the evidence to be legally
insufficient on the issue of causation. plaintiffs have filed a
motion for rehearing en banc in the court of appeals.
merck filed a response in october 2008. in january 2009,
plaintiffs filed a reply in support of their rehearing motion.
as previously reported, in april 2006, in garza v. merck, a jury
in state court in rio grande city, texas returned a verdict in
favor of the family of decedent leonel garza. the jury awarded a
total of $7million in compensatory damages to
mr.garzas widow and three sons. the jury also
purported to award $25million in punitive damages even
though under texas law, in this case, potential punitive damages
were capped at $750,000. on may14, 2008, the
sanantonio court of appeals reversed the judgment and
rendered a judgment in favor of merck. on december10,
2008, the court of appeals, on rehearing, vacated its prior
ruling and issued a replacement. in the new ruling, the court
ordered a take-nothing judgment for merck on the design defect
claim, but reversed and remanded for a new trial as to the
strict liability claim because of juror misconduct. on
january26, 2009, merck filed a petition for review with
the texas supreme court.
merck voluntarily withdrew vioxx from the market on
september30, 2004. most states have statutes of
limitations for product liability claims of no more than three
years, which require that claims must be filed within no more
than three years after the plaintiffs learned or could have
learned of their potential cause of action. as a result, some
may view september30, 2007 as a significant deadline for
filing vioxx cases. it is important to note, however,
that the law regarding statutes of limitations can be complex
and variable, depending on the facts and applicable law. some
states have longer statutes of limitations. there are also
arguments that the statutes of limitations began running before
september30, 2004. new jersey superior court judge higbee
and federal district court judge fallon have issued orders in
cases from new jersey and eight other jurisdictions ruling that
the statutory period for making vioxx personal injury
claims has passed. judge higbees order was issued on
october15, 2007 and judge fallons was issued on
november8, 2007.
table of contents
other
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, on july29, 2005, a new jersey
state trial court certified a nationwide class of third-party
payors (such as unions and health insurance plans) that paid in
whole or in part for the vioxx used by their plan members
or insureds. the named plaintiff in that case sought recovery of
certain vioxx purchase costs (plus penalties) based on
allegations that the purported class members paid more for
vioxx than they would have had they known of the
products alleged risks. on march31, 2006, the new
jersey superior court, appellate division, affirmed the class
certification order. on september6, 2007, the new jersey
supreme court reversed the certification of a nationwide class
action of third-party payors, finding that the suit does not
meet the requirements for a class action. claims of certain
individual third-party payors remain pending in the new jersey
court, and counsel purporting to represent a large number of
third-party payors have filed additional such actions. judge
higbee lifted the stay in these cases and the cases are
currently in the discovery phase. a status conference with the
court took place in january 2009 to discuss scheduling issues in
these cases, including the selection of early trial pool cases.
the new jersey superior court heard argument on plaintiffs
motion for class certification in martin-kleinmanv. merck,
which is a putative consumer class action, on december5,
2008.
there are also pending in various u.s.courts putative
class actions purportedly brought on behalf of individual
purchasers or users of vioxx and claiming either
reimbursement of alleged economic loss or an entitlement to
medical monitoring. the majority of these cases are at early
procedural stages. on june12, 2008, a missouri state court
certified a class of missouri plaintiffs seeking reimbursement
for
out-of-pocket
costs relating to vioxx. the plaintiffs do not allege any
personal injuries from taking vioxx. the company filed a
petition for interlocutory review on june23, 2008, which
was granted on july30, 2008. briefing is now complete.
during the pendency of the appeal, discovery is proceeding in
the lower court. on february3, 2009, judge fallon
dismissed the master personal injury/wrongful death class action
master complaint and the medical monitoring class action master
complaint in the mdl.
plaintiffs also have filed a class action in california state
court seeking class certification of california third-party
payors and end-users. the parties are engaged in class
certification discovery and briefing. the court heard oral
argument on the class certification issue on february19,
2009.
the company has also been named as a defendant in eighteen
separate lawsuits brought by attorneys general of ten states,
five counties, the city of new york, and private citizens (whom
have brought qui tam and taxpayer derivative suits). one
of the lawsuits brought by the counties is a class action filed
by santaclara county, california on behalf of all
similarly situated california counties. these actions allege
that the company misrepresented the safety of vioxx and
seek (i)recovery of the cost of vioxx purchased or
reimbursed by the state and its agencies;
(ii)reimbursement of all sums paid by the state and its
agencies for medical services for the treatment of persons
injured by vioxx; (iii)damages under various common
law theories;
and/or
(iv)remedies under various state statutory theories,
including state consumer fraud
and/or fair
business practices or medicaid fraud statutes, including civil
penalties.
with the exception of a case filed by the texas attorney general
(which remains in texas state court and is currently scheduled
for trial in november 2009), a case filed by the michigan
attorney general (which was ordered remanded to state court in
january 2009), a case recently filed by the pennsylvania
attorney general (which has been removed to federal court but is
the subject of a pending motion to remand), and one case which
has not been removed to federal court, the rest of the actions
described in the above paragraph have been transferred to the
federal mdl and are in the discovery phase.
shareholder
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the vioxx product
liability lawsuits, the company and various current and former
officers and directors are defendants in various putative class
actions and individual lawsuits under the federal securities
laws and state securities laws (the vioxx
securities lawsuits). all of the vioxx securities
lawsuits pending in federal court have been transferred by the
judicial panel on multidistrict litigation (the
jpml) to the united states district court for the
district of new jersey before district judge stanley r. chesler
for inclusion in a nationwide mdl (the shareholder
mdl). judge chesler has consolidated the vioxx
table of contents
securities lawsuits for all purposes. the putative class action,
which requested damages on behalf of purchasers of company stock
between may21, 1999 and october29, 2004, alleged
that the defendants made false and misleading statements
regarding vioxx in violation of sections10(b) and
20(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, and sought
unspecified compensatory damages and the costs of suit,
including attorneys fees. the complaint also asserted
claims under section20a of the securities and exchange act
against certain defendants relating to their sales of merck
stock and under sections11, 12 and 15 of the securities
act of 1933 against certain defendants based on statements in a
registration statement and certain prospectuses filed in
connection with the merck stock investment plan, a dividend
reinvestment plan. on april12, 2007, judge chesler granted
defendants motion to dismiss the complaint with prejudice.
plaintiffs appealed judge cheslers decision to the united
states court of appeals for the third circuit. on
september9, 2008, the third circuit issued an opinion
reversing judge cheslers order and remanding the case to
the district court. on september23, 2008, merck filed a
petition seeking rehearing en banc, which was denied. the
case was remanded to the district court in october 2008, and
plaintiffs have filed their consolidated and fifth amended
classaction complaint. merck filed a petition for a writ
of certiorari with the united states supreme court on
january15, 2009. merck expects to file a motion to dismiss
the fifth amended classaction complaint.
in october 2005, a dutch pension fund filed a complaint in the
district of new jersey alleging violations of federal securities
laws as well as violations of state law against the company and
certain officers. pursuant to the case management order
governing the shareholder mdl, the case, which is based on the
same allegations as the vioxx securities lawsuits, was
consolidated with the vioxx securities lawsuits.
defendants motion to dismiss the pension funds
complaint was filed on august3, 2007. in september 2007,
the dutch pension fund filed an amended complaint rather than
responding to defendants motion to dismiss. in addition in
2007, six new complaints were filed in the district of new
jersey on behalf of various foreign institutional investors also
alleging violations of federal securities laws as well as
violations of state law against the company and certain
officers. defendants are not required to respond to these
complaints until after judge chesler resolves any motion to
dismiss in the consolidated securities action.
as previously disclosed, various shareholder derivative actions
filed in federal court were transferred to the shareholder mdl
and consolidated for all purposes by judge chesler (the
vioxx derivative lawsuits). on may5,
2006, judge chesler granted defendants motion to dismiss
and denied plaintiffs request for leave to amend their
complaint. plaintiffs appealed, arguing that judge chesler erred
in denying plaintiffs leave to amend their complaint with
materials acquired during discovery. on july18, 2007, the
united states court of appeals for the third circuit reversed
the district courts decision on the grounds that judge
chesler should have allowed plaintiffs to make use of the
discovery material to try to establish demand futility, and
remanded the case for the district courts consideration of
whether, even with the additional materials, plaintiffs
request to amend their complaint would still be futile.
plaintiffs filed their brief in support of their request for
leave to amend their complaint in november 2007. the court
denied the motion in june 2008 and closed the case. plaintiffs
have appealed judge cheslers decision to the united states
court of appeals for the third circuit.
in addition, as previously disclosed, various putative class
actions filed in federal court under the employee retirement
income security act (erisa) against the company and
certain current and former officers and directors (the
vioxx erisa lawsuits and, together with the
vioxx securities lawsuits and the vioxx derivative
lawsuits, the vioxx shareholder lawsuits)
have been transferred to the shareholder mdl and consolidated
for all purposes. the consolidated complaint asserts claims on
behalf of certain of the companys current and former
employees who are participants in certain of the companys
retirement plans for breach of fiduciary duty. the lawsuits make
similar allegations to the allegations contained in the vioxx
securities lawsuits. on july11, 2006, judge chesler
granted in part and denied in part defendants motion to
dismiss the erisa complaint. in october 2007, plaintiffs moved
for certification of a class of individuals who were
participants in and beneficiaries of the companys
retirement savings plans at any time between october1,
1998 and september30, 2004 and whose plan accounts
included investments in the merck common stock fund
and/or merck
common stock. on february9, 2009, the court denied the
motion for certification of a class as to one count and granted
the motion as to the remaining counts. the court also limited
the class to those individuals who were participants in and
beneficiaries of the companys retirement savings plans who
suffered a loss due to their investments in merck stock through
the plans and who did not execute a settlement releasing their
claims. on october6, 2008, defendants filed
table of contents
a motion for judgment on the pleadings seeking dismissal of the
complaint. on december24, 2008, plaintiffs filed a motion
for partial summary judgment against certain individual
defendants. both motions are pending. discovery is ongoing in
this litigation.
as previously disclosed, on october29, 2004, two
individual shareholders made a demand on the companys
board to take legal action against mr.raymond gilmartin,
former chairman, president and chief executive officer and other
individuals for allegedly causing damage to the company with
respect to the allegedly improper marketing of vioxx. in
december 2004, the special committee of the board of directors
retained the honorable john s. martin,jr. of
debevoise& plimpton llp to conduct an independent
investigation of, among other things, the allegations set forth
in the demand. judge martins report was made public in
september 2006. based on the special committees
recommendation made after careful consideration of the martin
report and the impact that derivative litigation would have on
the company, the board rejected the demand. on october11,
2007, the shareholders filed a lawsuit in state court in
atlantic county, new jersey against current and former
executives and directors of the company alleging that the
boards rejection of their demand was unreasonable and
improper, and that the defendants breached various duties to the
company in allowing vioxx to be marketed. the current and
former executive and director defendants filed motions to
dismiss the complaint in june 2008. on october30, 2008,
proceedings in the case were stayed through march1, 2009.
on november21, 2008, the pending motions to dismiss were
denied without prejudice.
international
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the lawsuits discussed
above, the company has been named as a defendant in litigation
relating to vioxx in various countries (collectively, the
vioxx foreign lawsuits) in europe, as well as
canada, brazil, argentina, australia, turkey, and israel.
on may30, 2008, the provincial court of queens bench
in saskatchewan, canada entered an order certifying a class of
vioxx users in canada, except those in quebec. the class
includes individual purchasers who allege inducement to purchase
by unfair marketing practices; individuals who allege vioxx
was not of acceptable quality, defective or not fit for the
purpose of managing pain associated with approved indications;
or ingestors who claim vioxx caused or exacerbated a
cardiovascular or gastrointestinal condition. on june17,
2008, the court of appeal for saskatchewan granted the company
leave to appeal the certification order. that appeal was argued
before that court, and the court has reserved decision. on
july28, 2008, the superior court in ontario denied the
companys motion to stay class proceedings in ontario,
which had been based on the earlier certification order entered
in saskatchewan, and decided to certify an overlapping class of
vioxx users in canada, except those in quebec and
saskatchewan, who allege negligence and an entitlement to elect
to waive the tort. on november24, 2008, the ontario
divisional court granted the companys motion for leave to
appeal the superior courts decision denying the stay of
the ontario class proceedings and denied the companys
motion to appeal the certification order. the companys
appeal was heard by the ontario divisional court in february
2009. on february13, 2009, the divisional court declined
to set aside the order denying the stay. the company intends to
seek leave to appeal from the ontario court of appeal. earlier,
in november 2006, the superior court in quebec authorized the
institution of a class action on behalf of all individuals who,
in quebec, consumed vioxx and suffered damages arising
out of its ingestion. as of december31, 2008, the
plaintiffs have not instituted an action based upon that
authorization.
a trial in a representative action in australia is scheduled to
commence on march30, 2009, in the federal court of
australia. the named plaintiff, who alleges he suffered an mi,
seeks to represent others in australia who ingested vioxx
and suffered an mi, thrombotic stroke, unstable angina,
transient ischemic attack or peripheral vascular disease. on
november24, 2008, the company filed a motion for an order
that the proceeding no longer continue as a representative
proceeding. during a hearing on december5, 2008, the court
dismissed that motion and, on january9, 2009, issued its
reasons for that decision. on february17, 2009, the
companys motion for leave to appeal that decision was
denied and the parties were directed to prepare proposed lists
of issues to be tried.
table of contents
additional
lawsuits
based on media reports and other sources, the company
anticipates that additional vioxx product liability
lawsuits, vioxx shareholder lawsuits and vioxx
foreign lawsuits (collectively, the vioxx
lawsuits) may be filed against it
and/or
certain of its current and former officers and directors in the
future.
insurance
as previously disclosed, the company has product liability
insurance for claims brought in the vioxx product
liability lawsuits with stated upper limits of approximately
$630million after deductibles and
co-insurance.
this insurance provides coverage for legal defense costs and
potential damage amounts in connection with the vioxx
product liability lawsuits. through an arbitration
proceeding and negotiated settlements, the company received an
aggregate of approximately $590million in product
liability insurance proceeds relating to the vioxx
product liability lawsuits, plus approximately
$45million in fees and interest payments. the company has
no additional insurance for the vioxx product liability
lawsuits. the companys insurance coverage with respect to
the vioxx lawsuits will not be adequate to cover its
defense costs and losses.
the company has directors and officers insurance coverage
applicable to the vioxx securities lawsuits and vioxx
derivative lawsuits with stated upper limits of
approximately $190million. the company has fiduciary and
other insurance for the vioxx erisa lawsuits with stated
upper limits of approximately $275million. as a result of
the arbitration, additional insurance coverage for these claims
should also be available, if needed, under upper-level excess
policies that provide coverage for a variety of risks. there are
disputes with the insurers about the availability of some or all
of the companys insurance coverage for these claims and
there are likely to be additional disputes. the amounts actually
recovered under the policies discussed in this paragraph may be
less than the stated upper limits.
investigations
as previously disclosed, in november 2004, the company was
advised by the staff of the sec that it was commencing an
informal inquiry concerning vioxx. on january28,
2005, the company announced that it received notice that the sec
issued a formal notice of investigation. also, the company has
received subpoenas from the doj requesting information related
to the companys research, marketing and selling activities
with respect to vioxx in a federal health care
investigation under criminal statutes. this investigation
includes subpoenas for witnesses to appear before a grand jury.
in addition, as previously disclosed, investigations are being
conducted by local authorities in certain cities in europe in
order to determine whether any criminal charges should be
brought concerning vioxx. the company is cooperating with
these governmental entities in their respective investigations
(the vioxx investigations). the company
cannot predict the outcome of these inquiries; however, they
could result in potential civil
and/or
criminal dispositions.
as previously disclosed, on may20, 2008, the company
reached civil settlements with attorneys general from29
states and the district of columbia to fully resolve previously
disclosed investigations under state consumer protection laws
related to past activities for vioxx. as part of the
civil resolution of these investigations, merck paid a total of
$58 million to be divided among the29 states and the
district of columbia. the agreement also includes compliance
measures that supplement policies and procedures previously
established by the company.
in addition, the company received a subpoena in september 2006
from the state of california attorney general seeking documents
and information related to the placement of vioxx on
californias medi-cal formulary. the company is cooperating
with the attorney general in responding to the subpoena.
reserves
as discussed above, on november9, 2007, merck entered into
the settlement agreement with the law firms that comprise the
executive committee of the psc of the federal vioxx mdl
as well as representatives of plaintiffs counsel in the
texas, new jersey and california state coordinated proceedings
to resolve state and federal mi and is claims filed as of that
date in the united states. the settlement agreement, which also
applies to tolled claims, was signed by the parties after
several meetings with three of the four judges overseeing the
coordination of more than 95% of the current claims in the
vioxx litigation. the settlement agreement applies only
to u.s.legal residents and those who allege that their mi
or is occurred in the united states. in 2007, as a result of
entering into
table of contents
the settlement agreement, the company recorded a pretax charge
of $4.85billion which represents the fixed aggregate
amount to be paid to plaintiffs qualifying for payment under the
settlement program.
the company currently anticipates that two u.s.vioxx
product liability lawsuits will be tried in 2009. except
with respect to the product liability trial scheduled to be held
in australia, the company cannot predict the timing of any other
trials related to the vioxx litigation. the company
believes that it has meritorious defenses to the vioxx
lawsuits and will vigorously defend against them. in view of
the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of litigation,
particularly where there are many claimants and the claimants
seek indeterminate damages, the company is unable to predict the
outcome of these matters, and at this time cannot reasonably
estimate the possible loss or range of loss with respect to the
vioxx lawsuits not included in the settlement program.
the company has not established any reserves for any potential
liability relating to the vioxx lawsuits not included in
the settlement program or the vioxx investigations. in
each of those cases the company believes it has strong points to
raise on appeal and therefore that unfavorable outcomes in such
cases are not probable. unfavorable outcomes in the vioxx
litigation could have a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, liquidity and results of
operations.
legal defense costs expected to be incurred in connection with a
loss contingency are accrued when probable and reasonably
estimable. as of december31, 2007, the company had an
aggregate reserve of approximately $5.372billion
(thevioxx reserve) for the settlement program
and the companys future legal defense costs related to the
vioxx litigation.
during 2008, the company spent approximately $305million
in the aggregate, in legal defense costs worldwide related to
(i)the vioxx product liability lawsuits,
(ii)the vioxx shareholder lawsuits, (iii)the
vioxx foreign lawsuits, and (iv)the vioxx
investigations (collectively, the vioxx
litigation). in the fourth quarter, the company
recorded a charge of $62million solely for its future
legal defense costs related to the vioxx litigation. in
addition, in the fourth quarter the company paid an additional
$250million into the settlement funds in connection with
the settlement program after having paid $500million into
the settlement funds in the third quarter. consequently, as of
december31, 2008, the aggregate amount of the vioxx
reserve was approximately $4.379billion. in adding to
the vioxx reserve solely for its future legal defense
costs, the company considered the same factors that it
considered when it previously established reserves for the
vioxx litigation. some of the significant factors
considered in the review of the vioxx reserve were as
follows: the actual costs incurred by the company; the
development of the companys legal defense strategy and
structure in light of the scope of the vioxx litigation,
including the settlement agreement and the expectation that
certain lawsuits will continue to be pending; the number of
cases being brought against the company; the costs and outcomes
of completed trials and the most current information regarding
anticipated timing, progression, and related costs of pre-trial
activities and trials in the vioxx litigation. the amount
of the vioxx reserve as of december31, 2008,
allocated solely to defense costs represents the companys
best estimate of the minimum amount of defense costs to be
incurred in connection with the remaining aspects of the
vioxx litigation; however, events such as additional
trials in the vioxx litigation and other events that
could arise in the course of the vioxx litigation could
affect the ultimate amount of defense costs to be incurred by
the company.
the company will continue to monitor its legal defense costs and
review the adequacy of the associated reserves and may determine
to increase the vioxx reserve at any time in the future
if, based upon the factors set forth, it believes it would be
appropriate to do so.
other
product liability litigation
as previously disclosed, the company is a defendant in product
liability lawsuits in the united states involving fosamax
(the fosamax litigation). as of
december31, 2008, approximately 779 cases, which include
approximately 1,158 plaintiff groups had been filed and were
pending against merck in either federal or state court,
including one case which seeks class action certification, as
well as damages
and/or
medical monitoring. in these actions, plaintiffs allege, among
other things, that they have suffered osteonecrosis of the jaw,
generally subsequent to invasive dental procedures, such as
tooth extraction or dental implants
and/or
delayed healing, in association with the use of fosamax.
on august16, 2006, the jpml ordered that the fosamax
product liability cases pending in federal courts nationwide
should be transferred and consolidated into one multidistrict
litigation (the fosamax mdl) for coordinated
pre-trial proceedings. the fosamax mdl has been
transferred to judge john keenan in the
table of contents
united states district court for the southern district of new
york. as a result of the jpml order, approximately 645 of the
cases are before judge keenan. judge keenan has issued a case
management order (and various amendments thereto) setting forth
a schedule governing the proceedings which focused primarily
upon resolving the class action certification motions in 2007
and completing fact discovery in an initial group of 25 cases by
october1, 2008. briefing and argument on plaintiffs
motions for certification of medical monitoring classes were
completed in 2007 and judge keenan issued an order denying the
motions on january3, 2008. on january28, 2008, judge
keenan issued a further order dismissing with prejudice all
class claims asserted in the first four class action lawsuits
filed against merck that sought personal injury damages
and/or
medical monitoring relief on a class wide basis. in october
2008, judge keenan issued an order requiring that daubert
motions be filed in may 2009 and scheduling trials in the
first three cases in the mdl for august 2009, october 2009, and
january 2010, respectively. a trial is scheduled in alabama
state court later in 2009.
in addition, in july 2008, an application was made by the
atlantic county superior court of new jersey requesting that all
of the fosamax cases pending in new jersey be considered
for mass tort designation and centralized management before one
judge in new jersey. on october6, 2008, the new jersey
supreme court ordered that all pending and future actions filed
in new jersey arising out of the use of fosamax and
seeking damages for existing dental and jaw-related injuries,
including osteonecrosis of the jaw, but not solely seeking
medical monitoring, be designated as a mass tort for centralized
management purposes before judge higbee in atlantic county
superior court. as a result of the new jersey supreme
courts order, approximately 100 cases were coordinated as
of december31, 2008 before judge higbee, who is expected
to begin setting various case management deadlines during the
first quarter of 2009.
discovery is ongoing in both the fosamax mdl litigation
as well as in various state court cases. the company intends to
defend against these lawsuits.
as of december31, 2007, the company had a remaining
reserve of approximately $27million solely for its future
legal defense costs for the fosamax litigation. during
2008, the company spent approximately $34million and added
$40million to its reserve. consequently, as of
december31, 2008, the company had a reserve of
approximately $33million solely for its future legal
defense costs for the fosamax litigation. some of the
significant factors considered in the establishment of the
reserve for the fosamax litigation legal defense costs
were as follows: the actual costs incurred by the company thus
far; the development of the companys legal defense
strategy and structure in light of the creation of the
fosamax mdl; the number of cases being brought against
the company; and the anticipated timing, progression, and
related costs of pre-trial activities in the fosamax
litigation. the company will continue to monitor its legal
defense costs and review the adequacy of the associated
reserves. due to the uncertain nature of litigation, the company
is unable to estimate its costs beyond the completion of the
first three federal trials discussed above. the company has not
established any reserves for any potential liability relating to
the fosamax litigation. unfavorable outcomes in the
fosamax litigation could have a material adverse effect
on the companys financial position, liquidity and results
of operations.
commercial
litigation
as previously disclosed, the company was joined in ongoing
litigation alleging manipulation by pharmaceutical manufacturers
of average wholesale prices (awp), which are
sometimes used in calculations that determine public and private
sector reimbursement levels. in 2002, the jpml ordered the
transfer and consolidation of all pending federal awp cases to
federal court in boston, massachusetts. plaintiffs filed one
consolidated class action complaint, which aggregated the claims
previously filed in various federal district court actions and
also expanded the number of manufacturers to include some which,
like the company, had not been defendants in any prior pending
case. in may 2003, the court granted the companys motion
to dismiss the consolidated class action and dismissed the
company from the class action case. subsequent to the
companys dismissal, the plaintiffs filed an amended
consolidated class action complaint, which did not name the
company as a defendant. the company and many other
pharmaceutical manufacturers are defendants in similar
complaints pending in federal and state court brought
individually by a number of counties in the state of new york.
fifty of the county cases have been consolidated in new york
state court. the company was dismissed from the suffolk county
case, which was the first of the new york county cases to be
filed. in addition to the new york county cases, as of
december31, 2008, the company was a defendant in state
cases brought by the attorneys general of eleven states,
table of contents
all of which are being defended. in february 2009, the kansas
attorney general filed suit against merck and several other
manufacturers. additionally, the attorney general of arizona
voluntarily dismissed merck from its case in february 2009. the
court in the awp cases pending in hawaii listed merck and others
to be set for trial in mid-2010.
governmental
proceedings
as previously disclosed, in february 2008, the company announced
that it entered into agreements with the government to settle
federal and state civil cases alleging violations of the
medicaid rebate statute, as well as federal and state false
claims acts in connection with certain nominal pricing programs
and sales and marketing activities between  1994 and 2001. in
connection with these settlements, as previously disclosed,
merck entered into a corporate integrity agreement
(cia) with the u.s. department of health and human
services office of inspector general (hhs-oig) for a
five-year term. the cia requires, among other things, that merck
maintain its ethics training program and policies and procedures
governing promotional practices and medicaid price reporting.
further, as required by the cia, merck has retained an
independent review organization (iro) to conduct a
systems review of its promotional policies and procedures and to
conduct, on a sample basis, transactional reviews of
mercks promotional programs and certain medicaid pricing
calculations. merck is also required to provide regular reports
and certifications to the hhs-oig regarding its compliance with
the cia. the iro is currently  conducting the required reviews.
merck is scheduled to submit its first annual report to the
hhs-oig in may 2009.
vytorin/zetia
litigation
as previously disclosed, the company and its joint venture
partner, schering-plough, have received several letters
addressed to both companies from the house committee on energy
and commerce, its subcommittee on oversight and investigations
(o&i), and the ranking minority member of the
senate finance committee, collectively seeking a combination of
witness interviews, documents and information on a variety of
issues related to the enhance clinical trial, the sale and
promotion of vytorin, as well as sales of stock by
corporate officers. in addition, since august 2008, the
companies have received three additional letters from o&i,
including one dated february19, 2009, seeking certain
information and documents related to the seas clinical trial. as
previously disclosed, the companies have each received subpoenas
from the new york and new jersey state attorneys general offices
and a letter from the connecticut attorney general seeking
similar information and documents. in addition, the company has
received five civil investigative demands (cids)
from a multistate group of 35 state attorneys general who are
jointly investigating whether the companies violated state
consumer protection laws when marketing vytorin. finally,
in september 2008, the company received a letter from the civil
division of the doj informing it that the doj is investigating
whether the companies conduct relating to the promotion of
vytorin caused false claims to be submitted to federal
health care programs. the company is cooperating with these
investigations and working with schering-plough to respond to
the inquiries. in addition, the company has become aware of or
been served with approximately 145 civil class action lawsuits
alleging common law and state consumer fraud claims in
connection with the msp partnerships sale and promotion of
vytorin and zetia. certain of those lawsuits
allege personal injuries
and/or seek
medical monitoring. these actions, which have been filed in or
transferred to federal court, are coordinated in a multidistrict
litigation in the u.s.district court for the district
court of new jersey before district judge dennis m. cavanaugh.
the parties are presently engaged in motions practice and
briefing.
also, as previously disclosed, on april3, 2008, a merck
shareholder filed a putative class action lawsuit in federal
court in the eastern district of pennsylvania alleging that
merck and its chairman, president and chief executive officer,
richard t. clark, violated the federal securities laws. this
suit has since been withdrawn and
re-filed in
the district of new jersey and has been consolidated with
another federal securities lawsuit under the caption in re
merck& co., inc. vytorin securities
litigation. an amended consolidated complaint was filed on
october6, 2008 and names as defendants merck;
merck/schering-plough pharmaceuticals, llc; and certain of the
companys officers and directors. specifically, the
complaint alleges that merck delayed releasing unfavorable
results of a clinical study regarding the efficacy of vytorin
and that merck made false and misleading statements about
expected earnings, knowing that once the results of the
vytorin study were released, sales of vytorin
would decline and mercks earnings would suffer. on
april22, 2008, a member of a merck erisa plan filed a
putative
table of contents
class action lawsuit against the company and certain of its
officers and directors alleging they breached their fiduciary
duties under erisa. since that time, there have been other
similar erisa lawsuits filed against the company in the district
of new jersey, and all of those lawsuits have been consolidated
under the caption in re merck& co., inc. vytorin
erisa litigation. an amended consolidated complaint was
filed on february5, 2009, and names as defendants merck
and various members of mercks board of directors and
members of committees of mercks board of directors.
plaintiffs allege that the erisa plans investment in
company stock was imprudent because the companys earnings
are dependent on the commercial success of its cholesterol drug
vytorin and that defendants knew or should have known
that the results of a scientific study would cause the medical
community to turn to less expensive drugs for cholesterol
management. the company intends to defend the lawsuits referred
to in this section vigorously. unfavorable outcomes resulting
from the government investigations or the civil litigation could
have a material adverse effect on the companys financial
position, liquidity and results of operations.
in november 2008, the individual shareholder who had previously
delivered a letter to the companys board of directors
demanding that the board take legal action against the
responsible individuals to recover the amounts paid by the
company in 2007 to resolve certain governmental investigations
delivered another letter to the board demanding that the board
or a subcommittee thereof commence an investigation into the
matters raised by various civil suits and governmental
investigations relating to vytorin.
vaccine
litigation
as previously disclosed, the company is a party to individual
and class action product liability lawsuits and claims in the
united states involving pediatric vaccines (e.g., hepatitis b
vaccine) that contained thimerosal, a preservative used in
vaccines. merck has not distributed thimerosal-containing
pediatric vaccines in the unitedstates since the fall of
2001. as of december31, 2008, there were approximately 230
thimerosal related lawsuits pending in which the company is a
defendant, although the vast majority of those lawsuits are not
currently active. other defendants include other vaccine
manufacturers who produced pediatric vaccines containing
thimerosal as well as manufacturers of thimerosal. in these
actions, the plaintiffs allege, among other things, that they
have suffered neurological injuries as a result of exposure to
thimerosal from pediatric vaccines. there are no cases currently
scheduled for trial. the company will defend against these
lawsuits; however, it is possible that unfavorable outcomes
could have a material adverse effect on the companys
financial position, liquidity and results of operations.
the company has been successful in having cases of this type
either dismissed or stayed on the ground that the action is
prohibited under the national childhood vaccine injury act (the
vaccine act). the vaccine act prohibits any person
from filing or maintaining a civil action (in state or federal
court) seeking damages against a vaccine manufacturer for
vaccine-related injuries unless a petition is first filed in the
united states court of federal claims (hereinafter the
vaccine court). under the vaccine act, before filing
a civil action against a vaccine manufacturer, the petitioner
must either (a)pursue his or her petition to conclusion in
vaccine court and then timely file an election to proceed with a
civil action in lieu of accepting the vaccine courts
adjudication of the petition or (b)timely exercise a right
to withdraw the petition prior to vaccine court adjudication in
accordance with certain statutorily prescribed time periods. the
company is not a party to vaccine court proceedings because the
petitions are brought against the united states department of
health and human services.
the company is aware that there are approximately 5,000 cases
pending in the vaccine court involving allegations that
thimerosal-containing vaccines
and/or the
m-m-r ii vaccine cause autism spectrum disorders. not all
of the thimerosal-containing vaccines involved in the vaccine
court proceeding are company vaccines. the company is the sole
source of the m-m-r ii vaccine domestically. the special
masters presiding over the vaccine court proceedings held
hearings in three test cases involving the theory that the
combination of m-m-r ii vaccine and thimerosal in
vaccines causes autism spectrum disorders. on february12,
2009, the special masters issued decisions in each of those
cases, finding that the theory was unsupported by valid
scientific evidence and that the petitioners in the three cases
were therefore not entitled to compensation. the special masters
have held similar hearings in three different test cases
involving the theory that thimerosal in vaccines alone causes
autism spectrum disorders. decisions have not been issued in
this second set of test cases. the special masters had
previously indicated that they would hold similar hearings
involving the theory that m-m-r ii alone causes autism
spectrum disorders, but they have stated that they no longer
intend to do so. the vaccine court has indicated that it intends
to
table of contents
use the evidence presented at these test case hearings to guide
the adjudication of the remaining autism spectrum disorder cases.
patent
litigation
from time to time, generic manufacturers of pharmaceutical
products file andas with the fda seeking to market generic
forms of the companys products prior to the expiration of
relevant patents owned by the company. generic pharmaceutical
manufacturers have submitted andas to the fda seeking to
market in the united states a generic form of fosamax,
nexium, singulair, primaxin and emend prior to
the expiration of the companys (and astrazenecas in
the case of nexium) patents concerning these products. in
addition, an anda has been submitted to the fda seeking to
market in the united states a generic form of zetia prior
to the expiration of schering-ploughs patent concerning
that product. the generic companies andas generally
include allegations of non-infringement, invalidity and
unenforceability of the patents. the company has filed patent
infringement suits in federal court against companies filing
andas for generic alendronate (fosamax),
montelukast (singulair), imipenem/cilastatin
(primaxin) and astrazeneca and the company have filed
patent infringement suits in federal court against companies
filing andas for generic esomeprazole (nexium).
also, the company and schering-plough have filed a patent
infringement suit in federal court against companies filing
andas for generic ezetimibe (zetia). similar patent
challenges exist in certain foreign jurisdictions. the company
intends to vigorously defend its patents, which it believes are
valid, against infringement by generic companies attempting to
market products prior to the expiration dates of such patents.
as with any litigation, there can be no assurance of the
outcomes, which, if adverse, could result in significantly
shortened periods of exclusivity for these products.
in february 2007, schering-plough received a notice from a
generic company indicating that it had filed an anda for
zetia and that it is challenging the u.s.patents
that are listed for zetia. merck and schering-plough
market zetia through a joint venture, msp singapore
company llc. on march22, 2007, schering-plough and msp
singapore company llc filed a patent infringement suit against
glenmark pharmaceuticals inc., usa and its parent corporation
(glenmark). the lawsuit automatically stays fda
approval of glenmarks anda until october 2010 or until an
adverse court decision, if any, whichever may occur earlier.
as previously disclosed, in january 2007, the company received a
letter from ranbaxy laboratories ltd. (ranbaxy)
stating that it had filed an anda seeking approval of a generic
version of mercks primaxin (imipenem/cilastatin).
the lawsuit asserted infringement on mercks patent which
is due to expire on september15, 2009. in july 2008, merck
and ranbaxy entered into an agreement pursuant to which ranbaxy
can begin to market in the united states a generic form of
imipenem/cilastatin on september1, 2009.
as previously disclosed, in february 2007, the company received
a notice from teva, a generic company, indicating that it had
filed an anda for montelukast and that it is challenging the
u.s.patent that is listed for singulair. on
april2, 2007, the company filed a patent infringement
action against teva. the lawsuit automatically stays fda
approval of tevas anda until august 2009 or until an
adverse court decision, if any, whichever may occur earlier. a
trial in this matter commenced on february23, 2009.
as previously disclosed, in january 2005, the u.s.court of
appeals for the federal circuit in washington, dc found the
companys patent claims for once-weekly administration of
fosamax to be invalid. the company exhausted all options
to appeal this decision in 2005. based on the court of
appeals decision, fosamax and fosamax plus d
lost marketing exclusivity in the united states in 2008. as
a result of these events, the company is experiencing
significant declines in fosamax and fosamax plus d
u.s.sales. similarly, in most major foreign markets
the basic use patent covering alendronate expired in 2008 and
generic products are being sold.
in may 2005, the federal court of canada trial division issued a
decision refusing to bar the approval of generic alendronate on
the grounds that mercks patent for weekly alendronate was
likely invalid. this decision cannot be appealed and generic
alendronate was launched in canada in june 2005. in july 2005,
merck was sued in the federal court of canada by apotex corp.
(apotex) seeking damages for lost sales of generic
weekly alendronate due to the patent proceeding. in october
2008, the federal court of canada issued a decision awarding
apotex its lost profits for its generic alendronate product for
the period of time that it was held off the market due to
mercks lawsuit. the company has appealed this decision.
table of contents
as previously disclosed, in september 2004, the company appealed
a decision of the opposition division of the european patent
office (epo) that revoked the companys patent
in europe that covers the once-weekly administration of
alendronate. on march14, 2006, the board of appeal of the
epo upheld the decision of the opposition division revoking the
patent. on march28, 2007, the epo issued another patent in
europe to the company that covers the once-weekly administration
of alendronate. under its terms, this new patent is effective
until july 2018. the company has sued multiple parties in
european countries asserting its european patent covering
once-weekly dosing of fosamax. oppositions have been
filed in the epo against this patent. a hearing in that
proceeding is scheduled for march 2009.
in addition, as previously disclosed, in japan after a
proceeding was filed challenging the validity of the
companys japanese patent for the once-weekly
administration of alendronate, the patent office invalidated the
patent. the decision is under appeal.
in october 2008, the u.s.patent for dorzolamide, covering
both trusopt and cosopt, expired, after which the
company experienced a significant decline in u.s. sales of these
products. the company is involved in litigation proceedings of
the corresponding patents in canada and great britain.
the company and astrazeneca received notice in october 2005 that
ranbaxy had filed an anda for esomeprazole magnesium. the anda
contains paragraphiv challenges to patents on
nexium. in november 2005, the company and astrazeneca
sued ranbaxy in the united states district court in new jersey.
as previously disclosed, astrazeneca, merck and ranbaxy have
entered into a settlement agreement which provides that ranbaxy
will not bring its generic esomeprazole product to market in the
united states until may27, 2014. the company and
astrazeneca each received a cid from the united states federal
trade commission (the ftc) in july 2008 regarding
the settlement agreement with ranbaxy. the company is
cooperating with the ftc in responding to this cid.
the company and astrazeneca received notice in january 2006 that
ivax pharmaceuticals, inc. (ivax), subsequently
acquired by teva, had filed an anda for esomeprazole magnesium.
the anda contains paragraphiv challenges to patents on
nexium. in march 2006, the company and astrazeneca sued
teva in the united states district court in new jersey. in
january 2008, the company and astrazeneca sued
dr.reddys laboratories (dr.
reddys) in the district court in new jersey based on
dr.reddys filing of an anda for esomeprazole
magnesium. a trial has been scheduled for january 2010 with
respect to both ivaxs and dr.reddys andas. in
addition, the company and astrazeneca received notice in
december 2008 that sandoz inc. (sandoz) had filed an
anda for esomeprazole magnesium. the anda contains
paragraphiv challenges to patents on nexium. in
january 2009, the company and astrazeneca sued sandoz in the
district court in new jersey based on sandozs filing of an
anda for esomeprazole magnesium.
in january 2009, the company received notice that an anda was
filed with the fda for aprepitant which contained a
paragraphiv challenge to patents on emend. the
company is evaluating the information provided with the notice
to determine what action should be taken.
in europe, the company is aware of various companies seeking
registration for generic losartan (the active ingredient for
cozaar). the company has patent rights to losartan via
license from e.i. du pont de nemours and company (du
pont). the company and du pont have filed patent
infringement proceedings against various companies in portugal,
spain, norway and austria.
other
litigation
in february 2008, an individual shareholder delivered a letter
to the companys board of directors demanding that the
board take legal action against the responsible individuals to
recover the amounts paid by the company in 2007 to resolve
certain governmental investigations.
as previously disclosed, prior to the spin-off of medco health
solutions, inc. (medco health), the company and
medco health agreed to settle, on a class action basis, a series
of lawsuits asserting violations of erisa (the gruer
cases). the company, medco health and certain
plaintiffs counsel filed the settlement agreement with the
federal district court in new york, where cases commenced by a
number of plaintiffs, including participants in a number of
pharmaceutical benefit plans for which medco health is the
pharmacy benefit manager,
table of contents
as well as trustees of such plans, have been consolidated. medco
health and the company agreed to the proposed settlement in
order to avoid the significant cost and distraction of prolonged
litigation. the proposed class settlement has been agreed to by
plaintiffs in five of the cases filed against medco health and
the company. under the proposed settlement, the company and
medco health have agreed to pay a total of $42.5million,
and medco health has agreed to modify certain business practices
or to continue certain specified business practices for a period
of five years. the financial compensation is intended to benefit
members of the settlement class, which includes erisa plans for
which medco health administered a pharmacy benefit at any time
since december17, 1994. the district court held hearings
to hear objections to the fairness of the proposed settlement
and approved the settlement in 2004, but has not yet determined
the number of class member plans that have properly elected not
to participate in the settlement. the settlement becomes final
only if and when all appeals have been resolved. certain class
member plans have indicated that they will not participate in
the settlement. cases initiated by three such plans and two
individuals remain pending in the southern district of new york.
plaintiffs in these cases have asserted claims based on erisa as
well as other federal and state laws that are the same as or
similar to the claims that had been asserted by settling class
members in the gruer cases. the company and medco health are
named as defendants in these cases.
three notices of appeal were filed and the appellate court heard
oral argument in may 2005. in december 2005, the appellate court
issued a decision vacating the district courts judgment
and remanding the cases to the district court to allow the
district court to resolve certain jurisdictional issues. a
hearing was held to address such issues in february 2006. the
district court issued a ruling in august 2006 resolving such
jurisdictional issues in favor of the settling plaintiffs. the
class members and the other party that had previously appealed
the district courts judgment renewed their appeals. in
october 2007, the renewed appeals were affirmed in part and
vacated in part by the federal court of appeals. the appeals
court remanded the class settlement for further proceedings in
the district court.
the district court preliminarily approved the amended settlement
in may 2008. however, plaintiffs that had initially opted out of
the settlement class filed objections to the settlement. the
district court ordered briefing on the objections and heard
argument in october 2008. the district court has not yet issued
its ruling on those objections.
after the spin-off of medco health, medco health assumed
substantially all of the liability exposure for the matters
discussed in the foregoing three paragraphs. these cases are
being defended by medco health.
there are various other legal proceedings, principally product
liability and intellectual property suits involving the company,
which are pending. while it is not feasible to predict the
outcome of such proceedings or the proceedings discussed in this
item, in the opinion of the company, all such proceedings are
either adequately covered by insurance or, if not so covered,
should not ultimately result in any liability that would have a
material adverse effect on the financial position, liquidity or
results of operations of the company, other than proceedings for
which a separate assessment is provided in this item.
environmental
matters
the company is a party to a number of proceedings brought under
the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and
liability act, commonly known as superfund, and other federal
and state equivalents. these proceedings seek to require the
operators of hazardous waste disposal facilities, transporters
of waste to the sites and generators of hazardous waste disposed
of at the sites to clean up the sites or to reimburse the
government for cleanup costs. the company has been made a party
to these proceedings as an alleged generator of waste disposed
of at the sites. in each case, the government alleges that the
defendants are jointly and severally liable for the cleanup
costs. although joint and several liability is alleged, these
proceedings are frequently resolved so that the allocation of
cleanup costs among the parties more nearly reflects the
relative contributions of the parties to the site situation. the
companys potential liability varies greatly from site to
site. for some sites the potential liability is de
minimis and for others the costs of cleanup have not yet
been determined. while it is not feasible to predict the outcome
of many of these proceedings brought by federal or state
agencies or private litigants, in the opinion of the company,
such proceedings should not ultimately result in any liability
which would have a material adverse effect on the financial
position, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources
of the company. the
table of contents
company has taken an active role in identifying and providing
for these costs and such amounts do not include any reduction
for anticipated recoveries of cleanup costs from former site
owners or operators or other recalcitrant potentially
responsible parties.
as previously disclosed, approximately 2,200 plaintiffs have
filed an amended complaint against merck and 12 other defendants
in united states district court, eastern district of california
asserting claims under the clean water act, the resource
conservation and recovery act, as well as negligence and
nuisance. the suit seeks damages for personal injury, diminution
of property value, medical monitoring and other alleged real and
personal property damage associated with groundwater and soil
contamination found at the site of a former merck subsidiary in
merced, california. the company intends to defend itself against
these claims.
item4.
submission
of matters to a vote of security holders.
not applicable.
executive
officers of the registrant (ages as of february1,
2009)
richard t. clark age62
april, 2007 chairman, president and chief executive
officer
may, 2005 chief executive officer and president
june, 2003 president, merck manufacturing
division responsible for the companys
manufacturing, information services and operational excellence
organizations worldwide
adele d. ambrose age52
december, 2007 vice president and chief
communications officer responsible for the global
communications organization
april, 2005 on sabbatical
prior to april 2005, ms.ambrose was executive vice
president, public relations& investor communications
at at&t wireless (wireless services provider from september
2001 to april 2005)
john canan age52
january, 2008 senior vice president and
controller responsible for the corporate
controllers group
september, 2006 vice president,
controller responsible for the corporate
controllers group
june, 2003 vice president, corporate
audit& assurance services
celia a. colbert age52
january, 2008 senior vice president, secretary
(since september, 1993)and assistant general counsel
(since november, 1993) responsible for corporate
secretary function and corporate staff legal groups, functional
responsibility for office of ethics and compliance.
willie a. deese age53
january, 2008 executive vice president and
president, merck manufacturing division
(mmd) responsible for the companys
global manufacturing, procurement, and distribuion and logistics
functions
may, 2005 president, mmd responsible for
the companys global manufacturing, procurement, and
operational excellence functions
table of contents
january, 2004 senior vice president, global
procurement
kenneth c. frazier age54
august, 2007 executive vice president and president,
global human health responsible for the
companys marketing and sales organizations worldwide,
including the global pharmaceutical and vaccine franchises
november, 2006 executive vice president and general
counsel responsible for legal and public affairs
functions and the merck company foundation (a
not-for-profit
charitable organization affiliated with the company)
december, 1999 senior vice president and general
counsel responsible for legal and public affairs
functions and the merck company foundation (a
not-for-profit
charitable organization affiliated with the company)
mirian m. graddick-weir age54
january, 2008 executive vice president, human
resources responsible for the global human resources
organization
september, 2006 senior vice president, human
resources
prior to september 2006, dr.graddick-weir was executive
vice president of human resources and employee communications at
at&t (communications services provider), and has held
several other senior human resources leadership positions at
at&t for more than 20years.
peter n. kellogg age52
august, 2007 executive vice president and chief
financial officer responsible for the companys
worldwide financial organization, investor relations, corporate
development and licensing, and the companys joint venture
relationships
prior to august, 2007, mr.kellogg was executive vice
president, finance and chief financial officer of biogen idec
(biotechnology company) since november 2003, from the merger of
biogen, inc. and idec pharmaceuticals corporation.
mr.kellogg was formerly executive vice president, finance
and chief financial officer of biogen, inc. after serving as
vice president, finance and chief financial officer since july
peter s. kim age50
january, 2008 executive vice president and
president, merck research laboratories (since january,
2003) responsible for the companys research
and development efforts worldwide
bruce n. kuhlik age52
january, 2008 executive vice president and general
counsel responsible for legal, communications, and
public policy functions and the merck company foundation (a
not-for-profit
charitable organization affiliated with the company)
may, 2005 vice president and associate general
counsel primary responsibility for the
companys vioxx litigation defense
prior to may 2005, mr.kuhlik was senior vice president and
general counsel for the pharmaceutical research and
manufacturers of america since october, 2002
mark e. mcdonough age44
february, 2007 vice president and
treasurer responsible for the companys
treasury function
table of contents
january, 2004 assistant treasurer, global capital
markets responsible for managing the companys
investment and financing portfolios and the treasury share
repurchase program
margaret g. mcglynn age49
august, 2007 president, merck vaccines and
infectious diseases global responsibilities for the
vaccines business and infectious diseases franchise including
the companys sanofi-pasteur joint venture
august, 2005 president, merck vaccines
global responsibilities for the vaccines business including the
companys sanofi-pasteur joint venture
january, 2003 president, u.s.human
health responsible for one of the two prescription
drug divisions (hospital and specialty product franchises)
comprising u.s.human health (ushh), and the
managed care group of ushh
stefan oschmann age51
september, 2006 president, europe, middle east,
africa& canada responsible for the
companys business operations in europe, middle east,
africa and canada
october, 2005 senior vice president, worldwide human
health marketing
january, 2001 managing director, msd germany, a
subsidiary of the company
j.chris scalet age50
january, 2008 executive vice president, global
services, and chief information officer
(cio) responsible for global shared
services across the human resources, finance, site services and
information services function; and the enterprise business
process redesign initiative
january, 2006 senior vice president, global
services, and cio responsible for global shared
services across the human resources, finance, site services and
information services function; and the enterprise business
process redesign initiative
march, 2003 senior vice president, information
services, and cio responsible for all areas of
information technology and services including application
development, technical support, voice and data communications,
and computer operations worldwide
adam h. schechter age44
august, 2007 president, global
pharmaceuticals global responsibilities for the
companys atherosclerosis/cardiovascular, diabetes/obesity,
oncology, specialty/neuroscience, respiratory, bone, arthritis
and analgesia franchises as well as commercial responsibility in
the united states for the companys portfolio of
prescription medicines
july, 2006 president, u.s.human
health commercial responsibility in the united
states for the companys portfolio of prescription medicines
october, 2005 general manager, u.s.human
health responsible for the neuro-psychiatry,
osteoporosis, migraine, respiratory, and new products franchises
february, 2004 vice president/general manager,
merck/schering-plough pharmaceuticals u.s.joint venture
all officers listed above serve at the pleasure of the board of
directors. none of these officers was elected pursuant to any
arrangement or understanding between the officer and the board.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities.
the principal market for trading of the companys common
stock is the new york stock exchange (nyse) under
the symbol mrk. the common stock market price information set
forth in the table below is based on historical nyse market
prices.
the following table also sets forth, for the calendar periods
indicated, the dividend per share information.
cash
dividends paid per common share
year
4th q
3rd q
2nd q
1st q
$
1.52
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
1.52
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
0.38
$
0.38
common
stock market prices
4th q
3rd q
2nd q
1st q
high
$
32.46
$
38.90
$
42.24
$
61.18
low
$
22.82
$
30.34
$
34.49
$
36.82
high
$
61.62
$
53.81
$
55.14
$
46.55
low
$
51.44
$
48.11
$
44.52
$
42.35
as of january31, 2009, there were approximately 165,169
stockholders of record.
equity
compensation plan information
the following table summarizes information about the options,
warrants and rights and other equity compensation under the
companys equity plans as of the close of business on
december31, 2008. the table does not include information
about tax qualified plans such as the merck& co.,
inc. employee savings and security plan.
number of
securities
number of
remaining available
securities to be
for future issuance
issued upon
weighted-average
under equity
exercise of
exercise price of
compensation plans
outstanding
outstanding
(excluding
options, warrants
options, warrants
securities
and rights
and rights
reflected in column (a))
plan category
(a)
(b)
(c)
equity compensation plans approved by security
holders(1)
247,047,953
(2)
$
51.57
126,830,385
equity compensation plans not approved by security
holders(3)
-
-
-
total
247,047,953
$
51.57
126,830,385
(1)
includes options to purchase
shares of company common stock and other rights under the
following stockholder-approved plans: the 1996 incentive stock
plan, the 2001 incentive stock plan, the 2004 incentive stock
plan, the 2007 incentive stock plan, the 1996 non-employee
directors stock option plan, the 2001 non-employee directors
stock option plan and the 2006 non-employee directors stock
option plan.
table of contents
(2)
excludes approximately
6,292,164shares of restricted stock units and 3,242,796
performance share units (assuming maximum payouts) under the
2004 and 2007 incentive stock plans. also excludes
268,723shares of phantom stock deferred under the
merck& co., inc. deferral program. as of
december31, 2006, no additional shares were reserved under
the deferral program. beginning january1, 2007, one-tenth
of 1percent of the outstanding shares of merck common
stock on the last business day of the preceding calendar year
plus any shares authorized under the deferral program but not
issued are reserved for future issuance (2,643,159 as of
december31, 2008). the actual amount of shares to be
issued prospectively equals the amount participants elect to
defer from payouts under the companys various incentive
programs, such as the executive incentive plan, into phantom
stock, increased by the amount of dividends that would be paid
on an equivalent number of shares of merck common stock, divided
by the market price of merck common stock.
(3)
the table does not include
information for equity compensation plans and options and other
warrants and rights assumed by the company in connection with
mergers and acquisitions and pursuant to which there remain
outstanding options or other warrants or rights (collectively,
assumed plans), which include the following: medco
containment services, inc. 1991 classc non-qualified stock
option plan; sibia neurosciences, inc. 1996 equity and incentive
stock option plan; provantage health services, inc. 1999 stock
incentive plan; rosetta inpharmatics, inc. 1997 and 2000
employee stock option plans. a total of 603,316shares of
merck common stock may be purchased under the assumed plans, at
a weighted average exercise price of $22.59. no further grants
may be made under any assumed plans.
table of contents
performance
graph
the following graph compares the cumulative total stockholder
return (stock price appreciation plus reinvested dividends) on
the companys common stock with the cumulative total return
(including reinvested dividends) of the dow jones us
pharmaceutical index (djuspr), formerly referred to
as the dow jones pharmaceutical index united states
owned companies, and the standard& poors 500
index (s&p 500 index) for the five years ended
december31, 2008. amounts below have been rounded to the
nearest dollar or percent.
comparison
of five-year cumulative total return*
merck&
co., inc., dow jones us pharmaceutical index and s&p 500
index
end of
2008/2003
period value
cagr**
merck
$
%
djuspr
s&p 500
merck
100.00
72.36
75.30
107.42
147.54
80.69
djuspr
100.00
91.72
90.20
103.18
107.79
88.23
s&p 500
100.00
110.87
116.31
134.66
142.05
89.51
*
assumes that the value of the
investment in company common stock and each index was $100 on
december31, 2003 and that all dividends were
reinvested.
**
compound annual growth
rate
table of contents
issuer purchases of equity securities for the three month period
ended december31, 2008 are as follows:
issuer
purchases of equity securities
total number of
($ in millions)
total
shares purchased
approx. dollar value
number
average
as part of
of shares that may yet
of shares
price paid
publicly announced
be purchased under the
period
purchased
per share
plans or
programs(1)
plans or
programs(1)
october 1
october31, 2008
7,241,000
$28.95
7,241,000
$
2,372.7
november 1
november30, 2008
n/a
$
2,372.7
december 1
december31, 2008
n/a
$
2,372.7
total
7,241,000
$28.95
7,241,000
$
2,372.7
(1)
these share repurchases were
made as part of a plan announced in july 2002 to purchase
$10billion in merck shares.
table of contents
item6.
selected
financial data.
the following selected financial data should be read in
conjunction with item7. managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations and consolidated financial statements and notes
thereto contained in item8. financial statements and
supplementary data of this report.
merck&
co., inc. and subsidiaries
($ in millions except per share amounts)
2008(1)
2007(2)
2006(3)
2005(4)
2004(5)
results for year:
sales
$23,850.3
$24,197.7
$22,636.0
$22,011.9
$22,972.8
materials and production costs
5,582.5
6,140.7
6,001.1
5,149.6
4,965.7
marketing and administrative expenses
7,377.0
7,556.7
8,165.4
7,155.5
7,238.7
research and development expenses
4,805.3
4,882.8
4,782.9
3,848.0
4,010.2
restructuring costs
1,032.5
327.1
142.3
322.2
107.6
equity income from affiliates
(2,560.6
)
(2,976.5
)
(2,294.4
)
(1,717.1
)
(1,008.2
)
u.s. vioxx settlement agreement charge
-
4,850.0
-
-
-
other (income) expense, net
(2,194.2
)
46.2
(382.7
)
(110.2
)
(344.0
)
income before taxes
9,807.8
3,370.7
6,221.4
7,363.9
8,002.8
taxes on income
1,999.4
95.3
1,787.6
2,732.6
2,172.7
net income
7,808.4
3,275.4
4,433.8
4,631.3
5,830.1
basic earnings per common share
$3.66
$1.51
$2.04
$2.11
$2.63
earnings per common share assuming dilution
$3.64
$1.49
$2.03
$2.10
$2.62
cash dividends declared
3,250.4
3,310.7
3,318.7
3,338.7
3,329.1
cash dividends paid per common share
$1.52
$1.52
$1.52
$1.52
$1.49
capital expenditures
1,298.3
1,011.0
980.2
1,402.7
1,726.1
depreciation
1,445.1
1,752.4
2,098.1
1,544.2
1,258.7
year-end position:
working capital
$4,986.2
$2,787.2
$2,507.5
$7,806.9
$1,688.8
property, plant and equipment, net
11,999.6
12,346.0
13,194.1
14,398.2
14,713.7
total assets
47,195.7
48,350.7
44,569.8
44,845.8
42,572.8
long-term debt
3,943.3
3,915.8
5,551.0
5,125.6
4,691.5
stockholders equity
18,758.3
18,184.7
17,559.7
17,977.7
17,349.3
financial ratios:
income as a % of sales
32.7
%
13.5
%
19.6
%
21.0
%
25.4
%
net income as a % of average total assets
16.3
%
7.0
%
9.9
%
10.6
%
14.0
%
year-end statistics:
average common shares outstanding (millions)
2,135.8
2,170.5
2,177.6
2,197.0
2,219.0
average common shares outstanding assuming dilution (millions)
2,145.3
2,192.9
2,187.7
2,200.4
2,226.4
number of stockholders of record
165,700
173,000
184,200
198,200
216,100
number of employees
55,200
59,800
60,000
61,500
62,600
(1)
amounts for 2008 include a gain
on distribution from astrazeneca lp, a gain related to the sale
of the companys remaining worldwide rights to
aggrastat, the
favorable impact of certain tax items, the impact of
restructuring actions, additional legal defense costs and an
expense for a contribution to the merck company foundation.
(2)
amounts for 2007 include the
impact of the u.s. vioxx
settlement agreement charge, restructuring actions, a civil
governmental investigations charge, an insurance arbitration
settlement gain, acquired research expense resulting from an
acquisition, additional vioxx legal defense costs, gains
on sales of assets and product divestitures, as well as a net
gain on the settlements of certain patent disputes.
(3)
amounts for 2006 include the
impact of restructuring actions, acquired research expenses
resulting from acquisitions, additional
vioxx legal defense
costs and the adoption of a new accounting standard requiring
the expensing of stock options.
(4)
amounts for 2005 include the
impact of the net tax charge primarily associated with the
american jobs creation act repatriation, restructuring actions
and additional vioxx
legal defense costs.
(5)
amounts for 2004 include the
impact of the withdrawal of
vioxx, vioxx legal
defense costs and restructuring actions.
table of contents
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations.
description
of mercks business
merck is a global research-driven pharmaceutical company that
discovers, develops, manufactures and markets a broad range of
innovative products to improve human and animal health. the
companys operations are principally managed on a products
basis and are comprised of two reportable segments: the
pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines and infectious diseases
segment. the pharmaceutical segment includes human health
pharmaceutical products marketed either directly by merck or
through joint ventures. these products consist of therapeutic
and preventive agents, sold by prescription, for the treatment
of human disorders. merck sells these human health
pharmaceutical products primarily to drug wholesalers and
retailers, hospitals, government agencies and managed health
care providers such as health maintenance organizations,
pharmacy benefit managers and other institutions. the vaccines
and infectious diseases segment includes human health vaccine
and infectious disease products marketed either directly by
merck or, in the case of vaccines, also through a joint venture.
vaccine products consist of preventative pediatric, adolescent
and adult vaccines, primarily administered at physician offices.
merck sells these human health vaccines primarily to physicians,
wholesalers, physician distributors and government entities.
infectious disease products consist of therapeutic agents for
the treatment of infection sold primarily to drug wholesalers
and retailers, hospitals and government agencies. the
companys professional representatives communicate the
effectiveness, safety and value of its pharmaceutical and
vaccine products to health care professionals in private
practice, group practices and managed care organizations.
overview
during 2008, the company continued to address business
challenges in the midst of an evolving pharmaceutical industry
environment. revenue declined by 1% in 2008 driven largely by
lower sales of fosamax for the treatment and prevention
of osteoporosis. fosamax and fosamax plus d lost
market exclusivity for substantially all formulations in the
united states in february 2008 and april 2008, respectively, and
as a result the company is experiencing a significant decline in
sales in the united states within the fosamax franchise.
also contributing to the decline were lower sales of zocor,
the companys statin for modifying cholesterol which
lost u.s. market exclusivity in 2006. partially offsetting these
declines were higher sales of januvia and janumet
for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and isentress,
an antiretroviral therapy for the treatment of hiv infection.
to address the business and industry challenges that merck
faces, the company remains focused on innovation and customer
value in order to drive the growth of its business and help
position merck for future success.
the company has made significant progress with re-engineering
its operations through research and development initiatives, the
roll-out of a new commercial model and the continuation of
mercks supply strategy. these activities should enable the
company to optimize its product portfolio and invest in growth
opportunities, such as emerging markets, merck bioventures and
business development.
merck continues its efforts to diversify the companys
scientific portfolio both through internal programs and external
research collaborations. the company is focused on developing
novel,
best-in-class
or follow-on treatments for patients in primary care, specialty
care, and hospital settings. additionally, merck research
laboratories is pursuing a portfolio of treatment modalities
that not only includes small molecules and vaccines, but also
biologics, peptides and rna interference (rnai).
further, merck is moving to diversify its portfolio by creating
a new division, merck bioventures, which leverages a unique
technology platform for both follow-on and novel biologics.
the company has numerous active clinical programs across the
companys major research franchises: bone, respiratory,
immunology and endocrine; cardiovascular; diabetes and obesity;
infectious diseases; neuroscience; oncology and vaccines. the
company currently has nine candidates in phaseiii clinical
development and anticipates submitting two new drug applications
(nda) with the u.s.food and drug
administration (fda) with respect to two of the
candidates in 2009: mk-0974, telcagepant, an investigational
compound for the treatment of migraines, and mk-7418,
rolofylline, an investigational compound for the treatment of
acute heart failure. in addition, the company anticipates
submitting an nda in 2009 for mk-0653c, ezetimibe combined with
table of contents
atorvastatin, an investigational medication for the treatment of
dyslipidemia being developed by the merck/schering-plough joint
venture. also, the company anticipates regulatory action in 2009
on two supplemental filings that have been submitted to the fda:
one for gardasil, mercks hpv vaccine, for use in
males; and one for isentress, a
first-in-class
integrase inhibitor for the treatment of hiv-1 infection, for an
expanded indication for use in treatment-nave patients.
on the commercial side, the company is rolling out a more
customer-centric selling model that is designed to provide a
competitive advantage, help build trust with customers, and
improve patient outcomes. the strategy employs the use of new
marketing technologies to complement a new, more
customer-centered approach; and moves away from the traditional
frequency-based sales and marketing approach; it also creates
efficiencies by eliminating redundancies in core functions and
across the sales organization.
on the manufacturing side, merck has made significant progress
in the three years since it began re-engineering to create a
lean, flexible, cost-effective capability. the company continues
to address its manufacturing issues and it is working to build
additional capacity in vaccines and biologics, as well as to
support mercks expansion into emerging markets. to assist
this goal, the company is shifting investments from developed
markets into emerging markets commensurate with the size and
strategic importance of the opportunity.
in october 2008, the company announced a global restructuring
program (the 2008 restructuring program) to reduce
its cost structure, increase efficiency, and enhance
competitiveness. as discussed above, merck is rolling out a new,
more customer-centric selling model. additionally, the company
will make greater use of outside technology resources,
centralize common sales and marketing activities, and
consolidate and streamline its operations. mercks
manufacturing division will further focus its capabilities on
core products and outsource non-core manufacturing. also, merck
is expanding its access to worldwide external science through a
basic research global operating strategy, which is designed to
provide a sustainable pipeline and is focused on translating
basic research productivity into late-stage clinical success. to
increase efficiencies, basic research operations will
consolidate work in support of a given therapeutic area into one
of four locations. this will provide a more efficient use of
research facilities and result in the closure of three basic
research sites located in tsukuba, japan; pomezia, italy; and
seattle by the end of 2009. as part of the 2008 restructuring
program, the company expects to eliminate approximately 7,200
positions 6,800 active employees and 400
vacancies across all areas of the company worldwide
by the end of 2011, approximately 1,750 of which the company
eliminated in 2008. about 40% of the total reductions will occur
in the united states. as part of the 2008 restructuring program,
the company is streamlining management layers by reducing its
total number of senior and mid-level executives globally by
approximately 25%. the company, however, continues to hire new
employees as the business requires. the 2008 restructuring
program is expected to be completed by the end of 2011 with the
total pretax costs estimated to be $1.6billion to
$2.0billion. in 2008, the company recorded pretax
restructuring costs of $921.3million related to the 2008
restructuring program. the company estimates that two-thirds of
the cumulative pretax costs will result in future cash outlays,
primarily from employee separation expense. approximately
one-third of the cumulative pretax costs are non-cash, relating
primarily to the accelerated depreciation of facilities to be
closed or divested. merck expects the 2008 restructuring program
to yield cumulative pretax savings of $3.8billion to
$4.2billion from 2008 to 2013.
during 2008, in connection with certain transactions with
astrazeneca lp (azlp), the company recorded an
aggregate pretax gain of $2.2billion which is included in
other (income) expense, net and received net proceeds from azlp
of $2.6billion. see note8 to the consolidated
financial statements for further information.
earnings per common share (eps) assuming dilution
for 2008 were $3.64, including the impact of the gain on
distribution from azlp of $0.66 per share and restructuring
costs of $(0.44) per share. in addition, eps in 2008 reflects
the favorable impact of certain tax items. all of these items
are discussed more fully in the notes to the consolidated
financial statements.
competition
and the health care environment
the markets in which the company conducts its business are
highly competitive and often highly regulated. global efforts
toward health care cost containment continue to exert pressure
on product pricing and access.
table of contents
in the united states, the government expanded health care access
by enacting the medicare prescription drug improvement and
modernization act of 2003, which was signed into law in december
2003. prescription drug coverage began on january1, 2006.
this legislation supports the companys goal of improving
access to medicines by expanding insurance coverage, while
preserving market-based incentives for pharmaceutical
innovation. at the same time, the legislation will ensure that
prescription drug costs will be controlled by competitive
pressures and by encouraging the appropriate use of medicines.
the u.s.congress has considered, and may consider again,
proposals to increase the governments role in
pharmaceutical pricing in the medicare program. these proposals
may include removing the current legal prohibition against the
secretary of the health and human services intervening in price
negotiations between medicare drug benefit program plans and
pharmaceutical companies. they may also include mandating the
payment of rebates for some or all of the pharmaceutical
utilization in medicare drug benefit plans. in addition,
congress may again consider proposals to allow, under certain
conditions, the importation of medicines from other countries.
in addressing cost-containment pressure, the company has made a
continuing effort to demonstrate that its medicines provide
value to patients and those who pay for health care. in
addition, pricing flexibility across the companys product
portfolio has encouraged growing use of its medicines and
mitigated the effects of increasing cost pressures.
outside the united states, in difficult environments encumbered
by government cost-containment actions, the company has worked
in partnership with payers to encourage them to allocate scarce
resources to optimize health care outcomes, limiting the
potentially detrimental effects of government policies on sales
growth and access to innovative medicines and vaccines, and to
support the discovery and development of innovative products to
benefit patients. the company also is working with governments
in many emerging markets in eastern europe, latin america and
asia to encourage them to increase their investments in health
and thereby improve their citizens access to medicines. in
addition, certain countries within the eu, recognizing the
economic importance of the research-based pharmaceutical
industry and the value of innovative medicines to society, are
working with industry representatives to improve the competitive
climate through a variety of means including market deregulation.
in order to advance the related policy debate, the ec launched
the high levelpharmaceutical forum (hlpf)
during the period 2005 through 2008. the initiative aimed at
improving the prospects of the research-based pharmaceutical
industry in europe and thus the health prospects of all patients
who will benefit from innovative therapies. through an active
dialogue among all stakeholders in the health care system (from
payers to patients), this initiative was an attempt to tackle
key policy issues in europe: (i)promoting greater pricing
flexibility for medicines; (ii)ensuring that health
authorities apply best practices for the evaluation of the
relative effectiveness of medicines; and (iii)improving
greater access to information on medicines for patients in
europe. the company was actively engaged with the ec and other
stakeholders and was broadly in agreement with the
recommendations from the hlpf.
in january 2008, the ec launched a sector inquiry in the
pharmaceutical markets under the rules of eu competition law. as
part of this inquiry, the companys offices in germany were
inspected by the authorities beginning in january 2008. the
preliminary report of the ec was issued on november28,
2008, in which the ec stated it had confirmed its original
hypothesis that competition in the pharmaceutical sector may be
restricted or distorted, as indicated by a decline in innovation
measured by the number of novel medicines reaching the market,
and by alleged instances of delayed market entry of generic
medicines. the public consultation period with respect to the
preliminary report expired on january31, 2009, and the ec
has issued further inquiries in respect of the subject of the
investigation. the ec has not alleged that the company or any of
its subsidiaries have engaged in any unlawful practices. the
final report is planned for later in 2009. the company is
cooperating with the ec in this sector inquiry.
the company is committed to improving access to medicines and
enhancing the quality of life for people around the world. the
african comprehensive hiv/aids partnerships in botswana, a
partnership between the government of botswana, the
bill& melinda gates foundation and the merck company
foundation/merck& co., inc., is supporting
botswanas response to hiv/aids through a comprehensive and
sustainable approach to hiv prevention, care, treatment and
support.
table of contents
to further catalyze access to hiv medicines in developing
countries, under price reduction guidelines that the company
announced in 2001, merck makes no profit on the sale of its
current hiv/aids medicines in the worlds poorest countries
and those hardest hit by the pandemic, and offers its hiv/aids
medicines at significantly reduced prices to medium-income
countries. in february 2007, merck announced that it had again
reduced the price of stocrin in the least developed
countries of the world and those hardest hit by the pandemic. by
the end of 2008, approximately 725,000people living with
hiv and aids in 125 developing countries and territories were
estimated to be on treatment with antiretroviral regimens
containing crixivan, stocrin or atripla. through these
and other actions, merck is working independently and with
partners in the public and private sectors alike to focus on the
most critical barriers to access to medicines in the developing
world: the need for sustainable financing, increased
international assistance and additional investments in
education, training and health infrastructure and capacity in
developing countries.
in october 2008, merck announced that rotateq has been
awarded pre-qualification status by the world health
organization (who). who pre-qualification allows for
expanded access to rotateq and provides a greater
opportunity to help protect millions of infants from rotavirus
gastroenteritis. because rotateq is pre-qualified by the
who, the vaccine is eligible for procurement by the pan american
health organization, unicef and other united nations
agencies for use in national vaccination programs. rotateq
is the only
ready-to-use
oral liquid rotavirus vaccine to receive who pre-qualification.
merck has committed to providing rotateq to the global
alliance for vaccines and immunization-eligible countries at
prices at which it does not profit.
the company is subject to a number of privacy and data
protection laws and regulations globally. the legislative and
regulatory landscape for privacy and data protection continues
to evolve, and there has been an increasing amount of focus on
privacy and data protection issues with the potential to affect
directly the companys business, including recently enacted
laws in a majority of u.s.states requiring security breach
notification.
although no one can predict the outcome of these and other
legislative, regulatory and advocacy initiatives, the company is
well positioned to respond to the evolving health care
environment and market forces.
the company anticipates that the worldwide trend toward
cost-containment will continue, resulting in ongoing pressures
on health care budgets. as the company continues to successfully
launch new products, contribute to health care debates and
monitor reforms, its new products, policies and strategies
should enable it to maintain a strong position in the changing
economic environment.
acquisitions
in september 2007, merck completed the acquisition of
novacardia, inc. (novacardia) for
$366.4million which was paid through the issuance of merck
common stock. novacardia is a clinical-stage pharmaceutical
company focused on cardiovascular disease. this acquisition
added rolofylline (mk-7418), novacardias investigational
phaseiii compound for acute heart failure, to mercks
pipeline. in connection with the acquisition, the company
recorded a charge of $325.1million for acquired research
associated with rolofylline as at the acquisition date,
technological feasibility had not been established and no
alternative future use existed. the charge was not deductible
for tax purposes. the ongoing activity with respect to the
future development of rolofylline continues and the costs have
not been and are not expected to be material to the
companys research and development expenses.
in december 2006, merck completed the acquisition of sirna
therapeutics, inc. (sirna) for approximately
$1.1billion. sirna is a biotechnology company that is
developing a new class of medicines based on rnai technology,
which could significantly alter the treatment of disease. in
connection with the acquisition, the company recorded a charge
of $466.2million for acquired research associated with
sirnas compounds currently under development, which
related to the development of treatments for both the hepatitis
b and hepatitisc viruses, which were in preclinical
development, as well as licensing agreements held by sirna. the
charge was not deductible for tax purposes. the ongoing activity
with respect to each of these compounds under development
continues and the costs have not been and are not expected to be
material to the companys research and development
expenses. the acquisition of sirna has increased mercks
ability to use rnai technology to turn off a targeted gene in a
human cell, potentially rendering inoperative a gene responsible
for triggering a specific disease.
table of contents
in june 2006, merck acquired glycofi, inc. (glycofi)
a privately-held biotechnology company in the field of yeast
glycoengineering, which is the addition of specific carbohydrate
modifications to the proteins in yeast, and optimization of
biologic drug molecules, for $373million in cash
($400million purchase price net of $25million of
shares already owned and net transaction costs). the company
recorded a $296.3million charge for acquired research in
connection with the acquisition which was not deductible for tax
purposes. in may 2006, merck acquired abmaxis, inc.
(abmaxis) a privately-held biopharmaceutical company
dedicated to the discovery and optimization of monoclonal
antibody products for human therapeutics and diagnostics, for
$80million in cash. substantially all of the purchase
price was allocated to an intangible asset relating to
abmaxis technology platform. while each of the
acquisitions has independent scientific merits, the combination
of the glycofi and abmaxis platforms is potentially synergistic,
giving merck the ability to operate across the entire spectrum
of therapeutic antibody discovery, development and
commercialization.
see note4 to the consolidated financial statements for
further discussion of these acquisitions.
operating
results
sales
worldwide sales totaled $23.9billion for 2008, a decline
of 1% compared with 2007, primarily attributable to a 4% volume
decrease, partially offset by a 3% favorable effect from foreign
exchange. the revenue decline over 2007 largely reflects lower
sales of fosamax for the treatment and prevention of
osteoporosis. fosamax and fosamax plus d lost
market exclusivity for substantially all formulations in the
united states in february 2008 and april 2008, respectively.
also contributing to the decline were lower sales of zocor,
the companys statin for modifying cholesterol which
lost u.s.market exclusivity in 2006, lower sales of
vasotec/vaseretic for the treatment of hypertension
and/or heart
failure which lost patent protection in certain foreign markets
and lower sales of certain vaccines, including hepatitis and
haemophilus influenzae type b (hib) vaccines.
partially offsetting these declines were higher sales of
januvia and janumet for the treatment of type 2
diabetes, isentress, an antiretroviral therapy for the
treatment of hiv infection, cozaar/hyzaar for the
treatment of hypertension, rotateq, a vaccine to help
protect against rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants and
children, and singulair, a medicine indicated for the
chronic treatment of asthma and the relief of symptoms of
allergic rhinitis.
domestic sales declined 9% compared with 2007, while foreign
sales rose 10%. foreign sales represented 44% of total sales in
2008. the domestic sales decline was largely driven by lower
sales of fosamax and fosamax plus d, vaccines and
singulair, partially offset by higher sales of
januvia, janumet and isentress. foreign sales
growth reflects the strong performance of januvia, janumet,
singulair, cozaar/hyzaar and isentress, partially
offset by lower sales of vasotec/vaseretic and
zocor.
worldwide sales for 2007 increased 7% in total compared with
2006 reflecting a 4% volume increase, a 2% favorable effect from
foreign exchange and a less than 1% favorable effect from price
changes. sales growth was primarily driven by growth of the
companys vaccines, including gardasil, a vaccine to
help prevent cervical, vulvar and vaginal cancers, precancerous
or dysplastic lesions, and genital warts caused by hpv types 6,
11, 16 and 18, varivax, a vaccine to help prevent
chickenpox, rotateq and zostavax, a vaccine to
help prevent shingles (herpes zoster). also contributing to
sales growth during this period was strong performance of
singulair, higher sales of januvia and sales of
janumet, as well as increased sales of
cozaar/hyzaar. sales growth was partially offset by lower
sales of zocor and proscar, a urology product for
the treatment of symptomatic benign prostate enlargement.
mercks u.s.market exclusivity for proscar
expired in june 2006. also offsetting sales growth in 2007
were lower revenues from the companys relationship with
azlp and lower sales of fosamax and fosamax plus
d. foreign sales represented 39% of total sales for 2007.
table of contents
sales(1)
of the companys products were as follows:
($ in millions)
pharmaceutical:
singulair
$
4,336.9
$
4,266.3
$
3,579.0
cozaar/hyzaar
3,557.7
3,350.1
3,163.1
fosamax
1,552.7
3,049.0
3,134.4
januvia
1,397.1
667.5
42.9
cosopt/trusopt
781.2
786.8
697.1
zocor
660.1
876.5
2,802.7
maxalt
529.2
467.3
406.4
propecia
429.1
405.4
351.8
arcoxia
377.3
329.1
265.4
vasotec/vaseretic
356.7
494.6
547.2
janumet
351.1
86.4
-
proscar
323.5
411.0
618.5
emend
263.8
204.2
130.8
other
pharmaceutical(2)
2,278.9
2,422.9
2,780.5
vaccine and infectious disease product sales included in the
pharmaceutical
segment(3)
2,187.6
1,800.5
1,315.8
pharmaceutical segment revenues
19,382.9
19,617.6
19,835.6
vaccines(4)
and infectious diseases:
gardasil
1,402.8
1,480.6
234.8
proquad/m-m-r ii/varivax
1,268.5
1,347.1
820.1
rotateq
664.5
524.7
163.4
zostavax
312.4
236.0
38.6
hepatitis vaccines
148.3
279.9
248.5
other vaccines
354.6
409.9
354.0
primaxin
760.4
763.5
704.8
cancidas
596.4
536.9
529.8
isentress
361.1
41.3
-
crixivan/stocrin
275.1
310.2
327.3
invanz
265.0
190.2
139.2
other infectious disease
15.5
1.7
-
vaccine and infectious disease product sales included in the
pharmaceutical
segment(3)
(2,187.6
)
(1,800.5
)
(1,315.8
)
vaccines and infectious diseases segment revenues
4,237.0
4,321.5
2,244.7
other segment
revenues(5)
81.8
162.0
162.1
total segment revenues
23,701.7
24,101.1
22,242.4
other(6)
148.6
96.6
393.6
$
23,850.3
$
24,197.7
$
22,636.0
(1)
presented net of discounts and returns.
(2)
other pharmaceutical primarily includes sales of other human
pharmaceutical products and revenue from the companys
relationship with azlp primarily relating to sales of
nexium, as well as prilosec. revenue from azlp was
$1.6billion, $1.7billion and $1.8billion in
2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. in 2006, other pharmaceutical
also reflects certain supply sales, including supply sales
associated with the companys arrangement with
dr.reddys laboratories for the sale of generic
simvastatin.
(3)
sales of vaccine and infectious disease products by
non-u.s.
subsidiaries are included in the pharmaceutical segment.
(4)
these amounts do not reflect sales of vaccines sold in most
major european markets through the companys joint venture,
sanofi pasteur msd, the results of which are reflected in equity
income from affiliates. these amounts do, however, reflect
supply sales to sanofi pasteur msd.
(5)
includes other non-reportable human and animal health
segments.
(6)
other revenues are primarily comprised of miscellaneous
corporate revenues, sales related to divested products or
businesses and other supply sales not included in segment
results.
table of contents
the companys pharmaceutical products include therapeutic
and preventive agents, generally sold by prescription, for the
treatment of human disorders. among these are singulair,
a leukotriene receptor antagonist for the chronic treatment of
asthma and for the relief of symptoms of allergic rhinitis;
cozaar, hyzaar, vasotec and vaseretic, the
companys most significant hypertension
and/or heart
failure products; fosamax and fosamax plus d
(marketed as fosavance throughout the european union
(eu) and as fosamac in japan), for the
treatment and, in the case of fosamax, prevention of
osteoporosis; januvia and janumet, for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes; cosopt and trusopt,
mercks largest-selling ophthalmological products;
zocor, mercks statin for modifying cholesterol;
maxalt, an acute migraine product; propecia, a
product for the treatment of male pattern hair loss; arcoxia,
for the treatment of arthritis and pain; proscar, a
urology product for the treatment of symptomatic benign prostate
enlargement; and emend, for the prevention of
chemotherapy-induced and post-operative nausea and vomiting.
the companys vaccine and infectious disease products
include gardasil, a vaccine to help prevent cervical,
vulvar and vaginal cancers, precancerous or dysplastic lesions,
and genital warts caused by hpv types 6, 11, 16 and 18;
varivax, a vaccine to help prevent chickenpox;
proquad, a pediatric combination vaccine against measles,
mumps, rubella and varicella; m-m-r ii, a vaccine against
measles, mumps and rubella; rotateq, a vaccine to help
protect against rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants and
children; zostavax, a vaccine to help prevent shingles
(herpes zoster); primaxin and cancidas,
anti-bacterial/anti-fungal products; isentress, crixivan
and stocrin, antiretroviral therapies for the
treatment of hiv infection; and invanz for the
treatment of infection.
pharmaceutical
segment revenues
sales of the pharmaceutical segment declined 1% in 2008
primarily due to declines in fosamax, zocor and
vasotec/vaseretic, partially offset by growth in
januvia, janumet and cozaar/hyzaar. sales of the
pharmaceutical segment declined 1% in 2007 primarily due to
lower sales of zocor and proscar post patent
expiration, partially offset by increases in singulair,
cozaar/hyzaar, januvia and sales of janumet.
worldwide sales of singulair grew 2% reaching
$4.3billion in 2008 and rose 19% to $4.3billion in
2007, reflecting the continued demand for asthma and seasonal
and perennial allergic rhinitis medications. sales performance
in 2008 benefited from higher sales outside the united states,
including volume growth in europe and japan and the positive
effect of foreign exchange. sales in the united states declined
reflecting the impact of the switch of a competing allergic
rhinitis product to over-the-counter status in the united states
in early 2008, the timing and public reaction to the fda early
communication regarding a very limited number of post-marketing
adverse event reports which created uncertainty in the
marketplace, and smaller spring and fall allergy seasons.
singulair continues to be the number one prescribed
product in the u.s.respiratory market.
global sales of cozaar, and its companion agent hyzaar
(a combination of cozaar and hydrochlorothiazide),
increased 6% to $3.6billion in 2008 and grew 6% to
$3.4billion in 2007. the increase in 2008 was driven by
strong performance of hyzaar in japan (marketed as
preminent), as well as by the positive effect of foreign
exchange. cozaar and hyzaar are among the leading
medicines in the angiotensin receptor blocker class.
cozaar and hyzaar will each lose patent protection
in the united states in april 2010. the company expects
significant declines in u.s. sales of these products after that
time.
worldwide sales of fosamax and fosamax plus d
declined 49% in 2008 to $1.6billion and decreased 3%
in 2007 to $3.0billion. since substantially all
formulations of these medicines have lost u.s.market
exclusivity, the company is experiencing significant declines in
sales in the united states within the fosamax franchise
and the company expects such declines to continue.
global sales of januvia, mercks dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 (dpp-4) inhibitor, were
$1.4billion in 2008, $667.5million in 2007 and
$42.9million in 2006. januvia was approved by the
fda in october 2006 and by the ec in march 2007. januvia
continues to be the second leading branded oral
anti-diabetic agent in terms of new prescription share in the
united states. dpp-4 inhibitors represent a class of
prescription medications that improve blood sugar control in
patients with type 2 diabetes by enhancing a natural body system
called the incretin system, which helps to regulate glucose by
affecting the beta cells and alpha cells in the pancreas.
in november 2008, new data presented at the 61stannual
scientific meeting of the gerontological society of america
showed januvia significantly reduced blood sugar levels
in elderly patients with type 2 diabetes and was not associated
with hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). in this study of
206patients aged 65 to 96years, there
table of contents
were no reports of hypoglycemia in either the januvia or
the placebo groups. advanced age contributes to the risk of
hypoglycemia.
worldwide sales of janumet, mercks oral
antihyperglycemic agent that combines sitagliptin (mercks
dpp-4 inhibitor, januvia) with metformin in a single
tablet to target all three key defects of type 2 diabetes, were
$351.1million in 2008 compared with $86.4million in
2007. janumet, launched in the united states in april
2007, was approved, as an adjunct to diet and exercise, to
improve blood sugar control in adult patients with type 2
diabetes who are not adequately controlled on metformin or
sitagliptin alone, or in patients already being treated with the
combination of sitagliptin and metformin. in february 2008,
merck received fda approval to market janumet as an
initial treatment for type 2 diabetes when treatment with both
sitagliptin and metformin is appropriate. in july 2008,
janumet was approved for marketing in the eu, iceland and
norway.
other products experiencing growth in 2008 include maxalt
to treat acute migraine pain, emend for the
prevention of chemotherapy-induced and post-operative nausea and
vomiting, arcoxia for the treatment of arthritis and
pain, and propecia for male pattern hair loss.
worldwide sales of zocor declined 25% in 2008 and 69% in
2007. zocor lost u.s.market exclusivity in june
2006 and has also lost market exclusivity in many international
markets.
in february 2006, the company entered into an agreement with
dr.reddys laboratories
(dr.reddys) that authorized the sale of
generic simvastatin. under the terms of the agreement, the
company was reimbursed on a cost-plus basis by
dr.reddys for supplying finished goods and received
a share of the net profits recorded by dr.reddys. in
2006, merck recorded $208.9million of revenue associated
with the dr.reddys arrangement for simvastatin.
proscar lost market exclusivity in the united states in
june 2006. mercks sales of proscar declined 21% in
2008 and 34% in 2007. the basic patent for proscar also
covers propecia, however, propecia is protected by
additional patents which expire in october 2013.
the patent that provided u.s.market exclusivity for
cosopt and trusopt expired in october 2008 and, as
a result, the company is experiencing significant declines in
u.s.sales of these products.
the patent that provides u.s.market exclusivity for
primaxin expires in september 2009. after such time, the
company expects a significant decline in u.s.sales of this
product.
during 2008, the company divested its remaining ownership of
aggrastat in foreign markets to iroko pharmaceuticals.
also during 2008, the company and azlp entered into an agreement
with ranbaxy laboratories ltd. (ranbaxy) to settle
patent litigation with respect to esomeprazole (nexium)
which provides that ranbaxy will not bring its generic
esomeprazole product to market in the united states until
may27, 2014. the company faces other challenges with
respect to outstanding patent infringement matters for
esomeprazole (see note10 to the consolidated financial
statements).
in february 2009, the company formally notified the european
medicines agency of its decision to withdraw the application for
marketing authorization for vorinostat, a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, for treatment of patients with advanced stage,
refratory cutaneous t-cell lymphoma (ctcl).
vorinostat, which is marketed as zolinza in the united
states, was granted orphan drug designation by the ec for the
treatment of ctcl in 2004.
vaccines
and infectious diseases segment revenues
sales of the vaccines and infectious diseases segment were
$4.2billion in 2008, $4.3billion in 2007 and
$2.2billion in 2006. the decline in 2008 was primarily due
to lower sales of gardasil, hepatitis vaccines, other
viral vaccines, which include varivax, m-m-r ii and
proquad, hib vaccines and lower sales of primaxin.
these declines were partially offset by growth in isentress,
rotateq and zostavax. the increase in 2007 was
primarily driven by the strong performance of gardasil,
as well as by varivax, rotateq and zostavax.
the following discussion of vaccine and infectious disease
products includes total vaccine and infectious disease product
sales, the majority of which are included in the vaccines and
infectious diseases segment and the remainder, representing
sales of these products by
non-u.s.subsidiaries,
are included in the pharmaceutical
table of contents
segment. these amounts do not reflect sales of vaccines sold in
most major european markets through sanofi pasteur msd
(spmsd), the companys joint venture with
sanofi pasteur, the results of which are reflected in equity
income from affiliates (see selected joint venture and
affiliate information below). supply sales to spmsd,
however, are reflected in vaccines and infectious diseases
segment revenues.
worldwide sales of the companys cervical cancer vaccine
gardasil, as recorded by merck, were $1.4billion in
2008, $1.5billion in 2007 and $234.8million in 2006.
gardasil was approved by the fda in june 2006 and is the
worlds top-selling hpv vaccine and only hpv vaccine
available for use in the united states. in september 2008, the
fda approved gardasil for the prevention of vulvar and
vaginal cancers caused by hpv types 16 and 18. gardasil
currently is indicated for girls and women 9 through
26years of age for the prevention of cervical, vulvar and
vaginal cancers, precancerous or dysplastic lesions, and genital
warts caused by hpv types 6, 11, 16 and 18. sales performance in
2008 reflects lower sales domestically, partially offset by
growth outside the united states. sales growth outside the
united states was aided by the adoption of school-based programs
in all canadian provinces. the decline in the united states was
affected by two factors. first, because of strong launch uptake,
a significant portion of the 11 to 18year old eligible
population has already been vaccinated. as a result, despite
continued strong vaccination rates in this population, the
number of total vaccinations has declined. secondly, the number
of total vaccinations in the 19 to 26year old age group
has declined as compared with 2007. sales in 2007 include
initial purchases by many states through the u.s.centers
for disease control and prevention (cdc) vaccines
for children program. the company is a party to certain third
party license agreements with respect to gardasil
(including a cross-license and settlement agreement with
glaxosmithkline). as a result of these agreements, the company
pays royalties on worldwide gardasil sales of
approximately 24% to 26% in the aggregate, which are included in
materials and production costs.
in january 2009, the fda issued a second complete response
letter regarding the supplemental biologics license application
(sbla) for the use of gardasil in women
ages27 though 45. the agency completed its review of the
response that merck provided in july 2008 to the fdas
first complete response letter issued in june 2008 and has
recommended that merck submit additional data when the
48month study has been completed. the initial sbla
included data collected through an average of 24months
from enrollment into the study, which is when the number of
pre-specified endpoints had been met. following a review of the
final results of the study, merck anticipates providing a
response to the fda in the fourth quarter of 2009. the letter
does not affect current indications for gardasil in
females ages9 through 26 nor does the letter relate to the
sbla that was submitted in december 2008 for the use of
gardasil in males.
in november 2008, data presented at the european research
organization on genital infection and neoplasia international
multidisciplinary conference showed that gardasil
prevented 90% of external genital lesions caused by hpv
types 6, 11, 16 and 18 in a pivotal phaseiii study in men
aged 16 to 26. these are the only data evaluating efficacy of
any hpv vaccine in preventing disease in males. the initial
planned analysis of this study, an analysis of male study
participants aged 16 to 26 who had not been infected with at
least one of the four hpv types before the start of the study
through one month after receiving their third dose of the
vaccine or placebo, has been completed. this analysis was
predetermined in the study protocol to be conducted after at
least 32 cases of external genital lesions were observed. the
study is ongoing, and additional data will be submitted to
global regulatory agencies once available. merck submitted an
sbla for gardasil in december 2008 which has been
accepted by the fda for the use of gardasil in boys and
men ages9 to 26 for the prevention of external genital
lesions caused by hpv types 6, 11, 16 and 18. other regulatory
submissions around the world will occur as planned.
rotateq achieved worldwide sales as recorded by merck of
$664.5million in 2008, $524.7million in 2007 and
$163.4million in 2006. the increases in 2008 and 2007 were
primarily driven by the continued uptake in the united states
and successful launches around the world. the fda approved
rotateq in february 2006. sales in 2008 included
purchases of $54million in 2008 and $78million in
2007 to support the cdc stockpile. the company anticipates that
domestic sales in 2009 will be impacted by the recent launch of
a competing product.
as previously disclosed, the company has resolved an issue
related to the bulk manufacturing process for the companys
varicella zoster virus (vzv)-containing vaccines.
the company is manufacturing bulk varicella and is producing
doses of varivax and zostavax. the company has
received regulatory approvals in the united states and certain
other markets to increase its manufacturing capacity for
vzv-containing vaccines. the company is working to ensure
adequate market supply and continued sufficient inventory of
varivax and to clear back orders
table of contents
and build stable supply and inventory for zostavax.
proquad, one of the vzv-containing vaccines, is currently
not available for ordering; however, orders have been
transitioned, as appropriate, to m-m-r ii and
varivax. total sales as recorded by merck for proquad
were $9.5million in 2008, $264.4million in 2007
and $234.8million in 2006. merck anticipates that
proquad will not return to the u.s.market in 2009.
mercks sales of varivax were $924.6million in
2008, $854.9million in 2007 and $327.9million in
2006. varivax is the only vaccine available in the united
states to help protect against chickenpox due to the
unavailability of proquad. in 2007, varivax
benefited from the advisory committee on immunization
practices june 2006 second dose recommendation. mercks
sales of m-m-r ii were $334.4million in 2008,
$227.8million in 2007 and $257.3million in 2006.
sales of varivax and m-m-r ii were affected by the
unavailability of proquad. combined sales of proquad,
m-m-r ii and varivax declined in 2008 compared with
2007.
sales of zostavax recorded by merck were
$312.4million in 2008, $236.0million in 2007 and
$38.6million in 2006. sales in 2008 and 2007 were impacted
by bulk vaccine supply issues that caused delays in the
fulfillment of customer orders. the company cleared the majority
of backorders in december 2008. the company expects to clear
backorders that remained at the end of the year in the first
quarter of 2009 and to return to normal shipping times in
mid-2009. once the backorders are resolved, the company expects
to have adequate supply to meet anticipated customer demand for
the remainder of 2009. the company currently anticipates
launching zostavax outside the united states after 2009.
zostavax was approved by the fda as well as by regulatory
authorities in australia and the eu in may 2006. the vaccine is
the first and only medical option for the prevention of shingles.
the company has been working to resolve manufacturing issues
related to its hib-containing vaccines, pedvaxhib and
comvax since december 2007. the company has resolved the
original issue related to equipment sterilization, but has
identified other unrelated manufacturing process changes that
will require a regulatory filing. merck anticipates that
pedvaxhib and comvax will return to the
u.s.market in mid-to-late 2009. timing of product
availability outside the united states is dependent upon local
regulatory requirements.
the pediatric formulation of vaqta, a vaccine against
hepatitis a, became available again in december of 2008 and the
company anticipates the adult formulation may be available in
the second half of 2009. outside of the united states, the
supply of vaqta is limited and availability will vary by
region. in addition, doses of the adult and dialysis
formulations of the companys hepatitis b vaccine,
recombivax hb, will be depleted during the first quarter
of 2009 after which time they will be unavailable in the united
states for the remainder of the year. the pediatric/adolescent
formulation of recombivax hb is expected to experience
intermittent backorders in the unitedstates throughout
2009. merck expects supplies of the pediatric/adolescent
formulation of recombivax hb to be limited throughout
2009 and the company does not expect to return to full supply of
the pediatric/adolescent formulation of recombivax hb
until some time in 2010.
sales of isentress were $361.1million in 2008 and
$41.3million in 2007. in october 2007, the fda granted
isentress accelerated approval for use in combination
with other antiretroviral agents for the treatment of hiv-1
infection in treatment-experienced adult patients who have
evidence of viral replication and hiv-1 strains resistant to
multiple antiretroviral agents. isentress is the first
medicine to be approved in the class of antiretroviral drugs
called integrase inhibitors. isentress works by
inhibiting the insertion of hiv dna into human dna by the
integrase enzyme. inhibiting integrase from performing this
essential function limits the ability of the virus to replicate
and infect new cells. in january 2009, the fda granted
traditional approval to isentress following review of the
48week data from the benchmrk 1 & 2 clinical trials.
merck is also conducting phaseiii clinical trials of
isentress in the treatment-nave (previously
untreated) hiv population. in december 2008, merck announced
that the fda had accepted the supplemental new drug application
(snda) filing for isentress tablets for
standard review. the company is seeking u.s.marketing
approval of isentress in combination with other hiv
medicines for treatment in adult patients who are previously
untreated (nave) for hiv. merck expects fda action in july
2009.
in february 2009, data on several phaseiii isentress
studies were presented at the 16thconference on
retroviruses and opportunistic infections in montreal, canada.
in new subgroup analyses of a phaseiii study (startmrk)
that compared isentress to efavirenz (one of the leading
antiretrovirals prescribed for previously untreated
(treatment-nave) hiv-infected patients), isentress
was found to be as effective as efavirenz at
table of contents
suppressing viral load and provided improvements in immune
system function across a broad spectrum of patient
subpopulations through 48weeks. the use of isentress
in previously untreated hiv-infected patients is an
investigational use of the drug. both medicines were taken in
combination with tenofovir/emtricitabine. in addition, results
from two phaseiii studies (switchmrk-1 and -2) evaluating
the effect of switching patients whose hiv is controlled on a
lopinavir/ritonavir-based regimen to a regimen containing
isentress tablets showed that isentress
significantly improved total cholesterol, triglycerides and
non-hdl-cholesterol. the study also showed that isentress
did not demonstrate non-inferior virologic efficacy at
maintaining viral load suppression. as a result of the viral
load findings in these trials, merck discontinued these two
studies.
other vaccines and infectious diseases segment products
experiencing growth in 2008 include invanz for the
treatment of infection and cancidas, an anti-fungal product.
in 2008, the fda approved an expanded label for cancidas,
which makes it the first and only echinocandin therapy approved
in the united states for the treatment of pediatric patients
aged three months to 17years with indicated fungal
infections.
costs,
expenses and other
($ in millions)
change
change
materials and production
$
5,582.5
%
$
6,140.7
%
$
6,001.1
marketing and administrative
7,377.0
%
7,556.7
%
8,165.4
research and development
4,805.3
%
4,882.8
%
4,782.9
restructuring costs
1,032.5
*
327.1
*
142.3
equity income from affiliates
(2,560.6
)
%
(2,976.5
)
%
(2,294.4
)
u.s. vioxx settlement agreement charge
-
*
4,850.0
-
-
other (income) expense, net
(2,194.2
)
*
46.2
*
(382.7
)
$
14,042.5
%
$
20,827.0
%
$
16,414.6
*
100% or greater.
materials
and production
in 2008, materials and production costs declined 9% compared
with a 1% decline in sales primarily reflecting lower
restructuring costs. included in materials and production costs
in 2008 were $123.2million of restructuring costs related
to both the 2008 and 2005 restructuring programs comprised of
$88.7million of accelerated depreciation associated with
the planned sale or closure of certain of the companys
manufacturing facilities and $34.5million of other costs,
primarily asset write-offs. this compares with restructuring
costs of $483.1million in 2007 representing
$460.6million of accelerated depreciation and
$22.5million of asset impairments. (see note3 to the
consolidated financial statements.)
in 2007, materials and production costs increased primarily due
to an increase in sales. this increase was partially offset by
lower costs related to the 2005 restructuring program which were
$483.1million in 2007 compared with $736.4million in
2006.
gross margin was 76.6% in 2008 compared with 74.6% in 2007 and
73.5% in 2006. the restructuring charges noted above had an
unfavorable impact of 0.5percentage points in 2008,
2.0percentage points in 2007 and 3.3percentage
points in 2006. gross margin in 2008 reflects changes in product
mix, including the decline in fosamax and fosamax plus
d sales as a result of the loss of u.s.market
exclusivity in 2008, and manufacturing efficiencies. gross
margin in 2007 reflects a slight unfavorable impact from changes
in product mix and the positive impact of manufacturing
efficiencies. gross margin in 2006 reflects the unfavorable
impact of changes in product mix, including the decline in
zocor sales as a result of the loss of u.s.market
exclusivity in june 2006.
marketing
and administrative
marketing and administrative expenses declined 2% in 2008 and 7%
in 2007. marketing and administrative expenses in 2008, 2007 and
2006 included $62million, $280million and
$673million, respectively, of
table of contents
additional reserves solely for future vioxx legal defense
costs. expenses in 2008 and 2006 also reflect $40million
and $48million, respectively, of additional reserves
solely for future legal defense costs for fosamax
litigation. in addition, marketing and administrative
expenses for 2007 included a $455million gain from an
insurance arbitration award related to vioxx product
liability litigation coverage. (see note10 to the
consolidated financial statements for more information on
vioxx-related and fosamax-related matters). in
addition to lower expenses for future legal defense costs, the
decline in marketing and administrative expenses in 2008 and
2007 also reflect the companys efforts to reduce its cost
base. the company has incurred separation costs associated with
sales force reductions that are reflected in restructuring costs
as discussed below.
research
and development
research and development expenses declined 2% in 2008 compared
with 2007. expenses in 2008 reflect $128.4million of costs
related to the closure or sale of research facilities in
connection with the 2008 restructuring program, substantially
all of which represent accelerated depreciation. expenses in
2007 reflect $325.1million of acquired research expense
related to the novacardia acquisition. research and development
expenses in 2008 compared with 2007 reflect an increase in
development spending in support of the continued advancement of
the research pipeline.
research and development expenses increased 2% in 2007 compared
with 2006 reflecting significant growth in the number of
compounds entering clinical trials from internal projects as
well as integration of late stage acquisitions. research and
development expenses in 2007 included $325.1million of
acquired research expense related to the novacardia acquisition
compared with acquired research expense of $762.5million
in 2006 related to the acquisitions of sirna and glycofi. in
addition, research and development expenses for 2006 reflected
accelerated depreciation costs of $56.5million related to
the closure of research facilities in connection with the 2005
restructuring program.
during 2008, the company continued the advancement of drug
candidates through the pipeline. the companys research
pipeline chart is included in item1.
business research and development
above.
on january25, 2008, the fda approved emend
(fosaprepitant dimeglumine) for injection, 115mg, for
the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
emend for injection provides a new option for day one, as
a substitute for emend (125mg) taken orally, as
part of the recommended
three-day
regimen. prior to the fda decision, the eu on january11,
2008 granted marketing approval for emend for injection,
known as ivemend in the eu, an action that applies to all
27 eu member countries as well as norway and iceland.
the company currently has nine drug candidates in phaseiii
development and anticipates making nda filings with respect to
two of the candidates in 2009 as noted below. additionally, the
company anticipates filing an nda with the fda in 2009 for
mk-0653c, an investigational medication combining ezetimibe with
atorvastatin for the treatment of dyslipidemia being developed
by the merck/schering-plough joint venture.
the company continues to anticipate filing an nda with the fda
in 2009 for mk-7418, rolofylline, a potential
first-in-class
selective adenosine a1 antagonist, which is an investigational
drug being evaluated for the treatment of acute heart failure.
in march 2008, the results of a phaseiii pilot
dose-ranging study of patients hospitalized with acute heart
failure syndrome and renal impairment treated with rolofylline
were presented at the annual scientific session of the american
college of cardiology. rolofylline administered with intravenous
(iv) loop diuretics was associated with improved
dyspnea (shortness of breath) and preserved renal function
compared to treatment with placebo andiv diuretics. in
addition, in a post-hoc analysis, treatment with rolofylline was
associated with a trend towards reduced
60-day
mortality or hospital re-admission for cardiovascular or renal
causes. rolofylline increases renal blood flow and urine
production by blocking adenosine-mediated vasoconstriction of
the afferent arterioles of the kidneys and inhibiting salt and
water reabsorption by the kidney. in this small pilot study, the
rates of adverse events seen across treatment groups were
similar. the confirmatory phaseiii studies with
rolofylline 30mg are underway.
the company also continues to anticipate filing an nda with the
fda in 2009 for mk-0974, telcagepant, an investigational oral
calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor (cgrp)
antagonist, which represents a new mechanism for the treatment
of migraine. in september 2008, merck announced that in a
phaseiii clinical trial telcagepant significantly relieved
moderate-to-severe migraine attacks, including migraine pain and
migraine-
table of contents
associated symptoms, compared to placebo. the data were
presented in london, england at the european headache/migraine
trustinternational congress. the reported findings are
from a worldwide, multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled
clinical trial in adult patients with acute migraine. also in
june 2008, merck presented data at the american headache society
annual meeting from a phaseiii clinical trial which showed
telcagepant significantly improved relief of migraine pain and
migraine-associated symptoms two hours after dosing compared to
placebo. in addition, the efficacy results for telcagepant
300mg were similar to the highest recommended dose of
zolmitriptan, an approved migraine therapy, with a lower
incidence of adverse events associated with telcagepant in this
study. this trial is part of an ongoing phaseiii program
evaluating telcagepant. there were no reports of serious adverse
events in the telcagepant or zolmitriptan treatment arms.
telcagepant is an antagonist of the receptor for cgrp, a potent
neuropeptide thought to play a central role in the underlying
pathophysiology of migraine.
mk-8669, deforolimus, is a novel mtor (mammalian target of
rapamycin) inhibitor being evaluated for the treatment of
cancer. the drug candidate is being jointly developed and
commercialized with ariad pharmaceuticals, inc., under an
agreement reached in 2007. a phaseiii study (succeed) in
patients with metastatic soft-tissue or bone sarcomas is
underway. the company continues to anticipate filing an nda with
the fda in 2010.
mk-0431c combines januvia (sitagliptin) with
pioglitazone, another type 2 diabetes therapy. the company
anticipates filing an nda with the fda in 2011.
v503 is a nine-valent hpv vaccine in development to expand
protection against cancer-causing hpv types. the phaseiii
clinical program is underway and merck anticipates filing a
biologics license application (bla) with the fda in
2012.
mk-0822, odanacatib, is a highly selective inhibitor of the
cathepsin k enzyme, which is being evaluated for the treatment
of osteoporosis. osteoporosis is a disease which reduces bone
density and strength and results in an increased risk of bone
fractures. the cathepsin k enzyme is believed to play a central
role in osteoclastic bone resorption, particularly in the
degradation of the protein component of bone. inhibition of
cathepsin k is a novel approach to the treatment of osteoporosis
that differs from those of currently approved treatments. in
september 2008, two-year data from a phase iib study of
odanacatib were reported at the 30thannual meeting of the
american society for bone and mineral research which
demonstrated dose-dependent increases in bone mineral density
(bmd) at the total hip, lumbar spine and femoral
neck fracture sites and decreased indices of bone resorption
compared to placebo in postmenopausal women with low bmd. the
multi-center, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study
evaluated doses of 3, 10, 25 or 50mg of odanacatib
administered orally, once-weekly and without regard to the
timing of meals or the patients physical position in
postmenopausal women with low bmd for 24months. the number
of patients experiencing a drug-related adverse experience was
similar between the 50mg odanacatib group and placebo. the
effect of odanacatib 50mg on vertebral, hip and
non-vertebral fractures is currently being evaluated in a large,
global phaseiii study. merck continues to anticipate
filing an nda with the fda in 2012.
mk-0524a is a drug candidate that combines extended-release
(er) niacin and a novel flushing inhibitor,
laropiprant. mk-0524a has demonstrated the ability to lower
ldl-cholesterol (ldl-c or bad
cholesterol), raise hdl-cholesterol (hdl-c or
good cholesterol) and lower triglycerides with
significantly less flushing than traditional extended release
niacin alone. high ldl-c, low hdl-c and elevated triglycerides
are risk factors associated with heart attacks and strokes. in
april 2008, merck received a non-approvable action letter from
the fda in response to its nda for mk-0524a. at a meeting to the
discuss the letter, the fda stated that additional efficacy and
safety data were required and suggested that the company wait
for the results of the treatment of hdl to reduce the incidence
of vascular events (hps2-thrive) cardiovascular
outcomes study, which is expected to be completed in january
2012. merck anticipates filing an nda with the fda for mk-0524a
in 2012. in july 2008, the company announced that tredaptive
(also known as mk-0524a) was approved for marketing in the
27 countries of the eu, iceland and norway. tredaptive is
approved for the treatment of dyslipidemia, particularly in
patients with combined mixed dyslipidemia (characterized by
elevated levels of ldl-c and triglycerides and low hdl-c) and in
patients with primary hypercholesterolemia (heterozygous
familial and non-familial). tredaptive should be used in
patients in combination with statins, when the cholesterol
lowering
table of contents
effects of statin monotherapy is inadequate. tredaptive
can be used as monotherapy only in patients in whom statins
are considered inappropriate or not tolerated. the launch of
tredaptive in europe and other markets has been delayed
due to a manufacturing-related issue. merck is committed to
quickly resolving the issue and to making tredaptive
available in europe as soon as possible. in other countries
around the world, merck continues to pursue regulatory approvals
for mk-0524a.
mk-0524b is a drug candidate that combines the novel approach to
raising hdl-c and lowering triglycerides from er niacin combined
with laropiprant with the proven benefits of simvastatin in one
combination product. merck will not seek approval for mk-0524b
in the united states until it files its complete response
relating to mk-0524a.
mk-0859, anacetrapib, is an inhibitor of the cholesteryl ester
transfer protein that has shown promise in lipid management by
raising hdl-c and reducing ldl-c without raising blood pressure.
a phaseiii study was initiated in 2008 and enrollment in a
cardiovascular outcomes study is planned to begin in 2010. the
company anticipates filing an nda with the fda beyond 2014.
in december 2008, the company terminated its collaboration with
dynavax technologies corporation (dynavax) for the
development of v270, an investigational hepatitis b vaccine,
which was entered into in 2007. in october 2008, merck and
dynavax received notification from the fda regarding the two
companies response to the agencys request for safety
information relating to the clinical hold on the two
investigational new drug (ind) applications for
v270. in issuing the clinical hold in march 2008, the fda
requested a review of clinical and safety data including all
available information about a single case of wegeners
granulomatosis, an uncommon disease in which the blood vessels
are inflamed, reported in a phaseiii clinical trial.
dynavax and merck had previously provided a response to the fda
in september 2008. in its october 2008 correspondence, the fda
advised the companies that the balance of risk versus potential
benefit no longer favored continued clinical evaluation of v270
in healthy adults and children.
in october 2008, merck announced it will not seek regulatory
approval for taranabant, an investigational medicine, to treat
obesity and has discontinued its phaseiii clinical
development program for taranabant for obesity. available
phaseiii data showed that both efficacy and adverse events
were dose related, with greater efficacy and more adverse events
in the higher doses. therefore, after careful consideration, the
company determined that the overall profile of taranabant did
not support further development for obesity.
merck continues to remain focused on augmenting its internal
efforts by capitalizing on growth opportunities that will drive
both near- and long-term growth. during 2008, the company
completed transactions across a broad range of therapeutic
categories, as well as early-stage technology transactions.
merck is actively monitoring the landscape for growth
opportunities that meet the companys strategic criteria.
highlights from these activities include:
in february 2009, merck entered into a definitive agreement with
insmed inc. (insmed) to purchase insmeds
portfolio of follow-on biologic therapeutic candidates and its
commercial manufacturing facilities located in boulder,
colorado. under the terms of the agreement, merck will pay
insmed an aggregate of $130million in cash to acquire all
rights to the boulder facilities and insmeds pipeline of
follow-on biologic candidates. insmeds follow-on biologics
portfolio includes two clinical candidates: ins-19, an
investigational recombinant granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor (g-csf) that will be evaluated for its
ability to prevent infections in patients with cancer receiving
chemotherapy, and ins-20, a pegylated recombinant g-csf designed
to allow for less frequent dosing. the agreement provides for
initial payments of up to $10million for ins-19 and
ins-20. merck will pay insmed the remaining balance upon closing
of the transaction, which is expected by the end of the first
quarter of 2009, without any further milestone or royalty
obligations.
in september 2008, merck and japan tobacco inc. (jt)
signed a worldwide licensing agreement to develop and
commercialize jtt-305, an investigational oral osteoanabolic
(bone growth stimulating) agent for the treatment of
osteoporosis. jtt-305 is an investigational oral calcium sensing
receptor antagonist that is currently being evaluated by jt in
phaseii clinical trials in japan for its effect on
increasing bone density and is in phase i clinical trials
outside of japan. under the terms of the agreement, merck gained
worldwide rights, except for japan,
table of contents
to develop and commercialize jtt-305 and certain other related
compounds. jt received an upfront payment of $85million,
which the company recorded as research and development expense,
and is eligible to receive additional cash payments upon
achievement of certain milestones associated with the
development and approval of a drug candidate covered by the
agreement. jt will also be eligible to receive royalties from
sales of any drug candidates that receive marketing approval.
the company maintains a number of long-term exploratory and
fundamental research programs in biology and chemistry as well
as research programs directed toward product development.
mercks research and development model is designed to
increase productivity and improve the probability of success by
prioritizing the companys research and development
resources on disease areas of unmet medical needs, scientific
opportunity and commercial opportunity. merck is managing its
research and development portfolio across diverse approaches to
discovery and development by balancing investments appropriately
on novel, innovative targets with the potential to have a major
impact on human health, on developing
best-in-class
approaches, and on delivering maximum value of its new medicines
and vaccines through new indications and new formulations.
another important component of mercks science-based
diversification is based on expanding the companys
portfolio of modalities to include not only small molecules and
vaccines, but also biologics, peptides and rnai. further, merck
is moving to diversify its portfolio by creating a new division,
merck bioventures, which leverages a unique platform for both
follow-on and novel biologics. the company will continue to
pursue appropriate external licensing opportunities.
during 2008, the company began implementing a new model for its
basic research global operating strategy. the new model will
align franchise and function through clear roles and
responsibilities, align resources with disease area priorities
and balance capacity across discovery phases and allow the
company to act upon those programs with the highest probability
of success. additionally, the strategy is designed to expand the
companys access to worldwide external science and
incorporate external research as a key component of the
companys early discovery pipeline in order to translate
basic research productivity into late-stage clinical success.
the companys clinical pipeline includes candidates in
multiple disease areas, including anemia, atherosclerosis,
cancer, diabetes, heart failure, hypertension, infectious
diseases, migraine, neurodegenerative diseases, psychiatric
diseases, osteoporosis, pain, and respiratory disease. the
company supplements its internal research with an aggressive
licensing and external alliance strategy focused on the entire
spectrum of collaborations from early research to late-stage
compounds, as well as new technologies. a chart reflecting the
companys current research pipeline as of february15,
2009 is set forth in item1. business
research and development above.
share-based
compensation
the company recognizes share-based compensation expense pursuant
to financial accounting standards board (fasb)
statement no.123r, share-based payment
(fas123r), which requires all share-based
payments to employees be expensed over the requisite service
period based on the grant-date fair value of the awards. total
pretax share-based compensation expense was $348.0million
in 2008, $330.2million in 2007 and $312.5million in
2006. at december31, 2008, there was $444.1million
of total pretax unrecognized compensation expense related to
nonvested stock option, restricted stock unit and performance
share unit awards which will be recognized over a weighted
average period of 2.0years. for segment reporting,
share-based compensation costs are unallocated expenses.
restructuring
costs
restructuring costs were $1.0billion, $327.1million
and $142.3million for 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.
of the restructuring costs recorded in 2008, $735.5million
related to the 2008 restructuring program and the remainder were
associated with the 2005 restructuring program. in 2008, 2007
and 2006, merck incurred separation costs of $957.3million
(of which $684.9million related to the 2008 restructuring
program), $251.4million and $113.7million,
respectively, associated with actual headcount reductions, as
well as headcount reductions that were probable and could be
reasonably estimated. the company eliminated 5,800 positions in
2008 (of which 1,750 related to the 2008 restructuring program),
2,400 positions in 2007 and 3,700 positions in 2006. these
position eliminations are comprised of actual headcount
reductions, and the elimination of contractors and vacant
positions. also included in restructuring costs are curtailment,
settlement and termination charges on the
table of contents
companys pension and other postretirement benefit plans
and shutdown costs. for segment reporting, restructuring costs
are unallocated expenses.
equity
income from affiliates
equity income from affiliates reflects the performance of the
companys joint ventures and partnerships. in 2008, the
decline in equity income from affiliates reflects decreased
equity income from the merck/schering-plough partnership and
lower partnership returns from azlp, partially offset by higher
equity income from merial limited (merial) and
spmsd. the decrease in equity income from the
merck/schering-plough joint venture is the result of lower
revenues of vytorin and zetia following the
announcements of the enhance and seas clinical trial results. in
addition, as a result of the termination of the respiratory
joint venture, the company was obligated to schering-plough
corporation (schering-plough) in the amount of
$105million as specified in the joint venture agreements.
this resulted in a charge of $43million in the second
quarter of 2008 which was included in equity income from
affiliates. the remaining amount is being amortized over the
remaining patent life of zetia through 2016. the lower
partnership returns from azlp are primarily attributable to the
first quarter 2008 partial redemption of mercks interest
in certain azlp product rights, which resulted in a reduction of
the priority return and the variable returns which were based,
in part, upon sales of certain former astra usa, inc. products.
the higher equity income from merial primarily reflects higher
sales of biological products. the increase in equity income from
spmsd is largely attributable to higher sales of gardasil
in joint venture territories outside of the united states.
in 2007 and 2006, the increase in equity income from affiliates
primarily reflects the successful performance of vytorin
and zetia through the merck/schering-plough
partnership. see selected joint venture and affiliate
information below.
u.s.
vioxx
settlement agreement charge
on november9, 2007, merck entered into an agreement (the
settlement agreement) with the law firms that
comprise the executive committee of the plaintiffs
steering committee of the federal multidistrict vioxx
litigation as well as representatives of plaintiffs
counsel in state coordinated proceedings to resolve state and
federal myocardial infarction (mi) and ischemic
stroke (is) claims already filed against the company
in the united states. under the settlement agreement , the
company will pay an aggregate fixed amount of $4.85billion
into two funds for qualifying claims consisting of
$4.0billion for qualifying mi claims and $850million
for qualifying is claims that enter into the resolution process
(settlement program), of which $750million was
paid into such funds in 2008. as a consequence of the settlement
agreement, the company recorded a pretax charge of
$4.85billion in 2007. (see note10 to the
consolidated financial statements).
other
(income) expense, net
the change in other (income) expense, net during 2008 was
primarily due to an aggregate gain in 2008 from azlp of
$2.2billion (see note8 to the consolidated financial
statements), the impact of a $671million charge in 2007
related to the resolution of certain civil governmental
investigations, and a 2008 gain of $249million related to
the sale of the companys remaining worldwide rights to
aggrastat, partially offset by a $300million
expense in 2008 for a contribution to the merck company
foundation, an increase in exchange losses of $202million,
higher recognized losses of $153million, net, in the
companys investment portfolio and a $58million
charge related to the resolution of an investigation into
whether the company violated consumer protection laws with
respect to the sales and marketing of vioxx (see
note10 to the consolidated financial statements). the
fluctuation in exchange losses (gains) in 2008 from 2007 is
primarily due to the higher cost of foreign currency contracts
due to lower u.s.interest rates and unfavorable impacts of
period-to-period changes in foreign currency exchange rates on
net long or net short foreign currency positions, considering
both net monetary assets and related foreign currency contracts.
the change in other (income) expense, net during 2007 as
compared with 2006 primarily reflects a $671million charge
in 2007 related to the resolution of certain civil governmental
investigations partially offset by
table of contents
the favorable impact of gains on sales of assets and product
divestitures, as well as a net gain on the settlements of
certain patent disputes.
segment
profits
($ in millions)
pharmaceutical segment profits
$
12,400.4
$
13,430.6
$
12,476.5
vaccines and infectious diseases segment profits
2,798.9
2,625.0
1,253.1
other segment profits
419.3
452.7
380.7
other
(5,810.8
)
(13,137.6
)
(7,888.9
)
income before income taxes
$
9,807.8
$
3,370.7
$
6,221.4
segment profits are comprised of segment revenues less certain
elements of materials and production costs and operating
expenses, including components of equity income (loss) from
affiliates and depreciation and amortization expenses. for
internal management reporting presented to the chief operating
decision maker, the company does not allocate the vast majority
of indirect production costs, research and development expenses
and general and administrative expenses, as well as the cost of
financing these activities. separate divisions maintain
responsibility for monitoring and managing these costs,
including depreciation related to fixed assets utilized by these
divisions and, therefore, they are not included in segment
profits. also excluded from the determination of segment profits
are the gain on distribution from azlp, the u.s.vioxx
settlement agreement charge, taxes paid at the joint venture
level and a portion of equity income. additionally, segment
profits do not reflect other expenses from corporate and
manufacturing cost centers and other miscellaneous income
(expense). these unallocated items are reflected in
other in the above table. also included in other are
miscellaneous corporate profits, operating profits related to
divested products or businesses, other supply sales and
adjustments to eliminate the effect of double counting certain
items of income and expense.
pharmaceutical segment profits decreased 8% in 2008 largely
driven by lower sales of fosamax and fosamax plus d,
zocor and decreased equity income from the
merck/schering-plough joint venture and from azlp.
pharmaceutical segment profits increased 8% in 2007 reflecting
higher equity income, primarily driven by the strong performance
of the merck/schering-plough partnership, partially offset by
the loss of u.s.market exclusivity for zocor and
proscar.
vaccine and infectious diseases segment profits increased 7% in
2008 primarily driven by the continued successful rollout of
isentress and the strong performance of rotateq,
as well as higher equity income from spmsd. vaccine and
infectious diseases segment profits more than doubled in 2007 as
compared with 2006 driven by the launch of three new vaccines in
the latter part of 2006 and the successful performance of
varivax.
taxes on
income
the companys effective income tax rate was 20.4% in 2008,
2.8% in 2007 and 28.7% in 2006. the 2008 effective tax rate
reflects a net favorable impact as compared with the statutory
rate of approximately 3percentage points, which includes
favorable impacts relating to tax settlements that resulted in a
reduction of the companys liability for unrecognized tax
benefits of approximately $200million, the realization of
foreign tax credits and the favorable tax impact of foreign
exchange rate changes during the fourth quarter, particularly
the strengthening of the japanese yen against the us dollar,
partially offset by an unfavorable impact resulting from the
azlp gain being fully taxable in the united states at a combined
federal and state tax rate of approximately 36.3%. in the first
quarter of 2008, the company decided to distribute certain prior
years foreign earnings to the united states which will
result in a utilization of foreign tax credits. these foreign
tax credits arose as a result of tax payments made outside of
the united states in prior years that became realizable in the
first quarter based on a change in the companys decision
to distribute these foreign earnings. the 2007 effective tax
rate reflects the reduction of domestic pretax income primarily
resulting from the u.s.vioxx settlement agreement
charge and the related change in mix of domestic and foreign
pretax income.
table of contents
net
income and earnings per share
($ in millions except per share
amounts)
change
change
net income
$
7,808.4
*
$
3,275.4
26%
$
4,433.8
as a % of sales
32.7
%
13.5
%
19.6
%
as a % of average total assets
16.3
%
7.0
%
9.9
%
earnings per common share assuming dilution
$
3.64
*
$
1.49
27%
$
2.03
*
100% or greater.
net
income and earnings per common share
net income was $7.8billion in 2008 compared with
$3.3billion in 2007 and $4.4billion in 2006.
earnings per common share assuming dilution were $3.64 in 2008
compared with $1.49 in 2007 and $2.03 in 2006. the increases in
net income and earnings per share in 2008 as compared with 2007
are primarily attributable to the gain on distribution from azlp
in 2008 and the impacts in 2007 of the u.s.vioxx
settlement agreement and civil governmental investigations
charges. in addition, the increases reflect the positive impact
of certain tax items, lower acquired research costs and lower
expenses for legal defense costs, partially offset by higher
restructuring costs and lower equity earnings in 2008, as well
as the recognition in 2007 of an insurance arbitration gain. the
declines in net income and earnings per share in 2007 as
compared with 2006 reflect the impact of the u.s.vioxx
settlement agreement charge and civil governmental
investigations charge in 2007, partially offset by lower
expenses for legal defense costs, a gain from an insurance
arbitration award related to vioxx product liability
litigation coverage, lower acquired research costs and the
favorable impact of gains on sales of assets and product
divestitures, as well as a net gain on the settlements of
certain patent disputes. net income and eps in 2007 as compared
with 2006 also reflect revenue growth of vaccines, singulair
and januvia, as well as higher equity income from
affiliates. net income as a percentage of sales was 32.7% in
2008, 13.5% in 2007 and 19.6% in 2006. the changes in the
percentage of sales ratio reflect the same factors discussed
above. net income as a percentage of average total assets was
16.3% in 2008, 7.0% in 2007 and 9.9% in 2006.
selected
joint venture and affiliate information
to expand its research base and realize synergies from combining
capabilities, opportunities and assets, in previous years the
company formed a number of joint ventures. (see note8 to
the consolidated financial statements.)
merck/schering-plough
partnership
in 2000, the company and schering-plough (collectively, the
partners) entered into agreements to create separate
equally-owned partnerships to develop and market in the united
states new prescription medicines in the cholesterol-management
and respiratory therapeutic areas. these agreements generally
provide for equal sharing of development costs and for
co-promotion of approved products by each company. in 2001, the
cholesterol-management partnership agreements were expanded to
include all the countries of the world, excluding japan. in
2002, ezetimibe, the first in a new class of
cholesterol-lowering agents, was launched in the united states
as zetia (marketed as ezetrol outside the united
states). in 2004, a combination product containing the active
ingredients of both zetia and zocor was approved
in the united states as vytorin (marketed as inegy
outside the united states). vytorin is the only
combination tablet cholesterol treatment to provide ldl
cholesterol lowering through the dual inhibition of cholesterol
production and absorption.
the cholesterol agreements provide for the sharing of operating
income generated by the merck/schering-plough cholesterol
partnership (the msp partnership) based upon
percentages that vary by product, sales level and country. in
the u.s.market, the partners share profits on zetia
and vytorin sales equally, with the exception of the
first $300million of annual zetia sales, on which
schering-plough receives a greater share of profits. operating
income includes expenses that the partners have contractually
agreed to share, such as a portion of manufacturing costs,
specifically identified promotion costs (including
direct-to-consumer advertising and direct and identifiable
out-of-pocket promotion) and other agreed upon costs for
specific services such as on-going clinical research, market
support, market research, market expansion, as well as a
specialty sales force and physician education programs. expenses
incurred in support of the msp partnership but not shared
between the
table of contents
partners, such as marketing and administrative expenses
(including certain sales force costs), as well as certain
manufacturing costs, are not included in equity income from
affiliates. however, these costs are reflected in the overall
results of the company. certain research and development
expenses are generally shared equally by the partners, after
adjusting for earned milestones.
sales of joint venture products were as follows:
($ in millions)
vytorin
$
2,360.0
$
2,779.1
$
1,955.3
zetia
2,201.1
2,407.1
1,928.8
$
4,561.1
$
5,186.2
$
3,884.1
global sales of vytorin declined 15% in 2008 and grew 42%
in 2007. global sales of zetia decreased 9% in 2008 and
increased 25% in 2007. following the announcements of the
enhance and seas clinical trial results (which are discussed
below), sales of vytorin and zetia declined in
2008.
as previously disclosed, in january 2008, the company announced
the results of the effect of combination ezetimibe and high-dose
simvastatin vs. simvastatin alone on the atherosclerotic process
in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
(enhance) clinical trial, an imaging trial in
720patients with heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia, a rare genetic condition that causes very
high levels of ldl bad cholesterol and greatly
increases the risk for premature coronary artery disease. as
previously reported, despite the fact that ezetimibe/simvastatin
10/80 mg (vytorin) significantly lowered ldl
bad cholesterol more than simvastatin 80mg
alone, there was no significant difference between treatment
with ezetimibe/simvastatin and simvastatin alone on the
pre-specified primary endpoint, a change in the thickness of
carotid artery walls over two years as measured by ultrasound.
there also were no significant differences between treatment
with ezetimibe/simvastatin and simvastatin on the four
pre-specified key secondary endpoints: percent of patients
manifesting regression in the average carotid artery
intima-media thickness (ca imt); proportion of
patients developing new carotid artery plaques >1.3 mm;
changes in the average maximum ca imt; and changes in the
average ca imt plus in the average common femoral artery imt. in
enhance, when compared to simvastatin alone,
ezetimibe/simvastatin significantly lowered ldl bad
cholesterol, as well as triglycerides and c-reactive protein
(crp). ezetimibe/simvastatin is not indicated for
the reduction of crp. in the enhance study, the overall safety
profile of ezetimibe/simvastatin was generally consistent with
the product label. the enhance study was not designed nor
powered to evaluate cardiovascular clinical events. the improved
reduction in high-risk subjects presenting with acute coronary
syndrome (improve-it) trial is underway and is
designed to provide cardiovascular outcomes data for
ezetimibe/simvastatin in patients with acute coronary syndrome.
no incremental benefit of ezetimibe/simvastatin on
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality over and above that
demonstrated for simvastatin has been established. in march
2008, the results of enhance were reported at the annual
scientific session of the american college of cardiology.
on july21, 2008, efficacy and safety results from the
simvastatin and ezetimibe in aortic stenosis (seas)
study were announced. seas was designed to evaluate whether
intensive lipid lowering with vytorin
10/40mg
would reduce the need for aortic valve replacement and the risk
of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality versus placebo in
patients with asymptomatic mild to moderate aortic stenosis who
had no indication for statin therapy. vytorin failed to
meet its primary end point for the reduction of major
cardiovascular events. there also was no significant difference
in the key secondary end point of aortic valve events; however,
there was a reduction in the group of patients taking vytorin
compared to placebo in the key secondary end point of
ischemic cardiovascular events. vytorin is not indicated
for the treatment of aortic stenosis. no incremental benefit of
vytorin on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality over
and above that demonstrated for simvastatin has been
established. in the study, patients in the group who took
vytorin 10/40mg had a higher incidence of cancer
than the group who took placebo. there was also a nonsignificant
increase in deaths from cancer in patients in the group who took
vytorin versus those who took placebo. cancer and cancer
deaths were distributed across all major organ systems. the
company believes the cancer finding in seas is likely to be an
anomaly that, taken in light of all the available data, does not
support an association with vytorin. in august 2008, the
fda announced that it was investigating the results from the
seas trial. in this announcement, the fda also cited interim
data from two large ongoing
table of contents
cardiovascular trials of vytorin the study of
heart and renal protection (sharp) and the
improve-it clinical trials in which there was no
increased risk of cancer with the combination of simvastatin
plus ezetimibe. the sharp trial is expected to be completed in
2010. the improve-it trial is scheduled for completion around
2012. the fda determined that, as of that time, these findings
in the seas trial plus the interim data from ongoing trials
should not prompt patients to stop taking vytorin or any
other cholesterol lowering drug.
the company, through the msp partnership, is committed to
working with regulatory agencies to further evaluate the
available data and interpretations of those data; however, the
company does not believe that changes in the clinical use of
vytorin are warranted.
see note10 to the consolidated financial statements for
information with respect to litigation involving the partners
and the msp partnership related to the sale and promotion of
zetia and vytorin.
the respiratory therapeutic agreements provided for the joint
development and marketing in the unitedstates by the
partners of a once-daily, fixed-combination tablet containing
the active ingredients montelukast sodium and loratadine.
montelukast sodium, a leukotriene receptor antagonist, is sold
by merck as singulair and loratadine, an antihistamine,
is sold by schering-plough as claritin, both of which are
indicated for the relief of symptoms of allergic rhinitis.
during 2008, the partners received a not-approvable letter from
the fda for the proposed fixed combination of
loratadine/montelukast and subsequently announced the withdrawal
of the nda for the combination tablet. the companies also
terminated the respiratory joint venture. this action had no
impact on the business of the cholesterol joint venture. as a
result of the termination of the respiratory joint venture, the
company was obligated to schering-plough in the amount of
$105million as specified in the joint venture agreements.
this resulted in a charge of $43million during the second
quarter of 2008 which was included in equity income from
affiliates. the remaining amount is being amortized over the
remaining patent life of zetia through 2016.
the results from the companys interest in the msp
partnership are recorded in equity income from affiliates. merck
recognized equity income of $1.5billion in 2008,
$1.8billion in 2007 and $1.2billion in 2006.
the financial statements of the msp partnership are included in
item15. (a) (2)financial statement
schedules below.
astrazeneca
lp
in 1982, merck entered into an agreement with astra ab
(astra) to develop and market astras products
under a royalty-bearing license. in 1993, the companys
total sales of astra products reached a level that triggered the
first step in the establishment of a joint venture business
carried on by astra merck inc. (ami), in which merck
and astra each owned a 50% share. this joint venture, formed in
1994, developed and marketed most of astras new
prescription medicines in the united states including
prilosec, the first of a class of medications known as
proton pump inhibitors, which slows the production of acid from
the cells of the stomach lining.
in 1998, merck and astra completed the restructuring of the
ownership and operations of the joint venture whereby the
company acquired astras interest in ami, renamed kbi inc.
(kbi), and contributed kbis operating assets
to a new u.s.limited partnership, astra pharmaceuticals
l.p. (the partnership), in exchange for a 1% limited
partner interest. astra contributed the net assets of its wholly
owned subsidiary, astra usa, inc., to the partnership in
exchange for a 99% general partner interest. the partnership,
renamed astrazeneca lp (azlp) upon astras 1999
merger with zeneca group plc (the astrazeneca
merger), became the exclusive distributor of the products
for which kbi retained rights.
while maintaining a 1% limited partner interest in azlp, merck
has consent and protective rights intended to preserve its
business and economic interests, including restrictions on the
power of the general partner to make certain distributions or
dispositions. furthermore, in limited events of default,
additional rights will be granted to the company, including
powers to direct the actions of, or remove and replace, the
partnerships chief executive officer and chief financial
officer. merck earns ongoing revenue based on sales of current
and future kbi products and such revenue was $1.6billion,
$1.7billion and $1.8billion in 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively, primarily relating to sales of nexium, as
well as prilosec. in addition, merck earns certain
partnership returns, which are recorded in equity income from
affiliates. such returns include a priority return provided for
in the partnership
table of contents
agreement, variable returns based, in part, upon sales of
certain former astra usa, inc. products, and a preferential
return representing mercks share of undistributed azlp
gaap earnings. these returns aggregated $598.4million,
$820.1million and $783.7million in 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively. the astrazeneca merger triggered a partial
redemption in march 2008 of mercks interest in certain
azlp product rights. upon this redemption, merck received
$4.3billion from azlp. this amount was based primarily on
a multiple of mercks average annual variable returns
derived from sales of the former astra usa, inc. products for
the three years prior to the redemption (the limited
partner share of agreed value). merck recorded a
$1.5billion pretax gain on the partial redemption in 2008.
the partial redemption of mercks interest in the product
rights did not result in a change in mercks 1% limited
partner interest.
in conjunction with the 1998 restructuring, astra purchased an
option (the asset option) for a payment of
$443.0million, which was recorded as deferred income, to
buy mercks interest in the kbi products, excluding the
gastrointestinal medicines nexium and prilosec
(the non-ppi products). the asset option is
exercisable in the first half of 2010 at an exercise price equal
to the net present value as of march31, 2008 of projected
future pretax revenue to be received by the company from the
non-ppi products (the appraised value). merck also
had the right to require astra to purchase such interest in 2008
at the appraised value. in february 2008, the company advised
azlp that it would not exercise the asset option, thus the
$443.0million remains deferred. in addition, in 1998, the
company granted astra an option (the shares option)
to buy mercks common stock interest in kbi and, therefore,
mercks interest in nexium and prilosec,
exercisable two years after astras exercise of the asset
option. astra can also exercise the shares option in 2017 or if
combined annual sales of the two products fall below a minimum
amount provided, in each case, only so long as
astrazenecas asset option has been exercised in 2010. the
exercise price for the shares option is based on the net present
value of estimated future net sales of nexium and
prilosec as determined at the time of exercise, subject
to certain
true-up
mechanisms.
the astrazeneca merger constituted a trigger event under the kbi
restructuring agreements. as a result of the merger, in exchange
for mercks relinquishment of rights to future astra
products with no existing or pending u.s.patents at the
time of the merger, astra paid $967.4million (the
advance payment). the advance payment was deferred
as it remained subject to a
true-up
calculation (the
true-up
amount) that was directly dependent on the fair market
value in march 2008 of the astra product rights retained by the
company. the calculated
true-up
amount of $243.7million was returned to azlp in march 2008
and merck recognized a pretax gain of $723.7million
related to the residual advance payment balance.
under the provisions of the kbi restructuring agreements,
because a trigger event has occurred, the sum of the limited
partner share of agreed value, the appraised value and the
true-up
amount was guaranteed to be a minimum of $4.7billion.
distribution of the limited partner share of agreed value less
payment of the
true-up
amount resulted in cash receipts to merck of $4.0billion
and an aggregate pretax gain of $2.2billion which is
included in other (income) expense, net. astrazenecas
purchase of mercks interest in the non-ppi products is
contingent upon the exercise of the asset option by astrazeneca
in 2010 and, therefore, payment of the appraised value may or
may not occur. also, in march 2008, the $1.38billion
outstanding loan from astra plus interest through the redemption
date was settled. as a result of these transactions, the company
received net proceeds from azlp of $2.6billion.
merial
limited
in 1997, merck and rhne-poulenc s.a. (now sanofi-aventis
s.a.) combined their animal health businesses to
formmerial limited (merial), a fully
integrated animal health company, which is a stand-alone joint
venture, 50% owned by each party. merial provides a
comprehensive range of pharmaceuticals and vaccines to enhance
the health, well-being and performance of a wide range of animal
species.
table of contents
sales of joint venture products were as follows:
($ in millions)
fipronil products
$
1,053.0
$
1,033.3
$
886.9
biological products
789.7
674.9
600.7
avermectin products
511.8
478.4
468.7
other products
288.2
262.2
238.4
$
2,642.7
$
2,448.8
$
2,194.7
sanofi
pasteur msd
in 1994, merck and pasteur merieux connaught (now sanofi pasteur
s.a.) established a 50% owned joint venture to market vaccines
in europe and to collaborate in the development of combination
vaccines for distribution in europe.
in 2006, merck launched three new vaccines that have been
approved for use in the eu and are being or will be marketed by
spmsd in certain western european countries: gardasil to
help prevent cervical, vulvar and vaginal cancers, precancerous
or dysplastic lesions, and genital warts caused by hpv types 6,
11, 16 and 18; rotateq to help protect against rotavirus
gastroenteritis in infants and children; and zostavax to
help prevent shingles (herpes zoster) in individuals
60years of age or older.
sales of joint venture products were as follows:
($ in millions)
gardasil
$
865.3
$
476.0
$
7.5
viral vaccines
105.1
86.8
100.1
hepatitis vaccines
72.6
72.9
70.9
other vaccines
841.8
802.3
735.4
$
1,884.8
$
1,438.0
$
913.9
johnson&
johnsonmerck consumer pharmaceuticals company
in 1989, merck formed a joint venture with johnson&
johnson to develop and market a broad range of nonprescription
medicines for u.s.consumers. this 50% owned joint venture
was subsequently expanded into canada. significant joint venture
products are pepcid ac, an
over-the-counter
form of the companys ulcer medication pepcid, as
well as pepcid complete, an
over-the-counter
product which combines the companys ulcer medication with
antacids.
sales of joint venture products were as follows:
($ in millions)
gastrointestinal products
$
210.7
$
218.5
$
250.9
other products
1.4
1.2
1.7
$
212.1
$
219.7
$
252.6
capital
expenditures
capital expenditures were $1.3billion in 2008,
$1.0billion in 2007 and $980.2million in 2006.
expenditures in the united states were $946.6million in
2008, $788.0million in 2007 and $714.7million in
2006. expenditures during 2008 included $650.3million for
production facilities, $177.1million for research and
development facilities, $18.7million for environmental
projects, and $452.2million for administrative, safety and
general site projects, of which approximately 35% represents
capital investments related to a multi-year initiative to
standardize the companys information systems. capital
expenditures for 2009 are estimated to be $1.6billion.
table of contents
depreciation expense was $1.4billion in 2008,
$1.8billion in 2007 and $2.1billion in 2006, of
which $1.0billion, $1.4billion and
$1.5billion, respectively, applied to locations in the
united states. total depreciation expense in 2008, 2007 and 2006
included accelerated depreciation of $216.7million,
$460.6million and $763.8million, respectively,
associated with the 2008 and 2005 restructuring programs (see
note3 to the consolidated financial statements).
analysis
of liquidity and capital resources
mercks strong financial profile enables the company to
fully fund research and development, focus on external
alliances, support in-line products and maximize upcoming
launches while providing significant cash returns to
shareholders.
selected
data
($ in millions)
working capital
$
4,986.2
$
2,787.2
$
2,507.5
total debt to total liabilities and equity
13.2
%
11.9
%
15.3
%
cash provided by operations to total debt
1.1:1
1.2:1
1.0:1
cash provided by operating activities, which was
$6.6billion in 2008, $7.0billion in 2007 and
$6.8billion in 2006, continues to be the companys
primary source of funds to finance capital expenditures,
treasury stock purchases and dividends paid to stockholders.
cash provided by operating activities in 2008 reflects
$2.1billion received in connection with a partial
redemption of the companys partnership interest in azlp
discussed above, representing a distribution of the
companys accumulated earnings on its investment in azlp
since inception. cash provided by operating activities in 2008
was also impacted by a $675million payment made in
connection with the previously disclosed resolution of
investigations of civil claims by federal and state authorities
relating to certain past marketing and selling activities and
$750million of payments into the vioxx settlement
funds. cash provided by operating activities for 2007 reflects
the payment made under a previously disclosed settlement with
the internal revenue service (irs).
cash used by investing activities in 2008 was $1.8billion
compared with $2.8billion in 2007. the lower use of cash
by investing activities primarily reflects a distribution from
azlp in 2008 representing a return of the companys
investment in azlp and a $1.1billion payment in 2007 in
connection with the december 2006 acquisition of sirna
therapeutics, inc., partially offset by higher net purchases of
securities and other investments, higher capital expenditures
and an increase in restricted assets. cash used in financing
activities was $5.5billion in 2008 compared with
$4.9billion in 2007 reflecting higher purchases of
treasury stock, lower proceeds from the exercise stock options
and higher payments on debt in connection with the settlement of
a note due to astra, partially offset by a net increase in
short-term borrowings.
at december31, 2008, the total of worldwide cash and
investments was $12.0billion, including $5.5billion
of cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and
$6.5billion of long-term investments. in addition, the
company has $6.3billion of cash and investments restricted
under certain collateral arrangements as discussed below.
working capital levels are more than adequate to meet the
operating requirements of the company. the increase in working
capital was primarily attributable to net cash receipts from
azlp as discussed above in selected joint venture and
affiliate information. the ratios of total debt to total
liabilities and equity and cash provided by operations to total
debt reflect the strength of the companys operating cash
flows and the ability of the company to cover its contractual
obligations.
in august 2008, the company executed a $4.1billion letter
of credit agreement with a financial institution, which
satisfied certain conditions set forth in the u.s.vioxx
settlement agreement (see note10 to the consolidated
financial statements). the company pledged collateral to the
financial institution of approximately $5.1billion
pursuant to the terms of the letter of credit agreement.
although the amount of assets pledged as collateral is set by
the letter of credit agreement and such assets are held in
custody by a third party, the assets are
table of contents
managed by the company. the company considers the assets pledged
under the letter of credit agreement to be restricted. as a
result, $2.1billion and $1.4billion of cash and
investments, respectively, were classified as restricted current
assets and $1.6billion of investments were classified as
restricted non-current assets. the letter of credit amount and
required collateral balances will decline as payments (after the
first $750million) under the settlement agreement are
made. as of december31, 2008, $3.8billion was
recorded within deferred income taxes and other current assets
and $1.3billion was classified as other assets.
additionally, during 2008, the company paid $750million
into the vioxx settlement funds pursuant to the
settlement agreement.
as previously disclosed, the irs has completed its examination
of the companys tax returns for the years 1993 to 2001. as
a result of the examination, the company made an aggregate
payment of $2.79billion in february 2007. this payment was
offset by (i)a tax refund of $165million received in
2007 for amounts previously paid for these matters and
(ii)a federal tax benefit of approximately
$360million related to interest included in the payment,
resulting in a net cash cost to the company of approximately
$2.3billion in 2007. the impact for years subsequent to
2001 for items reviewed as part of the examination was included
in the payment although those years remain open in all other
respects. the closing of the irs examination did not have a
material impact on the companys results of operations in
2007 as these amounts had been previously accrued for.
as previously disclosed, in october 2006, the cra issued the
company a notice of reassessment containing adjustments related
to certain intercompany pricing matters. in february 2009, merck
and the cra negotiated a settlement agreement in regard to these
matters. the settlement calls for merck to pay additional tax of
approximately $300million (u.s.dollars) and interest
of approximately $360million (u.s.dollars) with no
additional amounts or penalties due on this assessment. in
accordance with fasb interpretation no.48, accounting
for uncertainty in income taxes an interpretation of
fasb statement no.109 (fin48),
the settlement will be accounted for in the first quarter of
2009. the company had previously established reserves for these
matters. a significant portion of the taxes paid is expected to
be creditable for u.s.tax purposes. the resolution of
these matters will not have a material effect on the
companys financial position or liquidity, other than with
respect to the associated collateral as discussed below.
in addition, in july 2007 and november 2008, the cra proposed
additional adjustments for 1999 and 2000, respectively, relating
to other intercompany pricing matters. the adjustments would
increase canadian tax due by approximately $260million
(u.s.dollars) plus $240million (u.s.dollars)
of interest. it is possible that the cra will propose similar
adjustments for later years. the company disagrees with the
positions taken by the cra and believes they are without merit.
the company intends to contest the assessments through the cra
appeals process and the courts if necessary. management believes
that resolution of these matters will not have a material effect
on the companys financial position or liquidity.
in connection with the appeals process, during 2007, the company
pledged collateral to two financial institutions, one of which
provided a guarantee to the cra and the other to the quebec
ministry of revenue representing a portion of the tax and
interest assessed. the collateral is included in deferred income
taxes and other current assets and other assets in the
consolidated balance sheet and totaled approximately
$1.2billion and $1.4billion at december31,
2008 and 2007, respectively. the guarantees will be reduced and
the related collateral released following payments to the cra
and quebec ministry of revenue, causing the restricted amounts
to be reclassified to cash and investments as appropriate on the
consolidated balance sheet.
the irs is examining the companys 2002 to 2005 federal
income tax returns. in addition, various state and foreign tax
examinations are in progress. tax years that remain subject to
examination by major tax jurisdictions include germany from
1999, italy from 2000 and japan from 2002.
table of contents
the companys contractual obligations as of
december31, 2008 are as follows:
payments
due by period
($ in millions)
total
2010 - 2011
2012 -2013
thereafter
purchase obligations
$
1,243.6
$
557.7
$
365.1
$
246.5
$
74.3
loans payable and current portion of long-term debt
2,297.1
2,297.1
-
-
-
long-term debt
3,943.3
-
553.6
541.1
2,848.6
u.s. vioxx settlement
agreement(1)
4,100.0
4,100.0
-
-
-
unrecognized tax
benefits(2)
1,203.8
1,203.8
-
-
-
operating leases
376.2
103.0
139.3
77.7
56.2
$
13,164.0
$
8,261.6
$
1,058.0
$
865.3
$
2,979.1
(1)
timing of payments under the u.s.vioxx
settlement agreement may vary depending on the timing of the
claims assessment process.
(2)
as of december31, 2008, the companys consolidated
balance sheet reflects liabilities for unrecognized tax
benefits, interest and penalties of $5.35billion,
including $1.20billion reflected as a current liability,
largely reflecting amounts related to the settlement with the
canadian revenue agency as discussed above. due to the high
degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash
outflows of liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits beyond one
year, a reasonable estimate of the period of cash settlement for
years beyond 2009 can not be made.
purchase obligations consist primarily of goods and services
that are enforceable and legally binding and include obligations
for minimum inventory contracts, research and development and
advertising. amounts reflected for research and development
obligations do not include contingent milestone payments. loans
payable and current portion of long-term debt also reflects
$322.2million of long-dated notes that are subject to
repayment at the option of the holders on an annual basis.
required funding obligations for 2009 relating to the
companys pension and other postretirement benefit plans
are not expected to be material. however, the company currently
anticipates contributing $600.0million and
$60.0million, respectively, to its pension plans and other
postretirement benefit plans during 2009.
in december 2008, the companys existing shelf registration
filed with the securities and exchange commission
(sec) expired. the company intends to file a new
shelf registration in 2009.
in april 2008, the company extended the maturity date of its
$1.5billion,
5-year
revolving credit facility from april 2012 to april 2013. the
facility provides backup liquidity for the companys
commercial paper borrowing facility and is for general corporate
purposes. the company has not drawn funding from this facility.
the companys long-term credit ratings assigned by
moodys investors service and standard&
poors are aa3 with a stable outlook and aa- with a stable
outlook, respectively. these ratings continue to allow access to
the capital markets and flexibility in obtaining funds on
competitive terms. the company continues to maintain a
conservative financial profile. total cash and investments of
$12.0billion exceed the sum of loans payable and long-term
debt of $6.2billion. the company places its cash and
investments in instruments that meet high credit quality
standards, as specified in its investment policy guidelines.
these guidelines also limit the amount of credit exposure to any
one issuer. despite this strong financial profile, certain
contingent events, if realized, which are discussed in
note10 to the consolidated financial statements, could
have a material adverse impact on the companys liquidity
and capital resources. the company does not participate in any
off-balance sheet arrangements involving unconsolidated
subsidiaries that provide financing or potentially expose the
company to unrecorded financial obligations.
in july 2002, the board of directors approved purchases over
time of up to $10.0billion of merck shares. total treasury
stock purchased under this program in 2008 was
$2.7billion. as of december31, 2008,
$2.4billion remains under the 2002 stock repurchase
authorization approved by the merck board of directors.
table of contents
financial
instruments market risk disclosures
foreign
currency risk management
while the u.s.dollar is the functional currency of the
companys foreign subsidiaries, a significant portion of
the companys revenues are denominated in foreign
currencies. merck relies on sustained cash flows generated from
foreign sources to support its long-term commitment to
u.s.dollar-based research and development. to the extent
the dollar value of cash flows is diminished as a result of a
strengthening dollar, the companys ability to fund
research and other dollar-based strategic initiatives at a
consistent level may be impaired. the company has established
revenue hedging and balance sheet risk management programs to
protect against volatility of future foreign currency cash flows
and changes in fair value caused by volatility in foreign
exchange rates.
the objective of the revenue hedging program is to reduce the
potential for longer-term unfavorable changes in foreign
exchange to decrease the u.s.dollar value of future cash
flows derived from foreign currency denominated sales, primarily
the euro and japanese yen. to achieve this objective, the
company will partially hedge anticipated third-party sales that
are expected to occur over its planning cycle, typically no more
than three years into the future. the company will layer in
hedges over time, increasing the portion of sales hedged as it
gets closer to the expected date of the transaction, such that
it is probable the hedged transaction will occur. the portion of
sales hedged is based on assessments of cost-benefit profiles
that consider natural offsetting exposures, revenue and exchange
rate volatilities and correlations, and the cost of hedging
instruments. the hedged anticipated sales are a specified
component of a portfolio of similarly denominated foreign
currency-based sales transactions, each of which responds to the
hedged risk in the same manner. merck manages its anticipated
transaction exposure principally with purchased local currency
put options, which provide the company with a right, but not an
obligation, to sell foreign currencies in the future at a
predetermined price. if the u.s.dollar strengthens
relative to the currency of the hedged anticipated sales, total
changes in the options cash flows offset the decline in
the expected future u.s.dollar cash flows of the hedged
foreign currency sales. conversely, if the u.s.dollar
weakens, the options value reduces to zero, but the
company benefits from the increase in the value of the
anticipated foreign currency cash flows. while a weaker
u.s.dollar would result in a net benefit, the market value
of the companys hedges would have declined by
$194.7million and $69.5million, respectively, from a
uniform 10% weakening of the u.s.dollar at
december31, 2008 and 2007. the market value was determined
using a foreign exchange option pricing model and holding all
factors except exchange rates constant. because merck
principally uses purchased local currency put options, a uniform
weakening of the u.s.dollar will yield the largest overall
potential loss in the market value of these options. the
sensitivity measurement assumes that a change in one foreign
currency relative to the u.s.dollar would not affect other
foreign currencies relative to the u.s.dollar. although
not predictive in nature, the company believes that a 10%
threshold reflects reasonably possible near-term changes in
mercks major foreign currency exposures relative to the
u.s.dollar. the cash flows from these contracts are
reported as operating activities in the consolidated statement
of cash flows.
the primary objective of the balance sheet risk management
program is to protect the u.s.dollar value of foreign
currency denominated net monetary assets from the effects of
volatility in foreign exchange that might occur prior to their
conversion to u.s.dollars. merck principally utilizes
forward exchange contracts, which enable the company to buy and
sell foreign currencies in the future at fixed exchange rates
and economically offset the consequences of changes in foreign
exchange on the amount of u.s.dollar cash flows derived
from the net assets. merck routinely enters into contracts to
offset the effects of exchange on exposures denominated in
developed country currencies, primarily the euro and japanese
yen. for exposures in developing country currencies, the company
will enter into forward contracts to partially offset the
effects of exchange on exposures when it is deemed economical to
do so based on a cost-benefit analysis that considers the
magnitude of the exposure, the volatility of the exchange rate
and the cost of the hedging instrument. the company will also
minimize the effect of exchange on monetary assets and
liabilities by managing operating activities and net asset
positions at the local level. the company uses forward contracts
to hedge the changes in fair value of certain foreign currency
denominated
available-for-sale
securities attributable to fluctuations in foreign currency
exchange rates. a sensitivity analysis to changes in the value
of the u.s.dollar on foreign currency denominated
derivatives, investments and monetary assets and liabilities
indicated that if the u.s.dollar uniformly weakened by 10%
against all currency exposures of the company at
december31, 2008 and 2007, income before taxes would have
declined by $15.8million and
table of contents
$24.6million, respectively. because merck is in a net
short position relative to its major foreign currencies after
consideration of forward contracts, a uniform weakening of the
u.s.dollar will yield the largest overall potential net
loss in earnings due to exchange. this measurement assumes that
a change in one foreign currency relative to the
u.s.dollar would not affect other foreign currencies
relative to the u.s.dollar. although not predictive in
nature, the company believes that a 10% threshold reflects
reasonably possible near-term changes in mercks major
foreign currency exposures relative to the u.s.dollar. the
cash flows from these contracts are reported as operating
activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
interest
rate risk management
in addition to the revenue hedging and balance sheet risk
management programs, the company may use interest rate swap
contracts on certain investing and borrowing transactions to
manage its net exposure to interest rate changes and to reduce
its overall cost of borrowing. the company does not use
leveraged swaps and, in general, does not leverage any of its
investment activities that would put principal capital at risk.
at december31, 2008, the company was a party to two
pay-floating, receive-fixed interest rate swap contracts
maturing in 2011 with notional amounts of $125million each
designated as fair value hedges of fixed-rate notes in which the
notional amounts match the amount of the hedged fixed-rate
notes. the swaps effectively convert the fixed-rate obligations
to floating-rate instruments. in 2008, the company terminated
four interest rate swap contracts with notional amounts of
$250million each, and terminated one interest rate swap
contract with a notional amount of $500million. these
swaps had effectively converted its $1.0billion, 4.75%
fixed-rate notes due 2015 and its $500million, 4.375%
fixed-rate notes due 2013 to variable rate debt. as a result of
the swap terminations, the company received $128.3million
in cash, excluding accrued interest which was not material. the
corresponding gains related to the basis adjustment of the debt
associated with the terminated swap contracts were deferred and
are being amortized as a reduction of interest expense over the
remaining term of the notes. the cash flows from these contracts
are reported as operating activities in the consolidated
statement of cash flows.
the companys investment portfolio includes cash
equivalents and short-term investments, the market values of
which are not significantly impacted by changes in interest
rates. the market value of the companys medium- to
long-term fixed-rate investments is modestly impacted by changes
in u.s.interest rates. changes in medium- to long-term
u.s.interest rates have a more significant impact on the
market value of the companys fixed-rate borrowings, which
generally have longer maturities. a sensitivity analysis to
measure potential changes in the market value of the
companys investments, debt and related swap contracts from
a change in interest rates indicated that a one percentage point
increase in interest rates at december31, 2008 and 2007
would have positively impacted the net aggregate market value of
these instruments by $98.9million and $62.1million,
respectively. a one percentage point decrease at
december31, 2008 and 2007 would have negatively impacted
the net aggregate market value by $156.3million and
$114.6million, respectively. the fair value of the
companys debt was determined using pricing models
reflecting one percentage point shifts in the appropriate yield
curves. the fair values of the companys investments were
determined using a combination of pricing and duration models.
critical
accounting policies and other matters
the companys consolidated financial statements include
certain amounts that are based on managements best
estimates and judgments. estimates are used in determining such
items as provisions for sales discounts and returns, depreciable
and amortizable lives, recoverability of inventories produced in
preparation for product launches, amounts recorded for
contingencies, environmental liabilities and other reserves,
pension and other postretirement benefit plan assumptions,
share-based compensation assumptions, amounts recorded in
connection with acquisitions, restructuring costs, impairments
of long-lived assets and investments, and taxes on income.
because of the uncertainty inherent in such estimates, actual
results may differ from these estimates. application of the
following accounting policies result in accounting estimates
having the potential for the most significant impact on the
financial statements.
revenue
recognition
revenues from sales of products are recognized at the time of
delivery and when title and risk of loss passes to the customer.
recognition of revenue also requires reasonable assurance of
collection of sales proceeds and completion of all performance
obligations. domestically, sales discounts are issued to
customers as direct
table of contents
discounts at the
point-of-sale
or indirectly through an intermediary wholesaler, known as
chargebacks, or indirectly in the form of rebates. additionally,
sales are generally made with a limited right of return under
certain conditions. revenues are recorded net of provisions for
sales discounts and returns, which are established at the time
of sale.
the provision for aggregate indirect customer discounts covers
chargebacks and rebates. chargebacks are discounts that occur
when a contracted customer purchases directly through an
intermediary wholesaler. the contracted customer generally
purchases product at its contracted price plus a
mark-up from
the wholesaler. the wholesaler, in turn, charges the company
back for the difference between the price initially paid by the
wholesaler and the contract price paid to the wholesaler by the
customer. the provision for chargebacks is based on expected
sell-through levels by the companys wholesale customers to
contracted customers, as well as estimated wholesaler inventory
levels. rebates are amounts owed based upon definitive
contractual agreements or legal requirements with private sector
and public sector (medicaid and medicare
partd)benefit providers, after the final dispensing
of the product by a pharmacy to a benefit plan participant. the
provision is based on expected payments, which are driven by
patient usage and contract performance by the benefit provider
customers.
the company assumes a
first-in,
first-out movement of inventory within the supply chain for
purposes of estimating its aggregate indirect customer discount
accrual. in addition, the company uses historical customer
segment mix, adjusted for other known events, in order to
estimate the expected provision. amounts accrued for aggregate
indirect customer discounts are evaluated on a quarterly basis
through comparison of information provided by the wholesalers
and other customers to the amounts accrued. adjustments are
recorded when trends or significant events indicate that a
change in the estimated provision is appropriate.
the company continually monitors its provision for aggregate
indirect customer discounts. there were no material adjustments
to estimates associated with the aggregate indirect customer
discount provision in 2008, 2007 or 2006.
summarized information about changes in the aggregate indirect
customer discount accrual is as follows:
($ in millions)
balance, january 1
$
699.4
$
757.1
current provision
2,037.5
2,109.7
adjustments to prior years
(13.7)
(14.1)
payments
(2,106.9)
(2,153.3)
balance, december 31
$
616.3
$
699.4
accruals for chargebacks are reflected as a direct reduction to
accounts receivable and accruals for rebates as current
liabilities. the accrued balances relative to these provisions
included in accounts receivable and accrued and other current
liabilities were $55.6million and $560.7million,
respectively, at december31, 2008, and $82.5million
and $616.9million, respectively, at december31, 2007.
the company maintains a returns policy that allows its customers
to return product within a specified period prior to and
subsequent to the expiration date (generally, six months before
and twelve months after product expiration). the estimate of the
provision for returns is based upon historical experience with
actual returns. additionally, the company considers factors such
as levels of inventory in the distribution channel, product
dating and expiration period, whether products have been
discontinued, entrance in the market of additional generic
competition, changes in formularies or launch of
over-the-counter
products, among others. the product returns provision, as well
as actual returns, were less than 1.0% of net sales in 2008,
2007 and 2006.
through its distribution program with u.s.wholesalers, the
company encourages wholesalers to align purchases with
underlying demand and maintain inventories below specified
levels. the terms of the program allow the wholesalers to earn
fees upon providing visibility into their inventory levels as
well as by achieving certain performance parameters, such as,
inventory management, customer service levels, reducing shortage
claims and reducing product returns. information provided
through the wholesaler distribution program includes items such
as sales trends, inventory on-hand, on-order quantity and
product returns.
table of contents
wholesalers generally provide only the above mentioned data to
the company, as there is no regulatory requirement to report lot
level information to manufacturers, which is the level of
information needed to determine the remaining shelf life and
original sale date of inventory. given current wholesaler
inventory levels, which are generally less than a month, the
company believes that collection of order lot information across
all wholesale customers would have limited use in estimating
sales discounts and returns.
inventories
produced in preparation for product launches
the company capitalizes inventories produced in preparation for
product launches sufficient to support initial market demand.
typically, capitalization of such inventory does not begin until
the related product candidates are in phaseiii clinical
trials and are considered to have a high probability of
regulatory approval. the company monitors the status of each
respective product within the regulatory approval process;
however, the company generally does not disclose specific timing
for regulatory approval. if the company is aware of any specific
risks or contingencies other than the normal regulatory approval
process or if there are any specific issues identified during
the research process relating to safety, efficacy,
manufacturing, marketing or labeling, the related inventory
would generally not be capitalized. expiry dates of the
inventory are impacted by the stage of completion. the company
manages the levels of inventory at each stage to optimize the
shelf life of the inventory in relation to anticipated market
demand in order to avoid product expiry issues. for inventories
that are capitalized, anticipated future sales and shelf lives
support the realization of the inventory value as the inventory
shelf life is sufficient to meet initial product launch
requirements. inventories produced in preparation for product
launches capitalized at december31, 2008 and 2007 were not
significant.
contingencies
and environmental liabilities
the company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings
of a nature considered normal to its business, including product
liability, intellectual property and commercial litigation, as
well as additional matters such as antitrust actions. (see
note10 to the consolidated financial statements.) the
company records accruals for contingencies when it is probable
that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be
reasonably estimated. these accruals are adjusted periodically
as assessments change or additional information becomes
available. for product liability claims, a portion of the
overall accrual is actuarially determined and considers such
factors as past experience, number of claims reported and
estimates of claims incurred but not yet reported. individually
significant contingent losses are accrued when probable and
reasonably estimable.
legal defense costs expected to be incurred in connection with a
loss contingency are accrued when probable and reasonably
estimable. as of december31, 2007, the company had an
aggregate reserve of approximately $5.372billion (the
vioxx reserve) for the settlement program and
the companys future legal defense costs worldwide related
to (i)the vioxx product liability lawsuits,
(ii)the vioxx shareholder lawsuits, (iii)the
vioxx foreign lawsuits, and (iv)the vioxx
investigations (collectively, the vioxx
litigation) (see note10 to the consolidated
financial statements). during 2008, the company spent
approximately $305million in the aggregate in legal
defense costs worldwide related to the vioxx litigation.
in the fourth quarter of 2008, the company recorded a charge of
$62million solely for its future legal defense costs
related to the vioxx litigation. in addition, in the
fourth quarter of 2008, the company paid an additional
$250million into the settlement funds in connection with
the settlement program after having paid $500million into
the settlement funds in the third quarter of 2008. consequently,
as of december31, 2008, the aggregate amount of the
vioxx reserve was approximately $4.379billion. in
adding to the vioxx reserve solely for its future legal
defense costs, the company considered the same factors that it
considered when it previously established reserves for the
vioxx litigation. some of the significant factors
considered in the review of the vioxx reserve were as
follows: the actual costs incurred by the company; the
development of the companys legal defense strategy and
structure in light of the scope of the vioxx litigation,
including the settlement agreement and the expectation that
certain lawsuits will continue to be pending; the number of
cases being brought against the company; the costs and outcomes
of completed trials and the most current information regarding
anticipated timing, progression, and related costs of pre-trial
activities and trials in the vioxx ligation. the amount
of the vioxx reserve as of december31, 2008
allocated solely to defense costs represents the companys
best estimate of the minimum amount of defense costs to be
incurred in connection with the remaining aspects of the
vioxx litigation; however, events such as additional
trials in the vioxx litigation and other events that
could arise in the course of the vioxx litigation could
affect the ultimate amount of defense
table of contents
costs to be incurred by the company. the company will continue
to monitor its legal defense costs and review the adequacy of
the associated reserves and may determine to increase the
vioxx reserve at any time in the future if, based upon
the factors set forth, it believes it would be appropriate to do
so.
the company currently anticipates that two u.s.vioxx
product liability lawsuits will be tried in 2009. except
with respect to a product liability trial scheduled to be held
in australia, the company cannot predict the timing of any other
trials related to the vioxx litigation. the company
believes that it has meritorious defenses to the vioxx
lawsuits and will vigorously defend against them. in view of
the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of litigation,
particularly where there are many claimants and the claimants
seek indeterminate damages, the company is unable to predict the
outcome of these matters, and at this time cannot reasonably
estimate the possible loss or range of loss with respect to the
vioxx lawsuits not included in the settlement program.
the company has not established any reserves for any potential
liability relating to the vioxx lawsuits not included in
the settlement program or the vioxx investigations. in
each of those cases the company believes it has strong points to
raise on appeal and therefore that unfavorable outcomes in such
cases are not probable. unfavorable outcomes in the vioxx
litigation could have a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, liquidity and results of
operations.
as of december31, 2007, the company had a remaining
reserve of approximately $27million solely for its future
legal defense costs for the fosamax litigation. during
2008, the company spent approximately $34million and added
$40million to its reserve. consequently, as of
december31, 2008, the company had a reserve of
approximately $33million solely for its future legal
defense costs for the fosamax litigation. some of the
significant factors considered in the establishment of the
reserve for the fosamax litigation legal defense costs
were as follows: the actual costs incurred by the company thus
far; the development of the companys legal defense
strategy and structure in light of the creation of the
fosamax multidistrict litigation; the number of cases
being brought against the company; and the anticipated timing,
progression, and related costs of pre-trial activities in the
fosamax litigation. the company will continue to monitor
its legal defense costs and review the adequacy of the
associated reserves. due to the uncertain nature of litigation,
the company is unable to estimate its costs beyond the
completion of the first three federal trials discussed in
note10 to the consolidated financial statements. the
company has not established any reserves for any potential
liability relating to the fosamax litigation. unfavorable
outcomes in the fosamax litigation could have a material
adverse effect on the companys financial position,
liquidity and results of operations.
the company is a party to a number of proceedings brought under
the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and
liability act, commonly known as superfund, and other federal
and state equivalents. when a legitimate claim for contribution
is asserted, a liability is initially accrued based upon the
estimated transaction costs to manage the site. accruals are
adjusted as site investigations, feasibility studies and related
cost assessments of remedial techniques are completed, and as
the extent to which other potentially responsible parties who
may be jointly and severally liable can be expected to
contribute is determined.
the company is also remediating environmental contamination
resulting from past industrial activity at certain of its sites
and takes an active role in identifying and providing for these
costs. a worldwide survey was initially performed to assess all
sites for potential contamination resulting from past industrial
activities. where assessment indicated that physical
investigation was warranted, such investigation was performed,
providing a better evaluation of the need for remedial action.
where such need was identified, remedial action was then
initiated. estimates of the extent of contamination at each site
were initially made at the pre-investigation stage and
liabilities for the potential cost of remediation were accrued
at that time. as more definitive information became available
during the course of investigations
and/or
remedial efforts at each site, estimates were refined and
accruals were adjusted accordingly. these estimates and related
accruals continue to be refined annually.
the company believes that it is in compliance in all material
respects with applicable environmental laws and regulations.
expenditures for remediation and environmental liabilities were
$34.5million in 2008, and are estimated at
$47.1million for the years 2009 through 2013. in
managements opinion, the liabilities for all environmental
matters that are probable and reasonably estimable have been
accrued and totaled $89.5million and $109.6million
at december31, 2008 and december31, 2007,
respectively. these liabilities are undiscounted, do not
consider potential recoveries from other parties and will be
paid out over the periods of remediation for the
table of contents
applicable sites, which are expected to occur primarily over the
next 15years. although it is not possible to predict with
certainty the outcome of these matters, or the ultimate costs of
remediation, management does not believe that any reasonably
possible expenditures that may be incurred in excess of the
liabilities accrued should exceed $70.0million in the
aggregate. management also does not believe that these
expenditures should result in a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, results of operations,
liquidity or capital resources for any year.
share-based
compensation
the company recognizes compensation cost in accordance with
fas123r, which requires all share-based payments to
employees, including grants of stock options, to be expensed
over the requisite service period based on the grant date fair
value of the awards. the company determines the fair value of
certain share-based awards using the black-scholes
option-pricing model which uses both historical and current
market data to estimate the fair value. this method incorporates
various assumptions such as the risk-free interest rate,
expected volatility, expected dividend yield and expected life
of the options.
pensions
and other postretirement benefit plans
net pension and other postretirement benefit cost totaled
$376.6million in 2008, $489.3million in 2007 and
$563.7million in 2006. the decrease of $112.7million
in 2008 is primarily due to the lower amortization of actuarial
net losses and higher expected return on plan assets which were
partially offset by an increase in termination benefits
attributable to the companys restructuring actions.
pension and other postretirement benefit plan information for
financial reporting purposes is calculated using actuarial
assumptions including a discount rate for plan benefit
obligations and an expected rate of return on plan assets.
the company reassesses its benefit plan assumptions on a regular
basis. for both the pension and other postretirement benefit
plans, the discount rate is evaluated on measurement dates and
modified to reflect the prevailing market rate of a portfolio of
high-quality fixed-income debt instruments that would provide
the future cash flows needed to pay the benefits included in the
benefit obligation as they come due. at december31, 2008,
the discount rates for the companys u.s.pension
plans and u.s.other postretirement benefit plans ranged
from 6.0% to 6.40% compared with a range of 5.75% to 6.50% at
december31, 2007.
the expected rate of return for both the pension and other
postretirement benefit plans represents the average rate of
return to be earned on plan assets over the period the benefits
included in the benefit obligation are to be paid. in developing
the expected rate of return, the company considers long-term
compound annualized returns of historical market data as well as
actual returns on the companys plan assets. using this
reference information, the company develops forward-looking
return expectations for each asset category and a weighted
average expected long-term rate of return for a target portfolio
allocated across these investment categories. the expected
portfolio performance reflects the contribution of active
management as appropriate. as a result of this analysis, for
2009, the companys expected rate of return of 8.75%
remained unchanged from 2008 for its u.s.pension and other
postretirement benefit plans.
the target investment portfolio of the companys
u.s.pension and other postretirement benefit plans is
allocated 45% to 60% in u.s.equities, 20% to 30% in
international equities, 15% to 25% in fixed-income investments,
and up to 8% in cash and other investments. the portfolios
equity weighting is consistent with the long-term nature of the
plans benefit obligation. the expected annual standard
deviation of returns of the target portfolio, which approximates
13%, reflects both the equity allocation and the diversification
benefits among the asset classes in which the portfolio invests.
the actual return on plan assets for pension and other
postretirement benefit plans reflects the allocation to global
equity markets which delivered significant negative returns
during 2008.
actuarial assumptions are based upon managements best
estimates and judgment. a reasonably possible change of plus
(minus) 25basis points in the discount rate assumption,
with other assumptions held constant, would have an estimated
$35.2million favorable (unfavorable) impact on its
u.s.net pension and postretirement benefit cost. a
reasonably possible change of plus (minus) 25basis points
in the expected rate of return assumption, with other
assumptions held constant, would have an estimated
$13.0million favorable (unfavorable) impact on its
u.s.net pension and postretirement benefit cost. the
company does not expect to have a minimum pension funding
table of contents
requirement under the internal revenue code during 2009. the
preceding hypothetical changes in the discount rate and expected
rate of return assumptions would not impact the companys
funding requirements.
net loss amounts, which reflect experience differentials
primarily relating to differences between expected and actual
returns on plan assets as well as the effects of changes in
actuarial assumptions, are recorded as a component of
accumulated other comprehensive income. expected returns for
pension plans are based on a calculated market-related value of
assets. under this methodology, asset gains/losses resulting
from actual returns that differ from the companys expected
returns are recognized in the market-related value of assets
ratably over a five-year period. also, net loss amounts in
accumulated other comprehensive income in excess of certain
thresholds are amortized into net pension and other
postretirement benefit cost over the average remaining service
life of employees. amortization of net losses for the
companys u.s.plans at december31, 2008 is
expected to increase net pension and other postretirement
benefit cost by approximately $130million annually from
2009 through 2013.
acquisitions
the company accounts for acquired businesses using the purchase
method of accounting in accordance with fas141,
business combinations, which requires that the assets
acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of
acquisition at their respective fair values. any excess of the
purchase price over the estimated fair values of net assets
acquired is recorded as goodwill. if the company determines the
acquired company is a development stage company which has not
commenced its planned principal operations, the acquisition will
be accounted for as an acquisition of assets rather than as a
business combination and, therefore, goodwill would not be
recorded. the fair value of intangible assets, including
acquired research, is based on significant judgments made by
management, and accordingly, for significant items, the company
typically obtains assistance from third party valuation
specialists. amounts are allocated to acquired research and
expensed at the date of acquisition if technological feasibility
has not been established and no alternative future use exists.
for projects which can be used immediately in the research
process that have alternative future uses, the company
capitalizes these intangible assets and amortizes them over an
appropriate useful life. the valuations and useful life
assumptions are based on information available near the
acquisition date and are based on expectations and assumptions
that are deemed reasonable by management. the judgments made in
determining estimated fair values assigned to assets acquired
and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, can materially
impact the companys results of operations.
for intangible assets, including acquired research, the company
typically uses the income approach, which estimates fair value
based on each projects projected cash flows. future cash
flows are predominately based on a net income forecast of each
project, consistent with historical pricing, margins and expense
levels of similar products. revenues are estimated based on
relevant market size and growth factors, expected industry
trends, individual project life cycles, and the life of each
research projects underlying patent, if any. expected
revenues are then adjusted for the probability of technical and
marketing success and the resulting cash flows are discounted at
a risk-adjusted discount rate.
on january1, 2009, the company adopted fasb statement
no.141r, business combinations
(fas141r), which changes the way assets
and liabilities are recognized in purchase accounting on a
prospective basis. see recently issued accounting standards
below.
restructuring
costs
the company has recorded restructuring costs in connection with
its global restructuring programs designed to reduce the
companys cost structure, increase efficiency and enhance
competitiveness. as a result, the company has made estimates and
judgments regarding its future plans, including future
termination benefits and other exit costs to be incurred when
the restructuring actions take place. in connection with these
actions, management also assesses the recoverability of
long-lived assets employed in the business. in certain
instances, asset lives have been shortened based on changes in
the expected useful lives of the affected assets. severance and
other related costs are reflected within restructuring costs.
asset-related charges are reflected within materials and
production costs and research and development expenses depending
upon the nature of the asset.
table of contents
impairments
of long-lived assets
the company assesses changes in economic conditions and makes
assumptions regarding estimated future cash flows in evaluating
the value of the companys property, plant and equipment,
goodwill and other intangible assets.
the company periodically evaluates whether current facts or
circumstances indicate that the carrying values of its
long-lived assets to be held and used are recoverable in
accordance with fasb statement no.144, accounting for
the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets. if such
circumstances are determined to exist, an estimate of the
undiscounted future cash flows of these assets, or appropriate
asset groupings, is compared to the carrying value to determine
whether an impairment exists. if the asset is determined to be
impaired, the loss is measured based on the difference between
the assets fair value and its carrying value. if quoted
market prices are not available, the company will estimate fair
value using a discounted value of estimated future cash flows
approach.
the company tests its goodwill for impairment at least annually
in accordance with fasb statement no.142, goodwill and
other intangible assets, using a fair value based test.
goodwill represents the excess of acquisition costs over the
fair value of net assets of businesses purchased and is assigned
to reporting units within the companys segments. other
acquired intangibles are recorded at cost. when events or
circumstances warrant a review, the company will assess
recoverability from future operations of other intangibles using
undiscounted cash flows derived from the lowest appropriate
asset groupings, generally the subsidiary level. impairments are
recognized in operating results to the extent that carrying
values exceed fair value, which is determined based on the net
present value of estimated cash flows.
impairments
of investments
the company reviews its investments for impairments based on the
determination of whether the decline in market value of the
investment below the carrying value is other than temporary. the
company considers available evidence in evaluating potential
impairments of its investments, including the duration and
extent to which fair value is less than cost and the
companys ability and intent to hold the investments.
fair
value measurements
on january1, 2008, the company adopted fasb statement
no.157, fair value measurements
(fas157) which clarifies the definition of
fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value,
and expands the disclosures on fair value measurements.
fas157 establishes a fair value hierarchy which requires
an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize
the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value.
fas157 describes three levels of inputs that may be used
to measure fair value (see note5 to the consolidated
financial statements). at december31, 2008, the
companys level3 assets of $96.6million
primarily include mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities,
as well as certain corporate notes and bonds for which there was
a decrease in the observability of market pricing for these
investments. on january1, 2008, the company had
$1,273.1million invested in a short-term fixed income fund
(the fund). due to market liquidity conditions, cash
redemptions from the fund were restricted. as a result of this
restriction on cash redemptions, the company did not consider
the fund to be traded in an active market with observable
pricing on january1, 2008 and these amounts were
categorized as level3. on january7, 2008, the
company elected to be
redeemed-in-kind
from the fund and received its share of the underlying
securities of the fund. as a result, $1,099.7million of
the underlying securities were transferred out of level3
as it was determined these securities had observable markets. as
of december31, 2008, $96.6million of the investment
securities associated with the
redemption-in-kind
remained classified in level3 (approximately 0.9% of the
companys investment securities) as the securities
contained at least one significant input which was unobservable
(all of which were pledged under certain collateral arrangements
(see note15 to the consolidated financial statements)).
these securities account for the entire balance of the
companys level3 assets at december31, 2008.
these securities were valued primarily using pricing models for
which management understands the methodologies. these models
incorporate transaction details such as contractual terms,
maturity, timing and amount of future cash inflows, as well as
assumptions about liquidity and credit valuation adjustments of
marketplace participants at december31, 2008.
table of contents
taxes on
income
the companys effective tax rate is based on pretax income,
statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available in
the various jurisdictions in which the company operates. an
estimated effective tax rate for a year is applied to the
companys quarterly operating results. in the event that
there is a significant unusual or one-time item recognized, or
expected to be recognized, in the companys quarterly
operating results, the tax attributable to that item would be
separately calculated and recorded at the same time as the
unusual or one-time item. the company considers the resolution
of prior year tax matters to be such items. significant judgment
is required in determining the companys tax provision and
in evaluating its tax positions. the recognition and measurement
of a tax position is based on managements best judgment
given the facts, circumstances and information available at the
reporting date. in accordance with fin48, the company
evaluates tax positions to determine whether the benefits of tax
positions are more likely than not of being sustained upon audit
based on the technical merits of the tax position. for tax
positions that are more likely than not of being sustained upon
audit, the company recognizes the largest amount of the benefit
that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate
settlement in the financial statements. for tax positions that
are not more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, the
company does not recognize any portion of the benefit in the
financial statements. if the more likely than not threshold is
not met in the period for which a tax position is taken, the
company may subsequently recognize the benefit of that tax
position if the tax matter is effectively settled, the statute
of limitations expires, or if the more likely than not threshold
is met in a subsequent period. (see note15 to the
consolidated financial statements.)
tax regulations require items to be included in the tax return
at different times than the items are reflected in the financial
statements. timing differences create deferred tax assets and
liabilities. deferred tax assets generally represent items that
can be used as a tax deduction or credit in the tax return in
future years for which the company has already recorded the tax
benefit in the financial statements. the company establishes
valuation allowances for its deferred tax assets when the amount
of expected future taxable income is not likely to support the
use of the deduction or credit. deferred tax liabilities
generally represent tax expense recognized in the financial
statements for which payment has been deferred or expense for
which the company has already taken a deduction on the tax
return, but has not yet recognized as expense in the financial
statements. at december31, 2008, foreign earnings of
$22.0billion have been retained indefinitely by subsidiary
companies for reinvestment, therefore no provision has been made
for income taxes that would be payable upon the distribution of
such earnings.
recently
issued accounting standards
in december 2007, the fasb issued fas141r which expands
the scope of acquisition accounting to all transactions under
which control of a business is obtained. this standard requires
an acquirer to recognize the assets acquired and liabilities
assumed at the acquisition date fair values with limited
exceptions. additionally, fas141r requires that contingent
consideration as well as contingent assets and liabilities be
recorded at fair value on the acquisition date, that acquired
in-process research and development be capitalized and recorded
as intangible assets at the acquisition date, and also requires
transaction costs and costs to restructure the acquired company
be expensed. fas141r is effective, on a prospective basis,
january1, 2009 and future transactions will be accounted
for under this standard.
in december 2007, the fasb issued statement no.160,
noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial
statements an amendment of arb no.51
(fas160) which provides guidance for the
accounting, reporting and disclosure of noncontrolling interests
and requires, among other things, that noncontrolling interests
be recorded as equity in the consolidated financial statements.
fas160 is effective, on a prospective basis,
january1, 2009 with the exception of the presentation and
disclosure requirements of fas160 which must be applied
retrospectively. the adoption of this standard will result in
the reclassification of $2.4billion of minority interests
(now referred to as noncontrolling interests) to a separate
component of stockholders equity on the consolidated
balance sheet. additionally, net income attributable to
noncontrolling interests will be shown separately from parent
net income in the consolidated statement of income.
in december 2007, the fasb ratified the consensus reached by the
emerging issues task force (eitf) on issue
no.07-1,
accounting for collaborative arrangements
(eitf07-1).
eitf07-1,
which is effective january1, 2009, is applied
retrospectively to all prior periods presented for all
collaborative arrangements existing as of the effective date.
eitf07-1
defines collaborative arrangements and establishes reporting
requirements for
table of contents
transactions between participants in a collaborative arrangement
and between participants in the arrangement and third parties.
the effect of adoption of
eitf07-1
is not expected to be material to the companys financial
position or results of operations.
in march 2008, the fasb issued statement no.161,
disclosures about derivative instruments and hedging
activities (fas161), which is effective
january1, 2009. fas161 requires enhanced disclosures
about derivative instruments and hedging activities to allow for
a better understanding of their effects on an entitys
financial position, financial performance, and cash flows. among
other things, fas161 requires disclosure of the fair
values of derivative instruments and associated gains and losses
in a tabular format. since fas161 requires only additional
disclosures about the companys derivatives and hedging
activities, the adoption of fas161 will not affect the
companys financial position or results of operations.
in june 2008, the fasb issued staff position
eitf03-6-1,
determining whether instruments granted in share-based
payment transactions are participating securities (fsp
eitf03-6-1),
which is effective january1, 2009. fsp
eitf03-6-1
clarifies that share-based payment awards that entitle holders
to receive nonforfeitable dividends before they vest will be
considered participating securities and therefore included in
the basic earnings per share calculation. the effect of adoption
of fsp
eitf03-6-1
is not expected to be material to the companys results of
operations.
in november 2008, the fasb issued
eitf08-6,
equity method investment accounting considerations
(eitf08-6).
eitf08-6
clarifies the accounting for certain transactions and impairment
considerations involving equity method investments.
eitf08-6
is effective january1, 2009, and will be applied on a
prospective basis to future transactions.
in november 2008, the fasb issued
eitf08-7,
accounting for defensive intangible assets
(eitf08-7).
eitf08-7
clarifies that a defensive intangible asset should be accounted
for as a separate unit of accounting and should be assigned a
useful life that reflects the entitys consumption of the
expected benefits related to the asset.
eitf08-7
is effective january1, 2009, and will be applied on a
prospective basis to future transactions.
in december 2008, the fasb issued staff position
fas132(r)-1, employers disclosures about
postretirement benefit plan assets (fsp
fas132(r)-1), which is effective december31,
2009. fsp fas132(r)-1 amends fasb statement no.132r,
employers disclosures about pensions and other
postretirement benefits, to provide guidance on an
employers disclosures about plan assets of a defined
pension or other postretirement plan. fsp fas132(r)-1
requires disclosures about plan assets including how investment
allocation decisions are made, the major categories of plan
assets, the inputs and valuation techniques used to measure the
fair value of plan assets, the effect of fair value measurements
using significant unobservable inputs (level3)on
changes in plan assets for the period, and significant
concentrations of risk within plan assets. since fsp
fas132(r)-1 requires only additional disclosures about the
companys pension and other postretirement plan assets, the
adoption of fsp fas132(r)-1 will not affect the
companys financial position or results of operations.
cautionary
factors that may affect future results
this report and other written reports and oral statements made
from time to time by the company may contain so-called
forward-looking statements, all of which are based
on managements current expectations and are subject to
risks and uncertainties which may cause results to differ
materially from those set forth in the statements. one can
identify these forward-looking statements by their use of words
such as expects, plans,
will, estimates, forecasts,
projects and other words of similar meaning. one can
also identify them by the fact that they do not relate strictly
to historical or current facts. these statements are likely to
address the companys growth strategy, financial results,
product development, product approvals, product potential and
development programs. one must carefully consider any such
statement and should understand that many factors could cause
actual results to differ materially from the companys
forward-looking statements. these factors include inaccurate
assumptions and a broad variety of other risks and
uncertainties, including some that are known and some that are
not. no forward-looking statement can be guaranteed and actual
future results may vary materially.
table of contents
the company does not assume the obligation to update any
forward-looking statement. one should carefully evaluate such
statements in light of factors, including risk factors,
described in the companys filings with the securities and
exchange commission, especially on
forms10-k,
10-q and
8-k. in
item1a. risk factors of this annual report on
form10-k
the company discusses in more detail various important risk
factors that could cause actual results to differ from expected
or historic results. the company notes these factors for
investors as permitted by the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995. one should understand that it is not
possible to predict or identify all such factors. consequently,
the reader should not consider any such list to be a complete
statement of all potential risks or uncertainties.
item7a.
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
the information required by this item is incorporated by
reference to the discussion under financial instruments
market risk disclosures in item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations.
table of contents
item8.
financial
statements and supplementary data.
(a)financial
statements
the consolidated balance sheet of merck& co., inc.
and subsidiaries as of december31, 2008 and 2007, and the
related consolidated statements of income, of retained earnings,
of comprehensive income and of cash flows for each of the three
years in the period ended december31, 2008, the notes to
consolidated financial statements, and the report dated
february26, 2009 of pricewaterhousecoopers llp,
independent registered public accounting firm, are as follows:
consolidated
statement of income
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
years ended december 31
($ in millions except per share amounts)
sales
$23,850.3
$24,197.7
$22,636.0
costs, expenses and other
materials and production
5,582.5
6,140.7
6,001.1
marketing and administrative
7,377.0
7,556.7
8,165.4
research and development
4,805.3
4,882.8
4,782.9
restructuring costs
1,032.5
327.1
142.3
equity income from affiliates
(2,560.6
)
(2,976.5
)
(2,294.4
)
u.s. vioxx settlement agreement charge
-
4,850.0
-
other (income) expense, net
(2,194.2
)
46.2
(382.7
)
14,042.5
20,827.0
16,414.6
income before taxes
9,807.8
3,370.7
6,221.4
taxes on income
1,999.4
95.3
1,787.6
net income
$7,808.4
$3,275.4
$4,433.8
basic earnings per common share
$3.66
$1.51
$2.04
earnings per common share assuming dilution
$3.64
$1.49
$2.03
consolidated
statement of retained earnings
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
years ended december 31
($ in millions)
balance, january 1
$
39,140.8
$
39,095.1
$
37,980.0
cumulative effect of adoption of fin48
-
81.0
-
net income
7,808.4
3,275.4
4,433.8
dividends declared on common stock
(3,250.4
)
(3,310.7
)
(3,318.7
)
balance, december 31
$
43,698.8
$
39,140.8
$
39,095.1
consolidated
statement of comprehensive income
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
years ended december 31
($ in millions)
net income
$
7,808.4
$
3,275.4
$
4,433.8
other comprehensive (loss) income
net unrealized gain (loss) on derivatives, net of tax and net
income realization
151.6
(4.4
)
(50.9
)
net unrealized (loss) gain on investments, net of tax and net
income realization
(80.5
)
58.0
26.1
benefit plan net (loss) gain and prior service cost (credit),
net of tax and amortization
(1,761.7
)
240.3
-
minimum pension liability, net of tax
-
-
22.5
cumulative translation adjustment relating to equity investees,
net of tax
(37.2
)
44.3
18.9
(1,727.8
)
338.2
16.6
comprehensive income
$
6,080.6
$
3,613.6
$
4,450.4
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
consolidated balance sheet
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
december 31
($ in millions)
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
4,368.3
$
5,336.1
short-term investments
1,118.1
2,894.7
accounts receivable (including non-trade receivables of $871.2
in 2008 and $906.0 in 2007)
3,778.9
3,636.2
inventories (excludes inventories of $395.0 in 2008 and $345.2
in 2007 classified in other assets see note6)
2,283.3
1,881.0
deferred income taxes and other current assets
7,756.3
1,297.4
total current assets
19,304.9
15,045.4
investments
6,491.3
7,159.2
property, plant and equipment (at cost)
land
386.1
405.8
buildings
9,767.4
10,048.0
machinery, equipment and office furnishings
13,103.7
13,553.7
construction in progress
871.0
795.6
24,128.2
24,803.1
less allowance for depreciation
12,128.6
12,457.1
11,999.6
12,346.0
goodwill
1,438.7
1,454.8
other intangibles, net
525.4
713.2
other assets
7,435.8
11,632.1
$
47,195.7
$
48,350.7
liabilities and stockholders equity
current liabilities
loans payable and current portion of long-term debt
$
2,297.1
$
1,823.6
trade accounts payable
617.6
624.5
accrued and other current liabilities
9,174.1
8,534.9
income taxes payable
1,426.4
444.1
dividends payable
803.5
831.1
total current liabilities
14,318.7
12,258.2
long-term debt
3,943.3
3,915.8
deferred income taxes and noncurrent liabilities
7,766.6
11,585.3
minority interests
2,408.8
2,406.7
stockholders equity
common stock, one cent par value
authorized 5,400,000,000shares
issued 2,983,508,675shares 2008
and 2007
29.8
29.8
other paid-in capital
8,319.1
8,014.9
retained earnings
43,698.8
39,140.8
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(2,553.9
)
(826.1
)
49,493.8
46,359.4
less treasury stock, at cost
875,818,333shares 2008
811,005,791shares 2007
30,735.5
28,174.7
total stockholders equity
18,758.3
18,184.7
$
47,195.7
$
48,350.7
the accompanying notes are an integral part of this
consolidated financial statement.
table of contents
consolidated statement of cash flows
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
years ended december 31
($ in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net income
$
7,808.4
$
3,275.4
$
4,433.8
adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
operating activities:
gain on distribution from astrazeneca lp
(2,222.7
)
-
-
equity income from affiliates
(2,560.6
)
(2,976.5
)
(2,294.4
)
dividends and distributions from equity affiliates
4,289.6
2,485.6
1,931.9
u.s. vioxx settlement agreement charge
-
4,850.0
-
depreciation and amortization
1,631.2
1,988.2
2,268.4
deferred income taxes
530.1
(1,781.9
)
(530.2
)
share-based compensation
348.0
330.2
312.5
acquired research
-
325.1
762.5
taxes paid for internal revenue service settlement
-
(2,788.1
)
-
other
731.7
(64.7
)
18.1
net changes in assets and liabilities:
accounts receivable
(889.4
)
(290.7
)
(709.3
)
inventories
(452.1
)
(40.7
)
226.5
trade accounts payable
-
117.7
16.4
accrued and other current liabilities
(1,710.9
)
451.1
461.6
income taxes payable
(465.3
)
987.2
(138.2
)
noncurrent liabilities
(108.0
)
26.2
(125.6
)
other
(358.3
)
105.1
131.2
net cash provided by operating activities
6,571.7
6,999.2
6,765.2
cash flows from investing activities
capital expenditures
(1,298.3
)
(1,011.0
)
(980.2
)
purchases of securities and other investments
(11,967.3
)
(10,132.7
)
(19,591.3
)
proceeds from sales of securities and other investments
11,065.8
10,860.2
16,143.8
acquisitions of subsidiaries, net of cash acquired
-
(1,135.9
)
(404.9
)
distribution from astrazeneca lp
1,899.3
-
-
increase in restricted assets
(1,629.7
)
(1,401.1
)
(48.1
)
other
95.8
10.5
(3.0
)
net cash used by investing activities
(1,834.4
)
(2,810.0
)
(4,883.7
)
cash flows from financing activities
net change in short-term borrowings
1,859.9
11.4
(1,522.8
)
proceeds from issuance of debt
-
-
755.1
payments on debt
(1,392.0
)
(1,195.3
)
(506.2
)
purchases of treasury stock
(2,725.0
)
(1,429.7
)
(1,002.3
)
dividends paid to stockholders
(3,278.5
)
(3,307.3
)
(3,322.6
)
proceeds from exercise of stock options
102.3
898.6
369.9
other
(89.2
)
156.2
(375.3
)
net cash used by financing activities
(5,522.5
)
(4,866.1
)
(5,604.2
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(182.6
)
98.3
52.1
net decrease in cash and cash equivalents
(967.8
)
(578.6
)
(3,670.6
)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
5,336.1
5,914.7
9,585.3
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
4,368.3
$
5,336.1
$
5,914.7
the accompanying notes are an integral part of this
consolidated financial statement.
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
merck& co., inc. and subsidiaries
($ in millions except per share amounts)
1.
nature of
operations
merck is a global research-driven pharmaceutical company that
discovers, develops, manufactures and markets a broad range of
innovative products to improve human and animal health. the
companys operations are principally managed on a products
basis and are comprised of two reportable segments: the
pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines and infectious diseases
segment. the pharmaceutical segment includes human health
pharmaceutical products marketed either directly by merck or
through joint ventures. these products consist of therapeutic
and preventive agents, sold by prescription, for the treatment
of human disorders. merck sells these human health
pharmaceutical products primarily to drug wholesalers and
retailers, hospitals, government agencies and managed health
care providers such as health maintenance organizations,
pharmacy benefit managers and other institutions. the vaccines
and infectious diseases segment includes human health vaccine
and infectious disease products marketed either directly by
merck or, in the case of vaccines, also through a joint venture.
vaccine products consist of preventive pediatric, adolescent and
adult vaccines, primarily administered at physician offices.
merck sells these human health vaccines primarily to physicians,
wholesalers, physician distributors and government entities.
infectious disease products consist of therapeutic agents for
the treatment of infection sold primarily to drug wholesalers
and retailers, hospitals and government agencies. the
companys professional representatives communicate the
effectiveness, safety and value of its pharmaceutical and
vaccine products to health care professionals in private
practice, group practices and managed care organizations.
2.
summary
of accounting policies
principles of consolidation the consolidated
financial statements include the accounts of the company and all
of its subsidiaries in which a controlling interest is
maintained. intercompany balances and transactions are
eliminated. controlling interest is determined by majority
ownership interest and the absence of substantive third-party
participating rights or, in the case of variable interest
entities, by majority exposure to expected losses, residual
returns or both. for those consolidated subsidiaries where merck
ownership is less than 100%, the outside stockholders
interests are shown as minority interests. investments in
affiliates over which the company has significant influence but
not a controlling interest, such as interests in entities owned
equally by the company and a third party that are under shared
control, are carried on the equity basis.
foreign currency translation the
u.s.dollar is the functional currency for the
companys foreign subsidiaries.
cash equivalents cash equivalents are
comprised of certain highly liquid investments with original
maturities of less than three months.
inventories inventories are valued at the
lower of cost or market. the cost of substantially all domestic
inventories is determined using the
last-in,
first-out (lifo) method for both book and tax
purposes. the cost of all other inventories is determined using
the
first-in,
first-out (fifo) method. inventories consist of
currently marketed products and certain products awaiting
regulatory approval. in evaluating the recoverability of
inventories produced in preparation for product launches, the
company considers the probability that revenue will be obtained
from the future sale of the related inventory together with the
status of the product within the regulatory approval process.
investments investments in marketable debt
and equity securities classified as
available-for-sale
are reported at fair value. on january1, 2008, the company
adopted financial accounting standards board (fasb)
statement no.157, fair value measurements
(fas157), which clarifies the definition of
fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and
expands the disclosures on fair value measurements. fas157
defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received
for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in
the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or
liability in an orderly transaction between market participants
on the measurement date. fas157 also establishes a fair
value hierarchy which requires an entity to maximize the use of
observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs
when measuring fair value.
table of contents
fair value of the companys investments is determined using
quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities or quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities
or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by
observable market data for substantially the full term of the
assets or liabilities. for declines in fair value that are
considered
other-than-temporary,
impairment losses are charged to other (income) expense, net.
declines in fair value that are considered temporary, to the
extent not hedged, are reported net of tax in accumulated other
comprehensive income (aoci). the company considers
available evidence in evaluating potential impairment of its
investments, including the duration and extent to which fair
value is less than cost and the companys ability and
intent to hold the investment. realized gains and losses are
included in other (income) expense, net.
revenue recognition revenues from sales of
products are recognized at the time of delivery and when title
and risk of loss passes to the customer. recognition of revenue
also requires reasonable assurance of collection of sales
proceeds and completion of all performance obligations.
domestically, sales discounts are issued to customers as direct
discounts at the
point-of-sale
or indirectly through an intermediary wholesaler, known as
chargebacks, or indirectly in the form of rebates. additionally,
sales are generally made with a limited right of return under
certain conditions. revenues are recorded net of provisions for
sales discounts and returns, which are established at the time
of sale. accruals for chargebacks are reflected as a direct
reduction to accounts receivable and accruals for rebates are
recorded as current liabilities. the accrued balances relative
to these provisions included in accounts receivable and accrued
and other current liabilities were $55.6million and
$560.7million, respectively, at december31, 2008 and
$82.5million and $616.9million, respectively, at
december31, 2007.
the company recognizes revenue from the sales of vaccines to the
federal government for placement into stockpiles related to the
pediatric vaccine stockpile in accordance with securities and
exchange commission (sec) interpretation,
commission guidance regarding accounting for sales of vaccines
and bioterror countermeasures to the federal government for
placement into the pediatric vaccine stockpile or the strategic
national stockpile.
depreciation depreciation is provided over
the estimated useful lives of the assets, principally using the
straight-line method. for tax purposes, accelerated methods are
used. the estimated useful lives primarily range from 10 to
50years for buildings, and from 3 to 15years for
machinery, equipment and office furnishings.
software capitalization the company
capitalizes certain costs incurred in connection with obtaining
or developing internal-use software including external direct
costs of material and services, and payroll costs for employees
directly involved with the software development in accordance
with statement of position
98-1,
accounting for the costs of computer software developed or
obtained for internal use. capitalized software costs are
included in property, plant and equipment and amortized
beginning when the asset is substantially ready for use.
capitalized software costs associated with the companys
multi-year implementation of an enterprise-wide resource
planning system are being amortized over 7 to 10years. at
december31, 2008 and 2007, the company had approximately
$330million and $200million, respectively, of
remaining unamortized capitalized software costs associated with
this initiative. all other capitalized software costs are being
amortized over periods ranging from 3 to 5years. costs
incurred during the preliminary project stage and
post-implementation stage, as well as maintenance and training
costs, are expensed as incurred.
acquisitions the company accounts for
acquired businesses using the purchase method of accounting in
accordance with fasb statement no.141, business
combinations, which requires that the assets acquired and
liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at
their respective fair values. any excess of the purchase price
over the estimated fair values of net assets acquired is
recorded as goodwill. if the company determines the acquired
company is a development stage company which has not commenced
its planned principal operations, the acquisition will be
accounted for as an acquisition of assets rather than as a
business combination and, therefore, goodwill would not be
recorded. in accordance with fasb interpretation no.4,
applicability of fasb statement no.2 to business
combinations accounted for by the purchase method, the
company allocates amounts to acquired research which are
expensed at the date of acquisition if technological feasibility
has not been established and no alternative future use exists.
for projects which can be used immediately in the research
process that have alternative future uses, the company
capitalizes these intangible assets and amortizes them over an
appropriate useful life. the operating results of the acquired
business are reflected in the companys consolidated
financial
table of contents
statements and results of operations as of the date of
acquisition. on january1, 2009, the company adopted fasb
statement no.141r, business combinations, which
changes the way assets and liabilities are recognized in
purchase accounting on a prospective basis. see recently
issued accounting standards below.
goodwill and other intangibles goodwill
represents the excess of acquisition costs over the fair value
of net assets of businesses purchased. goodwill is assigned to
reporting units within the companys segments and evaluated
for impairment on at least an annual basis, using a fair value
based test. other acquired intangibles are recorded at cost and
are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated
useful lives ranging from 3 to 20years (see note7).
when events or circumstances warrant a review, the company will
assess recoverability from future operations of other
intangibles using undiscounted cash flows derived from the
lowest appropriate asset groupings, generally the subsidiary
level. impairments are recognized in operating results to the
extent that carrying value exceeds fair value, which is
determined based on the net present value of estimated future
cash flows.
research and development research and
development is expensed as incurred. upfront and milestone
payments due to third parties in connection with research and
development collaborations prior to regulatory approval are
expensed as incurred. payments due to third parties upon or
subsequent to regulatory approval are capitalized and amortized
over the shorter of the remaining license or product patent
life. on january1, 2008, the company adopted emerging
issues task force (eitf) issue
no.07-3,
accounting for advance payments for goods or services
received for use in future research and development activities,
which requires that nonrefundable advance payments for goods
and services that will be used in future research and
development activities be expensed when the activity has been
performed or when the goods have been received rather than when
the payment is made. see recently issued accounting standards
below.
share-based compensation the company expenses
all share-based payments to employees, including grants of stock
options, over the requisite service period based on the
grant-date fair value of the awards.
restructuring costs the company records
restructuring activities, including costs for one-time
termination benefits, in accordance with fasb statement
no.146, accounting for costs associated with exit or
disposal activities. employee termination benefits covered
by existing benefit arrangements are recorded in accordance with
fasb statement no.112, employers accounting for
postemployment benefits an amendment of fasb
statement no.5 and 43 and fasb statement no.88,
employers accounting for settlements and curtailments
of defined benefit pension plans for termination benefits.
employee termination costs are recorded when actions are
probable and estimable. asset impairment costs are recorded in
accordance with fasb statement no.144, accounting for
the impairment and disposal of long-lived assets.
contingencies and legal defense costs the
company records accruals for contingencies and legal defense
costs expected to be incurred in connection with a loss
contingency when it is probable that a liability has been
incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated in
accordance with fasb statement no.5, accounting for
contingencies.
taxes on income deferred taxes are recognized
for the future tax effects of temporary differences between
financial and income tax reporting based on enacted tax laws and
rates. the company evaluates tax positions to determine whether
the benefits of tax positions are more likely than not of being
sustained upon audit based on the technical merits of the tax
position. for tax positions that are more likely than not of
being sustained upon audit, the company recognizes the largest
amount of the benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being
realized upon ultimate settlement in the financial statements.
for tax positions that are not more likely than not of being
sustained upon audit, the company does not recognize any portion
of the benefit in the financial statements.
use of estimates the consolidated financial
statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states (gaap) and,
accordingly, include certain amounts that are based on
managements best estimates and judgments. estimates are
used in determining such items as provisions for sales discounts
and returns, depreciable and amortizable lives, recoverability
of inventories produced in preparation for product launches,
amounts recorded for contingencies, environmental liabilities
and other reserves, pension and other postretirement benefit
plan assumptions, share-based compensation assumptions, amounts
recorded in connection with acquisitions, restructuring costs,
impairments of long-lived assets and investments, and
table of contents
taxes on income. because of the uncertainty inherent in such
estimates, actual results may differ from these estimates.
reclassifications certain reclassifications
have been made to prior year amounts to conform with the current
year presentation.
recently adopted accounting standards in
2008, the company adopted fasb statement no.157, fair
value measurements (fas157), statement
no.159, the fair value option for financial assets and
financial liabilities including an amendment of fasb
statement no.115 (fas159), statement
no.162, the hierarchy of generally accepted accounting
principles (fas162), eitf issue
no.07-3,
accounting for advance payments for goods or services
received for use in future research and development activities
(eitf07-3)
and fasb staff position
fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8, disclosures by public entities
(enterprises) about transfers of financial assets and interests
in variable interest entities (fsp
fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8).
on january1, 2008, the company adopted fas157, which
clarifies the definition of fair value, establishes a framework
for measuring fair value, and expands the disclosures on fair
value measurements. in february 2008, the fasb issued staff
position
157-2,
effective date of fasb statement no.157
(fsp157-2),
that deferred the effective date of fas157 for one year
for nonfinancial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value
on a non-recurring basis. the effect of adoption of fas157
for financial assets and liabilities recognized at fair value on
a recurring basis did not have a material impact on the
companys financial position and results of operations (see
note5). the effect of adoption of
fsp157-2
on the companys financial position and results of
operations is not expected to be material. in october 2008, the
fasb issued staff position
157-3,
determining the fair value of a financial asset when the
market for that asset is not active
(fsp157-3),
which clarifies the application of fas157 in a market that
is not active.
fsp157-3
was effective upon issuance and the effect of adoption on the
companys financial position and results of operations was
not material.
on january1, 2008, the company adopted fas159, which
permits companies to make an irrevocable election to measure
certain financial assets and financial liabilities at fair
value. unrealized gains and losses on items for which the fair
value option has been elected are reported in earnings at each
subsequent reporting date. the company did not elect the fair
value option under fas159 for any of its financial assets
or liabilities upon adoption or in any subsequent period.
in the fourth quarter of 2008, the company adopted fas162,
which identifies the sources of accounting principles and the
framework for selecting the principles used (order of authority)
in the preparation of financial statements that are presented in
conformity with generally accepted accounting standards in the
united states. the effect of adoption of fas162 on the
companys financial statements was not material.
on january1, 2008, the company adopted
eitf07-03,
which is being applied prospectively for new contracts.
eitf07-3
addresses nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services
that will be used or rendered for future research and
development activities.
eitf07-3
requires that these payments be deferred and capitalized and
recognized as an expense as the related goods are delivered or
the related services are performed. the effect of adoption of
eitf07-3
on the companys financial position and results of
operations was not material.
on december31, 2008, the company adopted fsp
fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8 which amends fasb statement no.140,
accounting for transfers and servicing of financial assets
and extinguishment of liabilities, to require additional
disclosures about transfers of financial assets. fsp
fas140-4
and
fin46(r)-8
also amends fasb interpretation no.46r, consolidation
of variable interest entities, to include additional
disclosures about a public entitys involvement with
variable interest entities. the effect of adoption of fsp
fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8 had no impact on the companys
disclosures.
recently issued accounting standards the fasb
recently issued statement no.141r, business
combinations (fas141r), statement
no.160, noncontrolling interests in consolidated
financial statements an amendment of arb no.51
(fas160), statement
no.161, disclosures about derivative instruments and
hedging activities (fas161), staff
position
eitf03-6-1,
determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment
transactions are participating securities (fsp
eitf03-6-1),
staff position fas132(r)-1, employers disclosures
about postretirement benefit plan assets (fsp
fas132(r)-1), and ratified the consensus reached by
the eitf on issue
no.07-1,
accounting for collaborative arrangements
(eitf07-1),
issue
no.08-6,
table of contents
equity method investment accounting considerations
(eitf08-6)
and issue
no.08-7,
accounting for defensive intangible assets
(eitf08-7).
fas141r expands the scope of acquisition accounting to all
transactions under which control of a business is obtained. this
standard requires an acquirer to recognize the assets acquired
and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date fair values with
limited exceptions. additionally, fas141r requires that
contingent consideration as well as contingent assets and
liabilities be recorded at fair value on the acquisition date,
that acquired in-process research and development be capitalized
and recorded as intangible assets at the acquisition date, and
also requires transaction costs and costs to restructure the
acquired company be expensed. fas141r is effective, on a
prospective basis, january1, 2009 and future transactions
will be accounted for under this standard.
fas160 provides guidance for the accounting, reporting and
disclosure of noncontrolling interests and requires, among other
things, that noncontrolling interests be recorded as equity in
the consolidated financial statements. fas160 is
effective, on a prospective basis, january1, 2009 with the
exception of the presentation and disclosure requirements of fas
160 which must be applied retrospectively. the adoption of this
standard will result in the reclassification of
$2.4billion of minority interests (now referred to as
noncontrolling interests) to a separate component of
stockholders equity on the consolidated balance sheet.
additionally, net income attributable to noncontrolling
interests will be shown separately from parent net income in the
consolidated statement of income.
fas161, which is effective january1, 2009, requires
enhanced disclosures about derivative instruments and hedging
activities to allow for a better understanding of their effects
on an entitys financial position, financial performance,
and cash flows. among other things, fas161 requires
disclosure of the fair values of derivative instruments and
associated gains and losses in a tabular format. since
fas161 requires only additional disclosures about the
companys derivatives and hedging activities, the adoption
of fas161 will not affect the companys financial
position or results of operations.
fsp
eitf03-6-1,
which is effective january1, 2009, clarifies that
share-based payment awards that entitle holders to receive
nonforfeitable dividends before they vest will be considered
participating securities and therefore included in the basic
earnings per share calculation. the effect of adoption of fsp
eitf03-6-1
is not expected to be material to the companys results of
operations.
fsp fas132(r)-1, which is effective december31,
2009, amends fasb statement no.132r, employers
disclosures about pensions and other postretirement
benefits, to provide guidance on an employers
disclosures about plan assets of a defined pension or other
postretirement plan. fsp fas132(r)-1 requires disclosures
about plan assets including how investment allocation decisions
are made, the major categories of plan assets, the inputs and
valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of plan
assets, the effect of fair value measurements using significant
unobservable inputs (level3)on changes in plan
assets for the period, and significant concentrations of risk
within plan assets. since fsp fas132(r)-1 requires only
additional disclosures about the companys pension and
other postretirement plan assets, the adoption of fsp
fas132(r)-1 will not affect the companys financial
position or results of operations.
eitf07-1,
which is effective january1, 2009, is applied
retrospectively to all prior periods presented for all
collaborative arrangements existing as of the effective date.
eitf07-1
defines collaborative arrangements and establishes reporting
requirements for transactions between participants in a
collaborative arrangement and between participants in the
arrangement and third parties. the effect of adoption of
eitf07-1
is not expected to be material to the companys financial
position or results of operations.
eitf08-6,
which is effective january1, 2009, clarifies the
accounting for certain transactions and impairment
considerations involving equity method investments and will be
applied on a prospective basis to future transactions.
eitf08-7,
which is effective january1, 2009, clarifies that a
defensive intangible asset should be accounted for as a separate
unit of accounting and should be assigned a useful life that
reflects the entitys consumption of the expected benefits
related to the asset.
eitf08-7
will be applied on a prospective basis to future transactions.
table of contents
3.
restructuring
global restructuring program
in october 2008, the company announced a global restructuring
program (the 2008 restructuring program) to reduce
its cost structure, increase efficiency, and enhance
competitiveness. as part of the 2008 restructuring program, the
company expects to eliminate approximately 7,200 positions
6,800 active employees and 400 vacancies
across all areas of the company worldwide by the end of 2011.
during 2008, the company eliminated approximately 1,750
positions in connection with this program, comprised of employee
separations and the elimination of contractors and vacant
positions. about 40% of the total reductions will occur in the
united states. as part of the 2008 restructuring program, the
company is streamlining management layers by reducing its total
number of senior and mid-level executives globally by
approximately 25%. the company, however, continues to hire new
employees as the business requires. merck is rolling out a new,
more customer-centric selling model designed to provide merck
with a meaningful competitive advantage and help physicians,
patients and payers improve patient outcomes. the company also
will make greater use of outside technology resources,
centralize common sales and marketing activities, and
consolidate and streamline its operations. mercks
manufacturing division will further focus its capabilities on
core products and outsource non-core manufacturing. also, merck
is expanding its access to worldwide external science through a
basic research global operating strategy, which is designed to
provide a sustainable pipeline and is focused on translating
basic research productivity into late-stage clinical success. to
increase efficiencies, basic research operations will
consolidate work in support of a given therapeutic area into one
of four locations. this will provide a more efficient use of
research facilities and result in the closure of three basic
research sites located in tsukuba, japan; pomezia, italy; and
seattle by the end of 2009.
separation costs are accounted for under fas112 and
fas146. in connection with the 2008 restructuring program,
separation costs under the companys existing severance
programs worldwide were accounted for under fas112 and
recorded in the third quarter of 2008 to the extent such costs
were probable and estimable. the company commenced accruing
costs related to one-time termination benefits offered to
employees under the 2008 restructuring program in the fourth
quarter of 2008 as that is when the necessary criteria under
fas146 were met. the company recorded pretax restructuring
costs of $921.3million related to the 2008 restructuring
program in 2008. the 2008 restructuring program is expected to
be completed by the end of 2011 with the total pretax costs
estimated to be $1.6billion to $2.0billion. the
company estimates that two-thirds of the cumulative pretax costs
will result in future cash outlays, primarily from employee
separation expense. approximately one-third of the cumulative
pretax costs are non-cash, relating primarily to the accelerated
depreciation of facilities to be closed or divested.
global restructuring program
in november 2005, the company announced a global restructuring
program (the 2005 restructuring program) designed to
reduce the companys cost structure, increase efficiency
and enhance competitiveness. as part of the 2005 restructuring
program, merck has sold or closed five manufacturing sites and
two preclinical sites and since inception eliminated 11,250
positions company-wide comprised of employee separations and the
elimination of contractors and vacant positions. the company has
also sold or closed certain other facilities and sold related
assets in connection with the 2005 restructuring program. since
inception through december31, 2008, the company has
recorded total pretax accumulated costs of $2.5billion
associated with the 2005 restructuring program, which is
substantially complete.
for segment reporting, restructuring charges are unallocated
expenses.
table of contents
the following table summarizes the charges related to
restructuring activities by type of cost:
separation
accelerated
year ended december31,
costs
depreciation
other
total
2008 restructuring program
materials and production
$
-
$
33.7
$
25.0
$
58.7
research and development
-
127.1
-
127.1
restructuring costs
684.9
-
50.6
735.5
684.9
160.8
75.6
921.3
2005 restructuring program
materials and production
-
55.0
9.5
64.5
research and development
-
0.9
0.4
1.3
restructuring costs
272.4
-
24.6
297.0
272.4
55.9
34.5
362.8
$
957.3
$
216.7
$
110.1
$
1,284.1
year ended december31, 2007
materials and production
$
-
$
460.6
$
22.5
$
483.1
research and development
-
-
(0.1
)
(0.1
)
restructuring costs
251.4
-
75.7
327.1
$
251.4
$
460.6
$
98.1
$
810.1
year ended december31, 2006
materials and production
$
-
$
707.3
$
29.1
$
736.4
research and development
-
56.5
0.3
56.8
restructuring costs
113.7
-
28.6
142.3
$
113.7
$
763.8
$
58.0
$
935.5
separation costs are associated with actual headcount
reductions, as well as those headcount reductions which were
probable and could be reasonably estimated. approximately 5,800
positions, 2,400 positions and 3,700 positions were eliminated
in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. of the positions
eliminated in 2008 approximately 1,750 related to the 2008
restructuring program and 4,050 related to the 2005
restructuring program. these position eliminations are comprised
of actual headcount reductions, and the elimination of
contractors and vacant positions.
accelerated depreciation costs primarily relate to manufacturing
and research facilities to be sold or closed as part of the
programs. all of the sites have and will continue to operate up
through the respective closure dates, and since future cash
flows were sufficient to recover the respective book values,
merck was required to accelerate depreciation of the site assets
rather than write them off immediately. the site assets include
manufacturing and research facilities and equipment.
other activity in 2008, 2007 and 2006 includes
$29.4million, $39.4million and $25.0million,
respectively, associated with certain fixed assets that were no
longer to be used in the business as a result of these
restructuring actions and were therefore written off.
additionally, other activity includes $68.4million,
$18.9million and $34.2million in 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively, related to curtailment, settlement and
termination charges on the companys pension and other
postretirement benefit plans (see note13). other activity
also includes shut-down costs, and in 2008 and 2006, pretax
gains of $61.5million and $40.7million,
respectively, resulting from the sales of facilities and related
assets in connection with restructuring activities.
table of contents
the following table summarizes the charges and spending relating
to restructuring activities:
separation
accelerated
costs
depreciation
other
total
2008 restructuring program
restructuring reserves as of january1, 2008
$
-
$
-
$
-
$
-
expense
684.9
160.8
75.6
921.3
(payments) receipts, net
(77.2
)
-
(37.3
)
(114.5
)
non-cash activity
-
(160.8
)
(38.3
)
(199.1
)
restructuring reserves as of december31,
2008(1)
$
607.7
$
-
$
-
$
607.7
2005 restructuring program
restructuring reserves as of january1, 2007
$
177.7
$
-
$
-
$
177.7
expense
251.4
460.6
98.1
810.1
(payments) receipts, net
(197.6
)
-
(59.9
)
(257.5
)
non-cash activity
-
(460.6
)
(38.2
)
(498.8
)
restructuring reserves as of december31, 2007
$
231.5
$
-
$
-
$
231.5
expense
$
272.4
$
55.9
$
34.5
$
362.8
(payments) receipts, net
(389.1
)
-
(23.2
)(2)
(412.3
)
non-cash activity
-
(55.9
)
(11.3
)
(67.2
)
restructuring reserves as of december31,
2008(1)
$
114.8
$
-
$
-
$
114.8
(1)
the cash outlays associated with the restructuring reserve
for the 2008 restructuring program are expected to be completed
by the end of 2011. the cash outlays associated with the
remaining restructuring reserve for the 2005 restructuring
program are expected to be largely completed by the end of
2009.
(2)
includes proceeds from the sales of facilities in connection
with the 2005 restructuring program.
4.
research
collaborations, acquisitions and license agreements
merck continues its strategy of establishing strong external
alliances to complement its substantial internal research
capabilities, including research collaborations, acquisitions,
licensing pre-clinical and clinical compounds and technology
transfers to drive both near- and long-term growth.
in february 2009, merck entered into a definitive agreement with
insmed inc. (insmed) to purchase insmeds
portfolio of follow-on biologic therapeutic candidates and its
commercial manufacturing facilities located in boulder,
colorado. under the terms of the agreement, merck will pay
insmed an aggregate of $130million in cash to acquire all
rights to the boulder facilities and insmeds pipeline of
follow-on biologic candidates. insmeds follow-on biologics
portfolio includes two clinical candidates: ins-19, an
investigational recombinant granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor (g-csf) that will be evaluated for its
ability to prevent infections in patients with cancer receiving
chemotherapy and ins-20, a pegylated recombinant g-csf designed
to allow for less frequent dosing. the agreement provides for
initial payments of up to $10million for ins-19 and
ins-20. merck will pay insmed the remaining balance upon closing
of the transaction, which is expected by the end of the first
quarter of 2009, without any further milestone or royalty
obligations.
in september 2008, merck and japan tobacco inc. (jt)
signed a worldwide licensing agreement to develop and
commercialize jtt-305, an investigational oral osteoanabolic
(bone growth stimulating) agent for the treatment of
osteoporosis, a disease which reduces bone density and strength
and results in an increased risk of bone fractures. jtt-305 is
an investigational oral calcium sensing receptor antagonist that
is currently being evaluated by jt in phaseii clinical
trials in japan for its effect on increasing bone density and is
in phase i clinical trials outside of japan. under the terms of
the agreement, merck gained worldwide rights, except for japan,
to develop and commercialize jtt-305 and certain other related
compounds. jt received an upfront payment of $85million,
which the company recorded as research and development expense,
and is eligible to receive additional cash payments
table of contents
upon achievement of certain milestones associated with the
development and approval of a drug candidate covered by this
agreement. jt will also be eligible to receive royalties from
sales of any drug candidates that receive marketing approval.
the license agreement between merck and jt will remain in effect
until expiration of all royalty and milestone obligations, and
may be terminated in the event of an uncured material breach by
the other party. the agreement may also be terminated by merck
without cause before initial commercial sale of jtt-305 by
giving six months prior notice to jt, and thereafter by giving
one year prior notice thereof to jt. the license agreement may
also be terminated immediately by merck if merck determines due
to safety
and/or
efficacy concerns based on available scientific evidence to
cease development of jtt-305
and/or to
withdraw jtt-305 from the market on a permanent basis.
in september 2008, the company terminated its collaboration with
foxhollow technologies, inc. (foxhollow) for
atherosclerotic plaque analysis. the collaboration was entered
into in 2005 and expanded in 2006 whereby merck acquired an
equity interest in foxhollow.
in december 2008, the company terminated its collaboration with
dynavax technologies corporation for the development of v270, an
investigational hepatitis b vaccine, which was entered into in
2007.
in september 2007, merck completed the acquisition of
novacardia, inc. (novacardia), a privately held
clinical-stage pharmaceutical company focused on cardiovascular
disease. this acquisition added rolofylline (mk-7418),
novacardias investigational phaseiii compound for
acute heart failure, to mercks pipeline. merck acquired
all of the outstanding equity of novacardia for a total purchase
price of $366.4million (including $16.4million of
cash and investments on hand at closing), which was paid through
the issuance of 7.3million shares of merck common stock to
the former novacardia shareholders based on mercks average
closing stock price for the five days prior to closing of the
acquisition. in connection with the acquisition, the company
recorded a charge of $325.1million for acquired research
associated with rolofylline as at the acquisition date,
technological feasibility had not been established and no
alternative future use existed. the charge, which is not
deductible for tax purposes, was recorded in research and
development expense and was determined based upon the present
value of expected future cash flows resulting from this
technology adjusted for the probability of its technical and
marketing success utilizing an income approach reflecting an
appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate of 22.0%. the ongoing
activity with respect to the future development of rolofylline
continues and the costs have not been and are not expected to be
material to the companys research and development
expenses. the remaining purchase price was allocated to cash and
investments of $16.4million, a deferred tax asset relating
to a net operating loss carryforward of $23.9million and
other net assets of $1.0million. because novacardia was a
development stage company that had not commenced its planned
principal operations, the transaction was accounted for as an
acquisition of assets rather than as a business combination and,
therefore, goodwill was not recorded. novacardias results
of operations have been included in the companys
consolidated financial results since the acquisition date.
also in 2007, merck and gtx, inc. (gtx) entered into
an agreement providing for a research and development and global
strategic collaboration for selective androgen receptor
modulators (sarms), a new class of drugs with the
potential to treat age-related muscle loss (sarcopenia) as well
as other musculoskeletal conditions. also in 2007, merck and
ariad pharmaceuticals, inc. (ariad) entered into a
global collaboration to jointly develop and commercialize
deforolimus (mk-8669), ariads novel mtor inhibitor, for
use in cancer. these collaborations generally continue in effect
until the expiration of all royalty and milestone payment
obligations. these collaborations may generally be terminated in
the event of insolvency or a material uncured breach by either
party. additionally, the collaboration agreement between merck
and gtx may be terminated by merck upon ninety days notice to
gtx at any time after december18, 2009. the collaboration
agreement between merck and ariad may be terminated by merck
upon the failure of mk-8669 to meet certain developmental and
safety requirements or in the event merck concludes it is not
advisable to continue the development of mk-8669 for use in a
cancer indication. in addition, merck may terminate the ariad
collaboration agreement on or after the third anniversary of the
effective date by providing at least 12months prior
written notice. upon termination of the ariad collaboration
agreement, depending upon the circumstances, the parties have
varying rights and obligations with respect to the continued
development and commercialization of mk-8669 and continuing
royalty obligations.
on december29, 2006, merck completed the acquisition of
sirna therapeutics, inc. (sirna) for $13 per share
in cash, for a total value of approximately $1.1billion,
which included the purchase of all outstanding sirna
table of contents
shares, warrants and stock options. the aggregate purchase price
of $1.1billion was paid on january3, 2007. sirna was
a publicly-held biotechnology company that is developing a new
class of medicines based on rna interference (rnai)
technology, which could significantly alter the treatment of
disease. rnai-based therapeutics selectively catalyze the
destruction of the rna transcribed from an individual gene. the
acquisition of sirna has increased mercks ability to use
rnai technology to turn off a targeted gene in a human cell,
potentially rendering inoperative a gene responsible for
triggering a specific disease. the transaction was accounted for
under the purchase method of accounting, in which the
assets acquired and the liabilities assumed from sirna at the
date of acquisition were recorded at their respective fair
values as of the acquisition date in the companys
consolidated financial statements. the determination of fair
values requires management to make significant estimates and
assumptions. the excess of the purchase price over the fair
value of the acquired net assets was recorded as goodwill of
$369.2million. the goodwill was fully allocated to the
pharmaceutical segment and is not deductible for tax purposes.
also, the company recorded a charge of $466.2million for
acquired research associated with sirnas compounds
currently under development, for which, at the acquisition date,
technological feasibility had not been established and no
alternative future use existed. the acquired research charge
related to the development of treatments for both the hepatitis
b and hepatitisc viruses, which were in preclinical
development, as well as licensing agreements held by sirna. the
charge, which is not deductible for tax purposes, was recorded
in research and development expense and was determined based
upon the present value of expected future cash flows of new
product candidates resulting from this technology adjusted for
the probability of its technical and marketing success utilizing
an income approach reflecting appropriate risk-adjusted discount
rates of 27.0% to 30.0%. the ongoing activity with respect to
each of these compounds under development continues and the
costs have not been and are not expected to be material to the
companys research and development expenses. the allocation
of the purchase price also resulted in the recognition of an
intangible asset of $357.8million and a related deferred
tax liability of $146.3million, as well as other assets
and liabilities - net of $89.3million. the intangible
asset relates to sirnas developed technology that can be
used immediately in the research and development process and has
alternative future uses. this intangible asset is being
amortized to research and development expense on a straight-line
basis over a seven year useful life. pro forma financial
information is not required because sirnas historical
financial results are not significant when compared with the
companys financial results. the transaction closed on
december29, 2006, and accordingly, sirnas operating
results were included in the companys results of
operations beginning january1, 2007.
in june 2006, the company acquired all of the outstanding equity
of glycofi, inc. (glycofi) for approximately
$373million in cash ($400million purchase price net
of $25million in shares already owned and net transaction
costs). glycofi was a privately-held biotechnology company in
the field of yeast glycoengineering, which is the addition of
specific carbohydrate modifications to the proteins in yeast,
and optimization of biologic drug molecules. glycofis
technology platform is used in the development of glycoproteins,
as well as the optimization of a glycoprotein target. in
connection with the acquisition, the company recorded a charge
of $296.3million for acquired research associated with
glycofis technology platform to be used in the research
and development process, for which, at the acquisition date,
technological feasibility had not been established and no
alternative future use existed. this charge is not deductible
for tax purposes. the technology is currently being utilized in
mercks pipeline of biologics. the charge was recorded in
research and development expense and was determined based upon
the present value of expected future cash flows of new product
candidates resulting from this technology adjusted for the
probability of its technical and marketing success utilizing an
income approach reflecting the appropriate risk-adjusted
discount rate. the company also recorded a $99.4million
intangible asset ($57.6million net of deferred taxes)
related to glycofis developed technology that can be used
immediately in the research and development process and has
alternative future uses. this intangible asset is being
amortized to research and development expense on a straight-line
basis over a five year useful life. the remaining net assets
acquired in this transaction were not material. because glycofi
was a development stage company that had not commenced its
planned principal operations, the transaction was accounted for
as an acquisition of assets rather than as a business
combination and, therefore, goodwill was not recorded.
glycofis results of operations have been included with the
companys consolidated financial results since the
acquisition date.
in may 2006, the company acquired all of the equity of abmaxis,
inc. (abmaxis) for approximately $80million in
cash. abmaxis was a privately-held biopharmaceutical company
dedicated to the discovery and optimization of monoclonal
antibody (mab) products for human therapeutics and
diagnostics. abmaxis developed and validated a breakthrough
antibody engineering technology platform, abmaxis in-silico
table of contents
immunization, which has alternative future uses to the company
with no significant technological or engineering risks at the
date of acquisition. in connection with the acquisition, the
company allocated substantially all of the purchase price to
abmaxis technology platform and recorded an intangible
asset of $135.3million ($78.5million net of deferred
taxes). this intangible asset is being amortized to research and
development expense on a straight-line basis over a five year
useful life. the remaining net assets acquired in this
transaction were not material. because abmaxis was a development
stage company that had not commenced its planned principal
operations, the transaction was accounted for as an acquisition
of assets rather than as a business combination and, therefore,
goodwill was not recorded. abmaxis results of operations
have been included with the companys consolidated
financial results since the acquisition date.
also in 2006, merck and idera pharmaceuticals
(idera) formed a broad collaboration to research,
develop and commercialize ideras toll-like receptor
agonists for use in combination with mercks therapeutic
and prophylactic vaccines under development for oncology,
infectious diseases and alzheimers disease. additionally
in 2006, merck and ambrilia biopharma inc.
(ambrilia), a biopharmaceutical company developing
innovative therapeutics in the fields of cancer and infectious
diseases, announced they entered into an exclusive licensing
agreement granting merck the worldwide rights to ambrilias
hiv/aids protease inhibitor program. also in 2006, neuromed
pharmaceuticals ltd. and merck signed a research collaboration
and license agreement to research, develop and commercialize
novel compounds for the treatment of pain and other neurological
disorders.
5.
financial
instruments and fair value
foreign
currency risk management
while the u.s.dollar is the functional currency of the
companys foreign subsidiaries, a significant portion of
the companys revenues are denominated in foreign
currencies. merck relies on sustained cash flows generated from
foreign sources to support its long-term commitment to
u.s.dollar-based research and development. to the extent
the dollar value of cash flows is diminished as a result of a
strengthening dollar, the companys ability to fund
research and other dollar-based strategic initiatives at a
consistent level may be impaired. the company has established
revenue hedging and balance sheet risk management programs to
protect against volatility of future foreign currency cash flows
and changes in fair value caused by volatility in foreign
exchange rates.
the objective of the revenue hedging program is to reduce the
potential for longer-term unfavorable changes in foreign
exchange to decrease the u.s.dollar value of future cash
flows derived from foreign currency denominated sales, primarily
the euro and japanese yen. to achieve this objective, the
company will partially hedge anticipated third-party sales that
are expected to occur over its planning cycle, typically no more
than three years into the future. the company will layer in
hedges over time, increasing the portion of sales hedged as it
gets closer to the expected date of the transaction, such that
it is probable that the hedged transaction will occur. the
portion of sales hedged is based on assessments of cost-benefit
profiles that consider natural offsetting exposures, revenue and
exchange rate volatilities and correlations, and the cost of
hedging instruments. the hedged anticipated sales are a
specified component of a portfolio of similarly denominated
foreign currency-based sales transactions, each of which
responds to the hedged risk in the same manner. merck manages
its anticipated transaction exposure principally with purchased
local currency put options, which provide the company with a
right, but not an obligation, to sell foreign currencies in the
future at a predetermined price. if the u.s.dollar
strengthens relative to the currency of the hedged anticipated
sales, total changes in the options cash flows offset the
decline in the expected future u.s.dollar cash flows of
the hedged foreign currency sales. conversely, if the
u.s.dollar weakens, the options value reduces to
zero, but the company benefits from the increase in the value of
the anticipated foreign currency cash flows.
the designated hedge relationship is based on total changes in
the options cash flows. accordingly, the entire fair value
change in the options is deferred in aoci and reclassified into
sales when the hedged anticipated revenue is recognized. the
hedge relationship is highly effective and hedge ineffectiveness
is de minimis. the fair values of purchased currency
options are reported in accounts receivable or other assets. the
cash flows from these contracts are reported as operating
activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
table of contents
the primary objective of the balance sheet risk management
program is to protect the u.s.dollar value of foreign
currency denominated net monetary assets from the effects of
volatility in foreign exchange that might occur prior to their
conversion to u.s.dollars. merck principally utilizes
forward exchange contracts, which enable the company to buy and
sell foreign currencies in the future at fixed exchange rates
and economically offset the consequences of changes in foreign
exchange on the amount of u.s.dollar cash flows derived
from the net assets. merck routinely enters into contracts to
offset the effects of exchange on exposures denominated in
developed country currencies, primarily the euro and japanese
yen. for exposures in developing country currencies, the company
will enter into forward contracts to partially offset the
effects of exchange on exposures when it is deemed economical to
do so based on a cost-benefit analysis that considers the
magnitude of the exposure, the volatility of the exchange rate
and the cost of the hedging instrument. the company will also
minimize the effect of exchange on monetary assets and
liabilities by managing operating activities and net asset
positions at the local level.
foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities are
remeasured at spot rates in effect on the balance sheet date
with the effects of changes in spot rates reported in other
(income) expense, net. the forward contracts are not designated
as hedges and are marked to market through other (income)
expense, net. accordingly, fair value changes in the forward
contracts help mitigate the changes in the value of the
remeasured assets and liabilities attributable to changes in
foreign currency exchange rates, except to the extent of the
spot-forward differences. these differences are not significant
due to the short-term nature of the contracts, which typically
have average maturities at inception of less than one year.
the company uses forward contracts to hedge the changes in fair
value of certain foreign currency denominated
available-for-sale
securities attributable to fluctuations in foreign currency
exchange rates. changes in the fair value of the hedged
securities due to fluctuations in spot rates are offset in other
(income) expense, net, by the fair value changes in the forward
contracts attributable to spot rate fluctuations. hedge
ineffectiveness was not material during 2008, 2007 or 2006.
changes in the contracts fair value due to spot-forward
differences are excluded from the designated hedge relationship
and recognized in other (income) expense, net. these amounts
were not significant for the years ended december31, 2008,
2007 or 2006.
the fair values of forward exchange contracts are reported in
the following four balance sheet line items: accounts receivable
(current portion of gain position), other assets (non-current
portion of gain position), accrued and other current liabilities
(current portion of loss position), or deferred income taxes and
noncurrent liabilities (non-current portion of loss position).
the cash flows from these contracts are reported as operating
activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
interest
rate risk management
the company may use interest rate swap contracts on certain
investing and borrowing transactions to manage its net exposure
to interest rate changes and to reduce its overall cost of
borrowing. the company does not use leveraged swaps and, in
general, does not leverage any of its investment activities that
would put principal capital at risk.
at december31, 2008, the company was a party to two
pay-floating, receive-fixed interest rate swap contracts
maturing in 2011 with notional amounts of $125million each
designated as fair value hedges of fixed-rate notes in which the
notional amounts match the amount of the hedged fixed-rate
notes. the swaps effectively convert the fixed-rate obligations
to floating-rate instruments. the fair value changes in the
notes are offset in interest expense by the fair value changes
in the swap contracts. the fair values of these contracts are
reported in accounts receivable, other assets, accrued and other
current liabilities, or deferred income taxes and noncurrent
liabilities. during 2008, the company terminated four interest
rate swap contracts with notional amounts of $250million
each, and terminated one interest rate swap contract with a
notional amount of $500million. these swaps had
effectively converted its $1.0billion, 4.75% fixed-rate
notes due 2015 and its $500million, 4.375% fixed-rate
notes due 2013 to variable rate debt. as a result of the swap
terminations, the company received $128.3million in cash,
excluding accrued interest which was not material. the
corresponding gains related to the basis adjustment of the debt
associated with the terminated swap contracts were deferred and
are being amortized as a reduction of interest expense over the
remaining term of the notes. the cash flows from these contracts
are reported as operating activities in the consolidated
statement of cash flows.
table of contents
fair
value measurements
on january1, 2008, the company adopted fas157, which
clarifies the definition of fair value, establishes a framework
for measuring fair value, and expands the disclosures on fair
value measurements. in february 2008, the fasb issued
fsp157-2
that deferred the effective date of fas157 for one year
for nonfinancial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value
on a non-recurring basis. in october 2008, the fasb issued
fsp157-3,
which clarifies the application of fas157 in a market that
is not active. fas157 defines fair value as the exchange
price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a
liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous
market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants on the measurement date.
fas157 also establishes a fair value hierarchy which
requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and
minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair
value. fas157 describes three levels of inputs that may be
used to measure fair value:
level1  quoted prices in active markets for
identical assets or liabilities. the companys level1
assets include equity securities that are traded in an active
exchange market.
level2  observable inputs other than
level1 prices, such as quoted prices for similar assets or
liabilities; or other inputs that are observable or can be
corroborated by observable market data for substantially the
full term of the assets or liabilities. the companys
level2 assets and liabilities primarily include debt
securities with quoted prices that are traded less frequently
than exchange-traded instruments, corporate notes and bonds,
u.s.and foreign government and agency securities, certain
mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities, municipal
securities, and derivative contracts whose values are determined
using pricing models with inputs that are observable in the
market or can be derived principally from or corroborated by
observable market data.
level3  unobservable inputs that are
supported by little or no market activity and that are financial
instruments whose values are determined using pricing models,
discounted cash flow methodologies, or similar techniques, as
well as instruments for which the determination of fair value
requires significant judgment or estimation. the companys
level3 assets mainly include mortgage-backed and
asset-backed securities, as well as certain corporate notes and
bonds with limited market activity. at december31, 2008,
$96.6million, or approximately 0.9%, of the companys
investment securities were categorized as level3 fair
value assets (all of which were pledged under certain collateral
arrangements (see note15)). all of the assets classified
as level3 at december31, 2008 were acquired when the
company elected to be
redeemed-in-kind
from a short-term fixed income fund that restricted cash
redemptions as described below.
if the inputs used to measure the financial assets and
liabilities fall within more than one level described above, the
categorization is based on the lowest level input that is
significant to the fair value measurement of the instrument.
table of contents
financial
assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring
basis
financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a
recurring basis are summarized below:
fair value measurements using
quoted prices
significant
in active
other
significant
markets for
observable
unobservable
carrying
identical assets
inputs
inputs
carrying
fair
($ in millions)
value
(level 1)
(level 2)
(level 3)
total
value
value
assets
investments
corporate notes and bonds
$
3,093.2
$
-
$
3,093.2
$
-
$
3,093.2
$
5,465.0
$
5,465.0
u.s. government and agency securities
2,885.7
-
2,885.7
-
2,885.7
1,748.4
1,748.4
mortgage-backed
securities(1)
723.9
-
723.9
-
723.9
760.0
760.0
municipal securities
-
-
-
-
-
744.6
744.6
foreign government bonds
319.4
-
319.4
-
319.4
269.9
269.9
asset-backed
securities(1)
306.7
-
306.7
-
306.7
313.2
313.2
equity securities
144.7
71.1
73.6
-
144.7
150.8
150.8
commercial paper
133.0
-
133.0
-
133.0
258.1
258.1
other debt securities
2.8
-
2.8
-
2.8
343.9
343.9
total investments
$
7,609.4
$
71.1
$
7,538.3
$
-
$
7,609.4
$
10,053.9
$
10,053.9
other
assets(2)
$
2,974.5
$
-
$
2,877.9
$
96.6
$
2,974.5
$
958.6
$
958.6
derivative
assets(3)
purchased currency options
$
451.3
$
-
$
451.3
$
-
$
451.3
$
59.9
$
59.9
forward exchange contracts
73.2
-
73.2
-
73.2
62.1
62.1
interest rate swaps
23.9
-
23.9
-
23.9
108.0
108.0
total deriviative assets
$
548.4
$
-
$
548.4
$
-
$
548.4
$
230.0
$
230.0
liabilities
derivative
liabilities(3)
written currency options
$
1.9
$
-
$
1.9
$
-
$
1.9
$
8.8
$
8.8
forward exchange contracts
273.1
-
273.1
-
273.1
35.8
35.8
total derivative liabilities
$
275.0
$
-
$
275.0
$
-
$
275.0
$
44.6
$
44.6
(1)
mortgage-backed securities represent aaa rated securities
issued or unconditionally guaranteed as to payment of principal
and interest by u.s. government agencies. substantially all of
the asset-backed securities are highly-rated
(standard& poors rating of aaa and moodys
investors service rating of aaa), secured primarily by credit
card, auto loan, and home equity receivables, with
weighted-average lives of primarily 5years or less.
(2)
other assets represent a portion of the pledged collateral
discussed below and in note15. level2 other assets
are comprised of $987.4million of corporate notes and
bonds, $792.5million of municipal securities,
$357.3million of commercial paper, $276.0million of
mortgage-backed securities, $240.1million of u.s.
government and agency securities and $224.6million of
asset-backed securities.
(3)
the fair value determination of derivatives includes an
assessment of the credit risk of counterparties to the
derivatives and the companys own credit risk, the effects
of which were not significant.
level3
valuation techniques
financial assets are considered level3 when their fair
values are determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow
methodologies or similar techniques and at least one significant
model assumption or input is unobservable. level3
financial assets also include certain investment securities for
which there is limited market activity such that the
determination of fair value requires significant judgment or
estimation. the companys level3 investment
securities at december31, 2008, primarily include
mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities, as well as certain
corporate notes and bonds for which there was a decrease in the
observability of market pricing for these investments. these
securities were valued primarily using pricing models for which
management understands the methodologies. these models
incorporate transaction details such as contractual terms,
maturity, timing and amount of future cash inflows, as well as
assumptions about liquidity and credit valuation adjustments of
marketplace participants at december31, 2008.
table of contents
the table below provides a summary of the changes in fair value,
including net transfers in
and/or out,
of all financial assets measured at fair value on a recurring
basis using significant unobservable inputs
(level3)during 2008:
total realized and
losses
unrealized losses
recorded in
net
purchases,
included in:
earnings for
beginning
transfers
sales,
compre-
ending
level 3 assets
balance
(out) of
settlements,
hensive
balance
still held at
($ in millions)
january1
level
3(1)
net
earnings(2)
income
december31
december31
other assets
$
958.6
$
(684.5
)
$
(132.8
)
$
(43.6
)
$
(1.1
)
$
96.6
$
(44.3
)
other debt securities
314.5
(314.5
)
-
-
-
-
-
total
$
1,273.1
$
(999.0
)
$
(132.8
)
$
(43.6
)
$
(1.1
)
$
96.6
$
(44.3
)
(1)
transfers in and out of level3 are deemed to occur at
the beginning of the quarter in which the transaction takes
place.
(2)
amounts are recorded in other (income) expense, net, in the
consolidated statement of income.
on january1, 2008, the company had $1,273.1million
invested in a short-term fixed income fund (the
fund). due to market liquidity conditions, cash
redemptions from the fund were restricted. as a result of this
restriction on cash redemptions, the company did not consider
the fund to be traded in an active market with observable
pricing on january1, 2008 and these amounts were
categorized as level3. on january7, 2008, the
company elected to be
redeemed-in-kind
from the fund and received its share of the underlying
securities of the fund. as a result, $1,099.7million of
the underlying securities were transferred out of level3
as it was determined that these securities had observable
markets. on december31, 2008, $96.6million of the
investment securities associated with the
redemption-in-kind
were classified in level3 as the securities contained at
least one significant input which was unobservable. these
securities account for the entire balance of the companys
level3 assets at december31, 2008.
financial
instruments not measured at fair value
some of the companys financial instruments are not
measured at fair value on a recurring basis but are recorded at
amounts that approximate fair value due to their liquid or
short-term nature, such as cash and cash equivalents,
receivables and payables.
the estimated fair value of the companys loans payable and
long-term debt (including current portion) at december31,
2008 was $6,294.8million compared with a carrying value of
$6,240.4million and at december31, 2007 estimated
fair value was $5,815.1million compared with a carrying
amount of $5,739.4million. fair value was estimated using
quoted dealer prices.
a summary of the december 31gross unrealized gains and
losses on the companys available-for-sale investments,
including those pledged as collateral, recorded in aoci
is as follows:
gross unrealized
gross unrealized
gains(1)
losses(1)
gains
losses
corporate notes and bonds
$
31.6
$
(65.3
)
$
28.4
$
(20.7
)
u.s. government and agency securities
67.4
(3.2
)
32.2
(0.1
)
mortgage-backed securities
12.5
(5.0
)
8.9
-
municipal securities
28.4
(0.3
)
13.3
(0.2
)
asset-backed securities
0.6
(20.7
)
1.8
(1.4
)
foreign government bonds
13.5
-
0.7
(0.6
)
other debt securities
1.5
(3.4
)
14.5
-
equity securities
17.7
(3.1
)
97.0
(5.5
)
$
173.2
$
(101.0
)
$
196.8
$
(28.5
)
(1)
at december31, 2008, gross unrealized gains and gross
unrealized losses related to amounts pledged as collateral (see
below and note15)were $36.1million and
$(30.3)million, respectively.
table of contents
the amount of gross unrealized losses at december31, 2008
that were in a continuous loss position for more than
12months was de minimis. available-for-sale debt
securities maturing within one year totaled $1.1billion at
december31, 2008. of the remaining debt securities,
$5.6billion mature within five years.
letter of
credit
in august 2008, the company executed a $4.1billion letter
of credit agreement with a financial institution, which
satisfied certain conditions set forth in the u.s.vioxx
settlement agreement (see note10). the company pledged
collateral to the financial institution of approximately
$5.1billion pursuant to the terms of the letter of credit
agreement. although the amount of assets pledged as collateral
is set by the letter of credit agreement and such assets are
held in custody by a third party, the assets are managed by the
company. the company considers the assets pledged under the
letter of credit agreement to be restricted. as a result,
$2.1billion and $1.4billion of cash and investments,
respectively, were classified as restricted current assets and
$1.6billion of investments were classified as restricted
non-current assets. the letter of credit amount and required
collateral balances will decline as payments (after the first
$750million) under the settlement agreement are made. as
of december31, 2008, $3.8billion was recorded within
deferred income taxes and other current assets and
$1.3billion was classified as other assets.
concentrations
of credit risk
on an ongoing basis, the company monitors concentrations of
credit risk associated with corporate issuers of securities and
financial institutions with which it conducts business. credit
exposure limits are established to limit a concentration with
any single issuer or institution. cash and investments are
placed in instruments that meet high credit quality standards,
as specified in the companys investment policy guidelines.
the companys four largest u.s.customers, mckesson
corporation, cardinal health, inc., amerisourcebergen
corporation and medco health solutions, inc., represented, in
aggregate, approximately one-seventh of accounts receivable at
december31, 2008. the company monitors the
creditworthiness of its customers to which it grants credit
terms in the normal course of business. bad debts have been
minimal. the company does not normally require collateral or
other security to support credit sales.
6.
inventories
inventories at december 31 consisted of:
finished goods
$
432.6
$
382.9
raw materials and work in process
2,147.1
1,732.2
supplies
98.6
111.1
total (approximates current cost)
2,678.3
2,226.2
reduction to lifo costs
-
-
$
2,678.3
$
2,226.2
recognized as:
inventories
$
2,283.3
$
1,881.0
other assets
395.0
345.2
inventories valued under the lifo method comprised approximately
56% and 57% of inventories at december31, 2008 and 2007,
respectively. amounts recognized as other assets are comprised
entirely of raw materials and work in process inventories, the
majority of which are noncurrent vaccine inventories.
table of contents
7.
other
intangibles
other intangibles at december 31 consisted of:
patents and product rights
$
1,656.4
$
1,656.3
other
779.2
781.0
total acquired cost
2,435.6
2,437.3
patents and product rights
$
1,528.5
$
1,449.4
other
381.7
274.7
total accumulated amortization
1,910.2
1,724.1
$
525.4
$
713.2
other reflects intangibles, primarily technology rights,
recorded in connection with the acquisitions of sirna, glycofi
and abmaxis (see note4). aggregate amortization expense
was $186.1million in 2008, $235.8million in 2007 and
$170.3million in 2006. the estimated aggregate
amortization expense for each of the next five years is as
follows: 2009, $133.5million; 2010, $130.8million;
2011, $104.3million; 2012, $85.3million; 2013,
$62.9million.
8.
joint
ventures and other equity method affiliates
equity income from affiliates reflects the performance of the
companys joint ventures and other equity method affiliates
and was comprised of the following:
years ended december
merck/schering-plough
$
1,536.3
$
1,830.8
$
1,218.6
astrazeneca lp
598.4
820.1
783.7
other(1)
425.9
325.6
292.1
$
2,560.6
$
2,976.5
$
2,294.4
(1)
primarily reflects results from merial limited, sanofi
pasteur msd and johnson& johnsonmerck consumer
pharmaceuticals company.
merck/schering-plough
in 2000, the company and schering-plough corporation
(schering-plough) (collectively the
partners) entered into agreements to create separate
equally-owned partnerships to develop and market in the united
states new prescription medicines in the cholesterol-management
and respiratory therapeutic areas. these agreements generally
provide for equal sharing of development costs and for
co-promotion of approved products by each company. in 2001, the
cholesterol-management partnership agreements were expanded to
include all the countries of the world, excluding japan. in
2002, ezetimibe, the first in a new class of
cholesterol-lowering agents, was launched in the united states
as zetia (marketed as ezetrol outside the united
states). in 2004, a combination product containing the active
ingredients of both zetia and zocor, was approved
in the united states as vytorin (marketed as inegy
outside of the united states).
the cholesterol agreements provide for the sharing of operating
income generated by the merck/schering-plough cholesterol
partnership (the msp partnership) based upon
percentages that vary by product, sales level and country. in
the u.s.market, the partners share profits on zetia
and vytorin sales equally, with the exception of the
first $300million of annual zetia sales on which
schering-plough receives a greater share of profits. operating
income includes expenses that the partners have contractually
agreed to share, such as a portion of manufacturing costs,
specifically identified promotion costs (including
direct-to-consumer advertising and direct and identifiable
out-of-pocket promotion) and other agreed upon costs for
specific services such as on-going clinical research, market
support, market research, market expansion, as well as a
specialty sales force and physician education programs. expenses
incurred in support of the msp partnership but not shared
between the partners, such as marketing and administrative
expenses (including certain sales force costs), as well as
certain manufacturing costs, are not included in equity income
from affiliates. however, these costs are reflected in the
table of contents
overall results of the company. certain research and development
expenses are generally shared equally by the partners, after
adjusting for earned milestones.
see note10 for information with respect to litigation
involving the msp partnership and the partners related to the
sale and promotion of zetia and vytorin.
the respiratory therapeutic agreements provided for the joint
development and marketing in the united states by the partners
of a once-daily, fixed-combination tablet containing the active
ingredients montelukast sodium and loratadine. montelukast
sodium, a leukotriene receptor antagonist, is sold by merck as
singulair and loratadine, an antihistamine, is sold by
schering-plough as claritin, both of which are indicated for the
relief of symptoms of allergic rhinitis. during 2008, the
partners received a not-approvable letter from the
u.s.food and drug administration (fda) for the
proposed fixed combination of loratadine/montelukast and
subsequently announced the withdrawal of the new drug
application for the combination tablet. the companies also
terminated the respiratory joint venture. this action had no
impact on the business of the cholesterol joint venture. as a
result of the termination of the respiratory joint venture, the
company was obligated to schering-plough in the amount of
$105million as specified in the joint venture agreements.
this resulted in a charge of $43million during the second
quarter of 2008 which was included in equity income from
affiliates. the remaining amount is being amortized over the
remaining patent life of zetia through 2016.
summarized financial information for the msp partnership is as
follows:
years ended december
sales
$
4,561.1
$
5,186.2
$
3,884.1
vytorin
2,360.0
2,779.1
1,955.3
zetia
2,201.1
2,407.1
1,928.8
materials and production costs
176.3
216.0
179.0
other expense, net
1,230.1
1,307.2
1,217.1
income before taxes
$
3,154.7
$
3,663.0
$
2,488.0
mercks share of income before
taxes(1)
$
1,489.5
$
1,832.5
$
1,214.5
december 31
total
assets(2)
$
608.0
$1,014.0
total
liabilities(2)
488.0
656.0
(1)
mercks share of the msp partnerships income
before taxes differs from the equity income recognized from the
msp partnership primarily due to the timing of recognition of
certain transactions between the company and the msp
partnership, including the $105million milestone payment
discussed above and other milestone payments.
(2)
amounts are comprised almost entirely of current balances.
astrazeneca
lp
in 1982, merck entered into an agreement with astra ab
(astra) to develop and market astras products
under a royalty-bearing license. in 1993, the companys
total sales of astra products reached a level that triggered the
first step in the establishment of a joint venture business
carried on by astra merck inc. (ami), in which merck
and astra each owned a 50% share. this joint venture, formed in
1994, developed and marketed most of astras new
prescription medicines in the united states including
prilosec, the first of a class of medications known as
proton pump inhibitors, which slows the production of acid from
the cells of the stomach lining.
in 1998, merck and astra completed the restructuring of the
ownership and operations of the joint venture whereby the
company acquired astras interest in ami, renamed kbi inc.
(kbi), and contributed kbis operating assets
to a new u.s.limited partnership, astra pharmaceuticals
l.p. (the partnership), in exchange for a 1% limited
partner interest. astra contributed the net assets of its wholly
owned subsidiary, astra usa, inc., to the partnership in
exchange for a 99% general partner interest. the partnership,
renamed astrazeneca lp (azlp) upon astras 1999
merger with zeneca group plc (the astrazeneca
merger), became the exclusive distributor of the products
for which kbi retained rights.
table of contents
while maintaining a 1% limited partner interest in azlp, merck
has consent and protective rights intended to preserve its
business and economic interests, including restrictions on the
power of the general partner to make certain distributions or
dispositions. furthermore, in limited events of default,
additional rights will be granted to the company, including
powers to direct the actions of, or remove and replace, the
partnerships chief executive officer and chief financial
officer. merck earns ongoing revenue based on sales of current
and future kbi products and such revenue was $1.6billion,
$1.7billion and $1.8billion in 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively, primarily relating to sales of nexium, as
well as prilosec. in addition, merck earns certain
partnership returns which are recorded in equity income from
affiliates as reflected in the table above. such returns include
a priority return provided for in the partnership agreement,
variable returns based, in part, upon sales of certain former
astra usa, inc. products, and a preferential return representing
mercks share of undistributed azlp gaap earnings. the
astrazeneca merger triggered a partial redemption in march 2008
of mercks interest in certain azlp product rights. upon
this redemption, merck received $4.3billion from azlp.
this amount was based primarily on a multiple of mercks
average annual variable returns derived from sales of the former
astra usa, inc. products for the three years prior to the
redemption (the limited partner share of agreed
value). merck recorded a $1.5billion pretax gain on
the partial redemption in 2008. the partial redemption of
mercks interest in the product rights did not result in a
change in mercks 1% limited partner interest.
in conjunction with the 1998 restructuring, astra purchased an
option (the asset option) for a payment of
$443.0million, which was recorded as deferred income, to
buy mercks interest in the kbi products, excluding the
gastrointestinal medicines nexium and prilosec
(the non-ppi products). the asset option is
exercisable in the first half of 2010 at an exercise price equal
to the net present value as of march31, 2008 of projected
future pretax revenue to be received by the company from the
non-ppi products (the appraised value). merck also
had the right to require astra to purchase such interest in 2008
at the appraised value. in february 2008, the company advised
azlp that it would not exercise the asset option, thus the
$443.0million remains deferred. in addition, in 1998 the
company granted astra an option (the shares option)
to buy mercks common stock interest in kbi, and,
therefore, mercks interest in nexium and
prilosec, exercisable two years after astras
exercise of the asset option. astra can also exercise the shares
option in 2017 or if combined annual sales of the two products
fall below a minimum amount provided, in each case, only so long
as astrazenecas asset option has been exercised in 2010.
the exercise price for the shares option is based on the net
present value of estimated future net sales of nexium and
prilosec as determined at the time of exercise, subject
to certain
true-up
mechanisms.
the astrazeneca merger constituted a trigger event under the kbi
restructuring agreements. as a result of the merger, in exchange
for mercks relinquishment of rights to future astra
products with no existing or pending u.s.patents at the
time of the merger, astra paid $967.4million (the
advance payment). the advance payment was deferred
as it remained subject to a
true-up
calculation (the
true-up
amount) that was directly dependent on the fair market
value in march 2008 of the astra product rights retained by the
company. the calculated
true-up
amount of $243.7million was returned to azlp in march 2008
and merck recognized a pretax gain of $723.7million
related to the residual advance payment balance.
under the provisions of the kbi restructuring agreements,
because a trigger event has occurred, the sum of the limited
partner share of agreed value, the appraised value and the
true-up
amount was guaranteed to be a minimum of $4.7billion.
distribution of the limited partner share of agreed value less
payment of the
true-up
amount resulted in cash receipts to merck of $4.0billion
and an aggregate pretax gain of $2.2billion which is
included in other (income) expense, net. astrazenecas
purchase of mercks interest in the non-ppi products is
contingent upon the exercise of the asset option by astrazeneca
in 2010 and, therefore, payment of the appraised value may or
may not occur. also, in march 2008, the $1.38billion
outstanding loan from astra plus interest through the redemption
date was settled. as a result of these transactions, the company
received net proceeds from azlp of $2.6billion.
table of contents
summarized financial information for azlp is as follows:
years ended december
sales
$
5,450.4
$
6,345.4
$
6,753.0
materials and production costs
2,682.4
3,364.0
3,940.4
other expense, net
1,408.1
1,090.1
1,131.6
income before taxes
1,359.9
1,891.3
1,681.0
december 31
current assets
$
2,023.9
$
5,360.7
noncurrent assets
359.0
437.0
total liabilities (all current)
3,054.4
2,231.1
in connection with the 1998 restructuring of ami, the company
assumed a $2.4billion par value preferred stock obligation
with a dividend rate of 5% per annum, which is carried by kbi
and included in minority interests. while a small portion of the
preferred stock carried by kbi is convertible into kbi common
shares, none of the preferred securities are convertible into
the companys common shares and, therefore, are not
included as common shares issuable for purposes of computing
earnings per common share assuming dilution (see note16).
merial
limited
in 1997, merck and rhne-poulenc s.a. (now sanofi-aventis
s.a.) combined their animal health businesses to
formmerial limited (merial), a fully
integrated animal health company, which is a stand-alone joint
venture, 50% owned by each party. merial provides a
comprehensive range of pharmaceuticals and vaccines to enhance
the health, well-being and performance of a wide range of animal
species. merial sales were $2.6billion for 2008,
$2.4billion for 2007 and $2.2billion for 2006.
sanofi
pasteur msd
in 1994, merck and pasteur mrieux connaught (now sanofi
pasteur s.a.) established an equally-owned joint venture to
market vaccines in europe and to collaborate in the development
of combination vaccines for distribution in europe. joint
venture vaccine sales were $1.9billion for 2008,
$1.4billion for 2007 and $913.9million for 2006.
johnson&
johnsonmerck consumer pharmaceuticals company
in 1989, merck formed a joint venture with johnson&
johnson to develop and market a broad range of nonprescription
medicines for u.s.consumers. this 50% owned venture was
subsequently expanded into canada. significant joint venture
products are pepcid ac, an over-the-counter form of the
companys ulcer medication pepcid, as well as
pepcid complete, an over-the-counter product which
combines the companys ulcer medication with antacids.
sales of products marketed by the joint venture were
$212.1million for 2008, $219.7million for 2007 and
$252.6million for 2006.
investments in affiliates accounted for using the equity method,
including the above joint ventures, totaled $1.4billion at
december31, 2008 and $3.9billion at
december31, 2007. these amounts are reported in other
assets. amounts due from the above joint ventures included in
accounts receivable were $623.4million at
december31, 2008 and $637.4million at
december31, 2007.
table of contents
summarized information for those affiliates (excluding the msp
partnership and azlp disclosed separately above) is as follows:
years ended december
sales
$
4,860.4
$
4,218.6
$
3,640.7
materials and production costs
1,553.6
1,346.9
1,189.3
other expense, net
2,297.9
1,995.2
1,693.3
income before taxes
1,008.9
876.5
758.1
december 31
current assets
$
1,935.8
$2,113.2
noncurrent assets
1,174.4
1,139.5
current liabilities
1,152.6
1,295.8
noncurrent liabilities
266.5
280.8
9.
loans
payable, long-term debt and other commitments
loans payable at december31, 2008 consisted primarily of
$1.9billion of commercial paper borrowings. during 2008,
the company settled the $1.38billion astra note due in
2008 which was included in loans payable and current portion of
long-term debt at december31, 2007 (see note8).
loans payable at december31, 2008 and 2007 also included
$322.2million and $331.7million, respectively, of
long-dated notes that are subject to repayment at the option of
the holders on an annual basis. in december 2006, a foreign
subsidiary of the company entered into an
18-month,
$100million line of credit with a financial institution.
in june 2008, the line of credit was reduced to $70million
and the maturity was extended to june 2010. at december31,
2008 and 2007, borrowings under the line of credit were
$60million and $100million, respectively, and are
included in loans payable. the weighted average interest rate
for these borrowings included in loans payable was 1.4% and 5.8%
at december31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
long-term debt at december 31 consisted of:
4.75%notes due 2015
$
1,078.3
$
1,068.1
4.375%notes due 2013
530.0
524.4
6.4%debentures due 2028
499.3
499.3
5.75%notes due 2036
497.8
497.7
5.95%debentures due 2028
497.2
497.1
5.125%notes due 2011
273.7
258.8
6.3%debentures due 2026
248.0
247.9
other
319.0
322.5
$
3,943.3
$
3,915.8
the company was a party to interest rate swap contracts which
effectively convert the 5.125% fixed-rate notes to floating-rate
instruments (see note5).
other (as presented in the table above) at december31,
2008 and 2007 consisted primarily of $292.7million of
borrowings at variable rates averaging 1.1% and 4.4%,
respectively. of these borrowings, $106.0million is
subject to repayment at the option of the holders beginning in
2010 and $158.7million is subject to repayment at the
option of the holders beginning in 2011. in both years, other
also included foreign borrowings at varying rates up to 7.5%.
the aggregate maturities of long-term debt for each of the next
five years are as follows: 2009, $7.4million; 2010,
$6.1million; 2011, $282.7million; 2012,
$4.1million; 2013, $537.0million.
table of contents
in april 2008, the company extended the maturity date of its
$1.5billion,
5-year
revolving credit facility from april 2012 to april 2013. the
facility provides backup liquidity for the companys
commercial paper borrowing facility and is to be used for
general corporate purposes. the company has not drawn funding
from this facility.
rental expense under the companys operating leases, net of
sublease income, was $222.4million in 2008. the minimum
aggregate rental commitments under noncancellable leases are as
follows: 2009, $103.0million; 2010, $79.4million;
2011, $59.9million; 2012, $44.4million; 2013,
$33.3million and thereafter, $56.2million. the
company has no significant capital leases.
10.
contingencies
and environmental liabilities
the company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings
of a nature considered normal to its business, including product
liability, intellectual property and commercial litigation, as
well as additional matters such as antitrust actions. the
company records accruals for contingencies when it is probable
that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be
reasonably estimated. these accruals are adjusted periodically
as assessments change or additional information becomes
available. for product liability claims, a portion of the
overall accrual is actuarially determined and considers such
factors as past experience, number of claims reported and
estimates of claims incurred but not yet reported. individually
significant contingent losses are accrued when probable and
reasonably estimable. legal defense costs expected to be
incurred in connection with a loss contingency are accrued when
probable and reasonably estimable.
the companys decision to obtain insurance coverage is
dependent on market conditions, including cost and availability,
existing at the time such decisions are made. as a result of a
number of factors, product liability insurance has become less
available while the cost has increased significantly. the
company has evaluated its risks and has determined that the cost
of obtaining product liability insurance outweighs the likely
benefits of the coverage that is available and as such, has no
insurance for certain product liabilities effective
august1, 2004, including liability for products first sold
after that date. the company will continue to evaluate its
insurance needs and the costs, availability and benefits of
product liability insurance in the future.
vioxx
litigation
product
liability lawsuits
as previously disclosed, individual and putative class actions
have been filed against the company in state and federal courts
alleging personal injury
and/or
economic loss with respect to the purchase or use of
vioxx. all such actions filed in federal court are
coordinated in a multidistrict litigation in the
u.s.district court for the eastern district of louisiana
(the mdl) before district judge eldon e. fallon. a
number of such actions filed in state court are coordinated in
separate coordinated proceedings in state courts in new jersey,
california and texas, and the counties of philadelphia,
pennsylvania and washoe and clark counties, nevada. as of
december31, 2008, the company had been served or was aware
that it had been named as a defendant in approximately 10,800
lawsuits, which include approximately 26,800 plaintiff groups,
alleging personal injuries resulting from the use of
vioxx, and in approximately 242 putative class actions
alleging personal injuries
and/or
economic loss. (all of the actions discussed in this paragraph
and in other lawsuits below are collectively
referred to as the vioxx product liability
lawsuits.) of these lawsuits, approximately 8,850 lawsuits
representing approximately 22,050 plaintiff groups are or are
slated to be in the federal mdl and approximately 165 lawsuits
representing approximately 165 plaintiff groups are included in
a coordinated proceeding in new jersey superior court before
judge carol e. higbee.
of the plaintiff groups described above, most are currently in
the vioxx settlement program, described below. as of
december31, 2008, 70 plaintiff groups who were otherwise
eligible for the settlement program have not participated and
their claims remained pending against merck. in addition, the
claims of 1,400 plaintiff groups who are not eligible for the
settlement program remained pending against merck. a number of
the 1,400 plaintiff groups are subject to motions to dismiss for
failure to comply with court-ordered deadlines. since
december31, 2008, hundreds of these plaintiff groups have
since been dismissed.
table of contents
in addition to the vioxx product liability lawsuits
discussed above, the claims of over 27,400 plaintiffs had been
dismissed as of december31, 2008. of these, there have
been over 4,925 plaintiffs whose claims were dismissed with
prejudice (i.e., they cannot be brought again) either by
plaintiffs themselves or by the courts. over 22,475 additional
plaintiffs have had their claims dismissed without prejudice
(i.e., subject to the applicable statute of limitations, they
can be brought again). of these, approximately 13,750 plaintiff
groups represent plaintiffs who had lawsuits pending in the new
jersey superior court at the time of the settlement agreement
described below and who enrolled in the program established by
the settlement agreement (the settlement program),
judge higbee has dismissed these cases without prejudice for
administrative reasons.
on november9, 2007, merck announced that it had entered
into an agreement (the settlement agreement) with
the law firms that comprise the executive committee of the
plaintiffs steering committee (psc) of the
federal vioxx mdl as well as representatives of
plaintiffs counsel in the texas, new jersey and california
state coordinated proceedings to resolve state and federal
myocardial infarction (mi) and ischemic stroke
(is) claims filed as of that date in the united
states. the settlement agreement, which also applies to tolled
claims, was signed by the parties after several meetings with
three of the four judges overseeing the coordination of more
than 95% of the u.s.vioxx product liability
lawsuits. the settlement agreement applies only to
u.s.legal residents and those who allege that their mi or
is occurred in the united states.
under the settlement agreement, merck will pay a fixed aggregate
amount of $4.85billion into two funds ($4.0billion
for mi claims and $850million for is claims) for
qualifying claims that enter into the settlement program.
individual claimants will be examined by administrators of the
settlement program to determine qualification based on
objective, documented facts provided by claimants, including
records sufficient for a scientific evaluation of independent
risk factors. the conditions in the settlement agreement also
require claimants to pass three gates: an injury gate, a
duration gate, and a proximity gate (each as defined in the
settlement agreement).
the settlement agreement provides that merck does not admit
causation or fault. the settlement agreement provided that
mercks payment obligations would be triggered only if,
among other conditions, (1)law firms on the federal and
state pscs and firms that have tried cases in the coordinated
proceedings elect to recommend enrollment in the program to 100%
of their clients who allege either mi or is, and (2)by
june30, 2008, plaintiffs enroll in the settlement program
at least 85% of each of all currently pending and tolled
(i)mi claims, (ii)is claims, (iii)eligible mi
and is claims together which involve death, and
(iv)eligible mi and is claims together which allege more
than 12months of use. under the terms of the settlement
agreement, merck could exercise a right to walk away from the
settlement agreement if the thresholds and other requirements
were not met. the company waived that right as of august4,
2008. the waiver of that right triggered mercks obligation
to pay a fixed total of $4.85billion. payments will be
made in installments into the settlement funds. the first
payment of $500million was made in august 2008 and an
additional payment of $250million was made in october
2008. interim payments have been made to certain plaintiffs who
alleged that they suffered an mi and the company anticipates
that interim payments to is claimants will begin shortly.
additional payments will be made on a periodic basis going
forward, when and as needed to fund payments of claims and
administrative expenses.
mercks total payment for both funds of $4.85billion
is a fixed amount to be allocated among qualifying claimants
based on their individual evaluation. the distribution of
interim payments to qualified claimants began in august 2008 and
will continue on a rolling basis until all claimants who qualify
for an interim payment are paid. final payments will be made
after the examination of all of the eligible claims has been
completed.
after the settlement agreement was announced on november9,
2007, judges in the federal mdl, california, texas and new
jersey state coordinated proceedings entered a series of orders.
the orders: (1)temporarily stayed their respective
litigations; (2)required plaintiffs to register their
claims by january15, 2008; (3)required plaintiffs
with cases pending as of november9, 2007 to preserve and
produce records and serve expert reports; and (4)required
plaintiffs who file thereafter to make similar productions on an
accelerated schedule. the clark county, nevada and washoe
county, nevada coordinated proceedings were also generally
stayed.
as of october30, 2008, the deadline for enrollment in the
settlement program, more than 48,100 of the approximately 48,325
individuals who were eligible for the settlement program and
whose claims were not 1)dismissed, 2)expected to be
dismissed in the near future, or 3)tolled claims that
appear to have been abandoned
table of contents
had submitted some or all of the materials required for
enrollment in the settlement program. this represents
approximately 99.8% of the eligible mi and is claims previously
registered with the settlement program.
on april14, 2008 and june3, 2008, two groups of
various private insurance companies and health plans filed suit
against browngreer, the claims administrator for the settlement
program (the claims administrator), and
u.s.bancorp, escrow agent for the settlement program (the
avmed and greater new york benefit fund
suits). the private insurance companies and health plans claim
to have paid healthcare costs on behalf of some of the enrolling
claimants and seek to enjoin the claims administrator from
paying enrolled claimants until their claims for reimbursement
from the enrolled claimants are resolved. each group sought
temporary restraining orders and preliminary injunctions. judge
fallon denied these requests. in avmed, the defendants moved to
sever the claims of the named plaintiffs and, in greater new
york benefit fund, to strike the class allegations. judge fallon
granted these motions. avmed appealed both of these decisions.
the fifth circuit heard argument on avmeds appeal on
november4, 2008. on november17, 2008, the court of
appeals affirmed the district courts ruling that denied
the two motions for preliminary injunctive relief. greater new
york benefit fund has served a notice of appeal. on
january22, 2009, the psc and counsel for certain private
insurers announced that they reached a settlement agreement. the
agreement provides a program for resolution of liens asserted by
private insurers against payments received by certain claimants
who have enrolled in the settlement program. the agreement can
be terminated by the private insurers if fewer than 90% of
eligible claimants participate. the plaintiffs in the avmed and
greater newyork benefit fund lawsuits have agreed to
participate in the settlement.
there are two u.s. vioxx product liability lawsuits
currently scheduled for trial in 2009. the company has
previously disclosed the outcomes of several vioxx
product liability lawsuits that were tried prior to 2008.
juries have now decided in favor of the company twelve times and
in plaintiffs favor five times. one merck verdict was set
aside by the court and has not been retried. another merck
verdict was set aside and retried, leading to one of the five
plaintiffs verdicts. there have been two unresolved
mistrials. with respect to the five plaintiffs verdicts,
merck filed an appeal or sought judicial review in each of those
cases. in one of those five, an intermediate appellate court
overturned the trial verdict and directed that judgment be
entered for merck, and in another, an intermediate appellate
court overturned the trial verdict, entering judgment for merck
on one claim and ordering a new trial on the remaining claims.
all but the following three cases that went to trial are now
resolved: mcdarbyv. merck, ernstv. merck, and
garzav. merck.
the first, mcdarby, was originally tried along with a second
plaintiff, cona, in april 2006, in superior court of new jersey,
law division, atlantic county. the jury returned a split
verdict. the jury determined that vioxx did not
substantially contribute to the heart attack of mr.cona,
but did substantially contribute to the heart attack of
mr.mcdarby. the jury also concluded that, in each case,
merck violated new jerseys consumer fraud statute, which
allows plaintiffs to receive their expenses for purchasing the
drug, trebled, as well as reasonable attorneys fees. the
jury awarded $4.5million in compensatory damages to
mr.mcdarby and his wife, who also was a plaintiff in that
case, as well as punitive damages of $9million. on
june8, 2007, judge higbee denied mercks motion for a
new trial. on june15, 2007, judge higbee awarded
approximately $4million in the aggregate in
attorneys fees and costs. the company has appealed the
judgments in both cases and the appellate division held oral
argument on both cases on january16, 2008. on may29,
2008, the new jersey appellate division vacated the consumer
fraud awards in both cases on the grounds that the product
liability act provides the sole remedy for personal injury
claims. the appellate division also vacated the mcdarby punitive
damage award on the ground of federal preemption and vacated the
attorneys fees and costs awarded under the consumer fraud
act in both cases. the court upheld the mcdarby compensatory
award. the company has filed with the supreme court of
newjersey a petition to appeal those parts of the trial
courts rulings that the appellate division affirmed.
plaintiffs filed a cross-petition to appeal those parts of the
trial courts rulings that the appellate division reversed.
on october8, 2008, the supreme court of new jersey granted
mercks petition for certification of appeal, limited
solely to the issue of whether the federal food, drug and
cosmetic act preempts state law tort claims predicated on the
alleged inadequacy of warnings contained in vioxx
labeling that was approved by the fda. the court denied the
plaintiffs cross-petition. on december4, 2008, the
new jersey supreme court granted mercks motion to stay the
appeal pending the issuance of a decision from united states
supreme court in wyethv. levine.
table of contents
as previously reported, in september 2006, merck filed a notice
of appeal of the august 2005 jury verdict in favor of the
plaintiff in the texas state court case, ernstv. merck. on
may29, 2008, the texas court of appeals reversed the trial
courts judgment and issued a judgment in favor of merck.
the court of appeals found the evidence to be legally
insufficient on the issue of causation. plaintiffs have filed a
motion for rehearing en banc in the court of appeals.
merck filed a response in october 2008. in january 2009,
plaintiffs filed a reply in support of their rehearing motion.
as previously reported, in april 2006, in garza v. merck, a jury
in state court in rio grande city, texas returned a verdict in
favor of the family of decedent leonel garza. the jury awarded a
total of $7million in compensatory damages to
mr.garzas widow and three sons. the jury also
purported to award $25million in punitive damages even
though under texas law, in this case, potential punitive damages
were capped at $750,000. on may14, 2008, the
sanantonio court of appeals reversed the judgment and
rendered a judgment in favor of merck. on december10,
2008, the court of appeals, on rehearing, vacated its prior
ruling and issued a replacement. in the new ruling, the court
ordered a take-nothing judgment for merck on the design defect
claim, but reversed and remanded for a new trial as to the
strict liability claim because of juror misconduct. on
january26, 2009, merck filed a petition for review with
the texas supreme court.
merck voluntarily withdrew vioxx from the market on
september30, 2004. most states have statutes of
limitations for product liability claims of no more than three
years, which require that claims must be filed within no more
than three years after the plaintiffs learned or could have
learned of their potential cause of action. as a result, some
may view september30, 2007 as a significant deadline for
filing vioxx cases. it is important to note, however,
that the law regarding statutes of limitations can be complex
and variable, depending on the facts and applicable law. some
states have longer statutes of limitations. there are also
arguments that the statutes of limitations began running before
september30, 2004. new jersey superior court judge higbee
and federal district court judge fallon have issued orders in
cases from new jersey and eight other jurisdictions ruling that
the statutory period for making vioxx personal injury
claims has passed. judge higbees order was issued on
october15, 2007 and judge fallons was issued on
november8, 2007.
other
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, on july29, 2005, a new jersey
state trial court certified a nationwide class of third-party
payors (such as unions and health insurance plans) that paid in
whole or in part for the vioxx used by their plan members
or insureds. the named plaintiff in that case sought recovery of
certain vioxx purchase costs (plus penalties) based on
allegations that the purported class members paid more for
vioxx than they would have had they known of the
products alleged risks. on march31, 2006, the new
jersey superior court, appellate division, affirmed the class
certification order. on september6, 2007, the new jersey
supreme court reversed the certification of a nationwide class
action of third-party payors, finding that the suit does not
meet the requirements for a class action. claims of certain
individual third-party payors remain pending in the new jersey
court, and counsel purporting to represent a large number of
third-party payors have filed additional such actions. judge
higbee lifted the stay in these cases and the cases are
currently in the discovery phase. a status conference with the
court took place in january 2009 to discuss scheduling issues in
these cases, including the selection of early trial pool cases.
the new jersey superior court heard argument on plaintiffs
motion for class certification in martin-kleinmanv. merck,
which is a putative consumer class action, on december5,
2008.
there are also pending in various u.s.courts putative
class actions purportedly brought on behalf of individual
purchasers or users of vioxx and claiming either
reimbursement of alleged economic loss or an entitlement to
medical monitoring. the majority of these cases are at early
procedural stages. on june12, 2008, a missouri state court
certified a class of missouri plaintiffs seeking reimbursement
for out-of-pocket costs relating to vioxx. the plaintiffs
do not allege any personal injuries from taking vioxx.
the company filed a petition for interlocutory review on
june23, 2008, which was granted on july30, 2008.
briefing is now complete. during the pendency of the appeal,
discovery is proceeding in the lower court. on february3,
2009, judge fallon dismissed the master personal injury/wrongful
death class action master complaint and the medical monitoring
class action master complaint in the mdl.
table of contents
plaintiffs also have filed a class action in california state
court seeking class certification of california third-party
payors and end-users. the parties are engaged in class
certification discovery and briefing. the court heard oral
argument on the class certification issue on february19,
2009.
the company has also been named as a defendant in eighteen
separate lawsuits brought by attorneys general of ten states,
five counties, the city of new york, and private citizens (whom
have brought qui tam and taxpayer derivative suits). one
of the lawsuits brought by the counties is a class action filed
by santaclara county, california on behalf of all
similarly situated california counties. these actions allege
that the company misrepresented the safety of vioxx and
seek (i)recovery of the cost of vioxx purchased or
reimbursed by the state and its agencies;
(ii)reimbursement of all sums paid by the state and its
agencies for medical services for the treatment of persons
injured by vioxx; (iii)damages under various common
law theories;
and/or
(iv)remedies under various state statutory theories,
including state consumer fraud
and/or fair
business practices or medicaid fraud statutes, including civil
penalties.
with the exception of a case filed by the texas attorney general
(which remains in texas state court and is currently scheduled
for trial in november 2009), a case filed by the michigan
attorney general (which was ordered remanded to state court in
january 2009), a case recently filed by the pennsylvania
attorney general (which has been removed to federal court but is
the subject of a pending motion to remand), and one case which
has not been removed to federal court, the rest of the actions
described in the above paragraph have been transferred to the
federal mdl and are in the discovery phase.
shareholder
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the vioxx product
liability lawsuits, the company and various current and former
officers and directors are defendants in various putative class
actions and individual lawsuits under the federal securities
laws and state securities laws (the vioxx
securities lawsuits). all of the vioxx
securities lawsuits pending in federal court have been
transferred by the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation
(the jpml) to the united states district court for
the district of new jersey before district judge stanley r.
chesler for inclusion in a nationwide mdl (the shareholder
mdl). judge chesler has consolidated the vioxx
securities lawsuits for all purposes. the putative class
action, which requested damages on behalf of purchasers of
company stock between may21, 1999 and october29,
2004, alleged that the defendants made false and misleading
statements regarding vioxx in violation of
sections10(b) and 20(a) of the securities exchange act of
1934, and sought unspecified compensatory damages and the costs
of suit, including attorneys fees. the complaint also
asserted claims under section20a of the securities and
exchange act against certain defendants relating to their sales
of merck stock and under sections11, 12 and 15 of the
securities act of 1933 against certain defendants based on
statements in a registration statement and certain prospectuses
filed in connection with the merck stock investment plan, a
dividend reinvestment plan. on april12, 2007, judge
chesler granted defendants motion to dismiss the complaint
with prejudice. plaintiffs appealed judge cheslers
decision to the united states court of appeals for the third
circuit. on september9, 2008, the third circuit issued an
opinion reversing judge cheslers order and remanding the
case to the district court. on september23, 2008, merck
filed a petition seeking rehearing en banc, which was
denied. the case was remanded to the district court in october
2008, and plaintiffs have filed their consolidated and fifth
amended classaction complaint. merck filed a petition for
a writ of certiorari with the united states supreme court on
january15, 2009. merck expects to file a motion to dismiss
the fifth amended classaction complaint.
in october 2005, a dutch pension fund filed a complaint in the
district of new jersey alleging violations of federal securities
laws as well as violations of state law against the company and
certain officers. pursuant to the case management order
governing the shareholder mdl, the case, which is based on the
same allegations as the vioxx securities lawsuits, was
consolidated with the vioxx securities lawsuits.
defendants motion to dismiss the pension funds
complaint was filed on august3, 2007. in september 2007,
the dutch pension fund filed an amended complaint rather than
responding to defendants motion to dismiss. in addition in
2007, six new complaints were filed in the district of new
jersey on behalf of various foreign institutional investors also
alleging violations of federal securities laws as well as
violations of state law against the company and certain
officers. defendants are not required to respond to these
complaints until after judge chesler resolves any motion to
dismiss in the consolidated securities action.
table of contents
as previously disclosed, various shareholder derivative actions
filed in federal court were transferred to the shareholder mdl
and consolidated for all purposes by judge chesler (the
vioxx derivative lawsuits). on may5,
2006, judge chesler granted defendants motion to dismiss
and denied plaintiffs request for leave to amend their
complaint. plaintiffs appealed, arguing that judge chesler erred
in denying plaintiffs leave to amend their complaint with
materials acquired during discovery. on july18, 2007, the
united states court of appeals for the third circuit reversed
the district courts decision on the grounds that judge
chesler should have allowed plaintiffs to make use of the
discovery material to try to establish demand futility, and
remanded the case for the district courts consideration of
whether, even with the additional materials, plaintiffs
request to amend their complaint would still be futile.
plaintiffs filed their brief in support of their request for
leave to amend their complaint in november 2007. the court
denied the motion in june 2008 and closed the case. plaintiffs
have appealed judge cheslers decision to the united states
court of appeals for the third circuit.
in addition, as previously disclosed, various putative class
actions filed in federal court under the employee retirement
income security act (erisa) against the company and
certain current and former officers and directors (the
vioxx erisa lawsuits and, together with the
vioxx securities lawsuits and the vioxx derivative
lawsuits, the vioxx shareholder lawsuits)
have been transferred to the shareholder mdl and consolidated
for all purposes. the consolidated complaint asserts claims on
behalf of certain of the companys current and former
employees who are participants in certain of the companys
retirement plans for breach of fiduciary duty. the lawsuits make
similar allegations to the allegations contained in the vioxx
securities lawsuits. on july11, 2006, judge chesler
granted in part and denied in part defendants motion to
dismiss the erisa complaint. in october 2007, plaintiffs moved
for certification of a class of individuals who were
participants in and beneficiaries of the companys
retirement savings plans at any time between october1,
1998 and september30, 2004 and whose plan accounts
included investments in the merck common stock fund
and/or merck
common stock. on february9, 2009, the court denied the
motion for certification of a class as to one count and granted
the motion as to the remaining counts. the court also limited
the class to those individuals who were participants in and
beneficiaries of the companys retirement savings plans who
suffered a loss due to their investments in merck stock through
the plans and who did not execute a settlement releasing their
claims. on october6, 2008, defendants filed a motion for
judgment on the pleadings seeking dismissal of the complaint. on
december24, 2008, plaintiffs filed a motion for partial
summary judgment against certain individual defendants. both
motions are pending. discovery is ongoing in this litigation.
as previously disclosed, on october29, 2004, two
individual shareholders made a demand on the companys
board to take legal action against mr.raymond gilmartin,
former chairman, president and chief executive officer and other
individuals for allegedly causing damage to the company with
respect to the allegedly improper marketing of vioxx. in
december 2004, the special committee of the board of directors
retained the honorable john s. martin,jr. of
debevoise& plimpton llp to conduct an independent
investigation of, among other things, the allegations set forth
in the demand. judge martins report was made public in
september 2006. based on the special committees
recommendation made after careful consideration of the martin
report and the impact that derivative litigation would have on
the company, the board rejected the demand. on october11,
2007, the shareholders filed a lawsuit in state court in
atlantic county, new jersey against current and former
executives and directors of the company alleging that the
boards rejection of their demand was unreasonable and
improper, and that the defendants breached various duties to the
company in allowing vioxx to be marketed. the current and
former executive and director defendants filed motions to
dismiss the complaint in june 2008. on october30, 2008,
proceedings in the case were stayed through march1, 2009.
on november21, 2008, the pending motions to dismiss were
denied without prejudice.
international
lawsuits
as previously disclosed, in addition to the lawsuits discussed
above, the company has been named as a defendant in litigation
relating to vioxx in various countries (collectively, the
vioxx foreign lawsuits) in europe, as well as
canada, brazil, argentina, australia, turkey, and israel.
on may30, 2008, the provincial court of queens bench
in saskatchewan, canada entered an order certifying a class of
vioxx users in canada, except those in quebec. the class
includes individual purchasers who allege inducement to purchase
by unfair marketing practices; individuals who allege vioxx
was not of acceptable
table of contents
quality, defective or not fit for the purpose of managing pain
associated with approved indications; or ingestors who claim
vioxx caused or exacerbated a cardiovascular or
gastrointestinal condition. on june17, 2008, the court of
appeal for saskatchewan granted the company leave to appeal the
certification order. that appeal was argued before that court,
and the court has reserved decision. on july28, 2008, the
superior court in ontario denied the companys motion to
stay class proceedings in ontario, which had been based on the
earlier certification order entered in saskatchewan, and decided
to certify an overlapping class of vioxx users in canada,
except those in quebec and saskatchewan, who allege negligence
and an entitlement to elect to waive the tort. on
november24, 2008, the ontario divisional court granted the
companys motion for leave to appeal the superior
courts decision denying the stay of the ontario class
proceedings and denied the companys motion to appeal the
certification order. the companys appeal was heard by the
ontario divisional court in february 2009. on february13,
2009, the divisional court declined to set aside the order
denying the stay. the company intends to seek leave to appeal
from the ontario court of appeal. earlier, in november 2006, the
superior court in quebec authorized the institution of a class
action on behalf of all individuals who, in quebec, consumed
vioxx and suffered damages arising out of its ingestion.
as of december31, 2008, the plaintiffs have not instituted
an action based upon that authorization.
a trial in a representative action in australia is scheduled to
commence on march30, 2009, in the federal court of
australia. the named plaintiff, who alleges he suffered an mi,
seeks to represent others in australia who ingested vioxx
and suffered an mi, thrombotic stroke, unstable angina,
transient ischemic attack or peripheral vascular disease. on
november24, 2008, the company filed a motion for an order
that the proceeding no longer continue as a representative
proceeding. during a hearing on december5, 2008, the court
dismissed that motion and, on january9, 2009, issued its
reasons for that decision. on february17, 2009, the
companys motion for leave to appeal that decision was
denied and the parties were directed to prepare proposed lists
of issues to be tried.
additional
lawsuits
based on media reports and other sources, the company
anticipates that additional vioxx product liability
lawsuits, vioxx shareholder lawsuits and vioxx
foreign lawsuits (collectively, the vioxx
lawsuits) may be filed against it
and/or
certain of its current and former officers and directors in the
future.
insurance
as previously disclosed, the company has product liability
insurance for claims brought in the vioxx product
liability lawsuits with stated upper limits of approximately
$630million after deductibles and co-insurance. this
insurance provides coverage for legal defense costs and
potential damage amounts in connection with the vioxx
product liability lawsuits. through an arbitration
proceeding and negotiated settlements, the company received an
aggregate of approximately $590million in product
liability insurance proceeds relating to the vioxx
product liability lawsuits, plus approximately
$45million in fees and interest payments. the company has
no additional insurance for the vioxx product liability
lawsuits. the companys insurance coverage with respect to
the vioxx lawsuits will not be adequate to cover its
defense costs and losses.
the company has directors and officers insurance coverage
applicable to the vioxx securities lawsuits and vioxx
derivative lawsuits with stated upper limits of
approximately $190million. the company has fiduciary and
other insurance for the vioxx erisa lawsuits with stated
upper limits of approximately $275million. as a result of
the arbitration, additional insurance coverage for these claims
should also be available, if needed, under upper-level excess
policies that provide coverage for a variety of risks. there are
disputes with the insurers about the availability of some or all
of the companys insurance coverage for these claims and
there are likely to be additional disputes. the amounts actually
recovered under the policies discussed in this paragraph may be
less than the stated upper limits.
investigations
as previously disclosed, in november 2004, the company was
advised by the staff of the sec that it was commencing an
informal inquiry concerning vioxx. on january28,
2005, the company announced that it received notice that the sec
issued a formal notice of investigation. also, the company has
received subpoenas from the u.s.department of justice (the
doj) requesting information related to the
companys research, marketing and selling activities with
respect to vioxx in a federal health care investigation
under criminal statutes. this investigation includes subpoenas
for witnesses to appear before a grand jury. in addition, as
previously disclosed,
table of contents
investigations are being conducted by local authorities in
certain cities in europe in order to determine whether any
criminal charges should be brought concerning vioxx. the
company is cooperating with these governmental entities in their
respective investigations (the vioxx
investigations). the company cannot predict the
outcome of these inquiries; however, they could result in
potential civil
and/or
criminal dispositions.
as previously disclosed, on may20, 2008, the company
reached civil settlements with attorneys general from 29 states
and the district of columbia to fully resolve previously
disclosed investigations under state consumer protection laws
related to past activities for vioxx. as part of the
civil resolution of these investigations, merck paid a total of
$58 million to be divided among the 29 states and the district
of columbia. the agreement also includes compliance measures
that supplement policies and procedures previously established
by the company.
in addition, the company received a subpoena in september 2006
from the state of california attorney general seeking documents
and information related to the placement of vioxx on
californias medi-cal formulary. the company is cooperating
with the attorney general in responding to the subpoena.
reserves
as discussed above, on november9, 2007, merck entered into
the settlement agreement with the law firms that comprise the
executive committee of the psc of the federal vioxx mdl
as well as representatives of plaintiffs counsel in the
texas, new jersey and california state coordinated proceedings
to resolve state and federal mi and is claims filed as of that
date in the united states. the settlement agreement, which also
applies to tolled claims, was signed by the parties after
several meetings with three of the four judges overseeing the
coordination of more than 95% of the current claims in the
vioxx litigation. the settlement agreement applies only
to u.s.legal residents and those who allege that their mi
or is occurred in the united states. in 2007, as a result of
entering into the settlement agreement, the company recorded a
pretax charge of $4.85billion which represents the fixed
aggregate amount to be paid to plaintiffs qualifying for payment
under the settlement program.
the company currently anticipates that two u.s.vioxx
product liability lawsuits will be tried in 2009. except
with respect to the product liability trial scheduled to be held
in australia, the company cannot predict the timing of any other
trials related to the vioxx litigation. the company
believes that it has meritorious defenses to the vioxx
lawsuits and will vigorously defend against them. in view of
the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of litigation,
particularly where there are many claimants and the claimants
seek indeterminate damages, the company is unable to predict the
outcome of these matters, and at this time cannot reasonably
estimate the possible loss or range of loss with respect to the
vioxx lawsuits not included in the settlement program.
the company has not established any reserves for any potential
liability relating to the vioxx lawsuits not included in
the settlement program or the vioxx investigations. in
each of those cases the company believes it has strong points to
raise on appeal and therefore that unfavorable outcomes in such
cases are not probable. unfavorable outcomes in the vioxx
litigation could have a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, liquidity and results of
operations.
legal defense costs expected to be incurred in connection with a
loss contingency are accrued when probable and reasonably
estimable. as of december31, 2007, the company had an
aggregate reserve of approximately $5.372billion (the
vioxx reserve) for the settlement program and
the companys future legal defense costs related to the
vioxx litigation.
during 2008, the company spent approximately $305million
in the aggregate, in legal defense costs worldwide related to
(i)the vioxx product liability lawsuits,
(ii)the vioxx shareholder lawsuits, (iii)the
vioxx foreign lawsuits, and (iv)the vioxx
investigations (collectively, the vioxx
litigation). in the fourth quarter, the company recorded a
charge of $62million solely for its future legal defense
costs related to the vioxx litigation. in addition, in
the fourth quarter the company paid an additional
$250million into the settlement funds in connection with
the settlement program after having paid $500million into
the settlement funds in the third quarter. consequently, as of
december31, 2008, the aggregate amount of the vioxx
reserve was approximately $4.379billion, which is included
in accrued and other current liabilities on the consolidated
balance sheet. in adding to the vioxx reserve solely for
its future legal defense costs, the company considered the same
factors that it considered when it previously established
reserves for the vioxx litigation. some of the
significant factors considered in the review of the vioxx
reserve were as follows: the actual costs incurred by the
company; the development of the
table of contents
companys legal defense strategy and structure in light of
the scope of the vioxx litigation, including the
settlement agreement and the expectation that certain lawsuits
will continue to be pending; the number of cases being brought
against the company; the costs and outcomes of completed trials
and the most current information regarding anticipated timing,
progression, and related costs of pre-trial activities and
trials in the vioxx litigation. the amount of the
vioxx reserve as of december31, 2008 allocated
solely to defense costs represents the companys best
estimate of the minimum amount of defense costs to be incurred
in connection with the remaining aspects of the vioxx
litigation; however, events such as additional trials in the
vioxx litigation and other events that could arise in the
course of the vioxx litigation could affect the ultimate
amount of defense costs to be incurred by the company.
the company will continue to monitor its legal defense costs and
review the adequacy of the associated reserves and may determine
to increase the vioxx reserve at any time in the future
if, based upon the factors set forth, it believes it would be
appropriate to do so.
other
product liability litigation
as previously disclosed, the company is a defendant in product
liability lawsuits in the united states involving fosamax
(the fosamax litigation). as of
december31, 2008, approximately 779 cases, which include
approximately 1,158 plaintiff groups had been filed and were
pending against merck in either federal or state court,
including one case which seeks class action certification, as
well as damages
and/or
medical monitoring. in these actions, plaintiffs allege, among
other things, that they have suffered osteonecrosis of the jaw,
generally subsequent to invasive dental procedures, such as
tooth extraction or dental implants
and/or
delayed healing, in association with the use of fosamax.
on august16, 2006, the jpml ordered that the fosamax
product liability cases pending in federal courts nationwide
should be transferred and consolidated into one multidistrict
litigation (the fosamax mdl) for coordinated
pre-trial proceedings. the fosamax mdl has been
transferred to judge john keenan in the united states district
court for the southern district of new york. as a result of the
jpml order, approximately 645 of the cases are before judge
keenan. judge keenan has issued a case management order (and
various amendments thereto) setting forth a schedule governing
the proceedings which focused primarily upon resolving the class
action certification motions in 2007 and completing fact
discovery in an initial group of 25 cases by october1,
2008. briefing and argument on plaintiffs motions for
certification of medical monitoring classes were completed in
2007 and judge keenan issued an order denying the motions on
january3, 2008. on january28, 2008, judge keenan
issued a further order dismissing with prejudice all class
claims asserted in the first four class action lawsuits filed
against merck that sought personal injury damages
and/or
medical monitoring relief on a class wide basis. in october
2008, judge keenan issued an order requiring that daubert
motions be filed in may 2009 and scheduling trials in the
first three cases in the mdl for august 2009, october 2009, and
january 2010, respectively. a trial is scheduled in alabama
state court later in 2009.
in addition, in july 2008, an application was made by the
atlantic county superior court of new jersey requesting that all
of the fosamax cases pending in new jersey be considered
for mass tort designation and centralized management before one
judge in new jersey. on october6, 2008, the new jersey
supreme court ordered that all pending and future actions filed
in new jersey arising out of the use of fosamax and
seeking damages for existing dental and jaw-related injuries,
including osteonecrosis of the jaw, but not solely seeking
medical monitoring, be designated as a mass tort for centralized
management purposes before judge higbee in atlantic county
superior court. as a result of the new jersey supreme
courts order, approximately 100 cases were coordinated as
of december31, 2008 before judge higbee, who is expected
to begin setting various case management deadlines during the
first quarter of 2009.
discovery is ongoing in both the fosamax mdl litigation
as well as in various state court cases. the company intends to
defend against these lawsuits.
as of december31, 2007, the company had a remaining
reserve of approximately $27million solely for its future
legal defense costs for the fosamax litigation. during
2008, the company spent approximately $34million and added
$40million to its reserve. consequently, as of
december31, 2008, the company had a reserve of
approximately $33million solely for its future legal
defense costs for the fosamax litigation. some of the
significant factors considered in the establishment of the
reserve for the fosamax litigation legal defense costs
were as follows: the actual costs incurred by the company thus
far; the development of the companys legal defense
table of contents
strategy and structure in light of the creation of the
fosamax mdl; the number of cases being brought against
the company; and the anticipated timing, progression, and
related costs of pre-trial activities in the fosamax
litigation. the company will continue to monitor its legal
defense costs and review the adequacy of the associated
reserves. due to the uncertain nature of litigation, the company
is unable to estimate its costs beyond the completion of the
first three federal trials discussed above. the company has not
established any reserves for any potential liability relating to
the fosamax litigation. unfavorable outcomes in the
fosamax litigation could have a material adverse effect
on the companys financial position, liquidity and results
of operations.
commercial
litigation
as previously disclosed, the company was joined in ongoing
litigation alleging manipulation by pharmaceutical manufacturers
of average wholesale prices (awp), which are
sometimes used in calculations that determine public and private
sector reimbursement levels. in 2002, the jpml ordered the
transfer and consolidation of all pending federal awp cases to
federal court in boston, massachusetts. plaintiffs filed one
consolidated class action complaint, which aggregated the claims
previously filed in various federal district court actions and
also expanded the number of manufacturers to include some which,
like the company, had not been defendants in any prior pending
case. in may 2003, the court granted the companys motion
to dismiss the consolidated class action and dismissed the
company from the class action case. subsequent to the
companys dismissal, the plaintiffs filed an amended
consolidated class action complaint, which did not name the
company as a defendant. the company and many other
pharmaceutical manufacturers are defendants in similar
complaints pending in federal and state court brought
individually by a number of counties in the state of new york.
fifty of the county cases have been consolidated in new york
state court. the company was dismissed from the suffolk county
case, which was the first of the new york county cases to be
filed. in addition to the new york county cases, as of
december31, 2008, the company was a defendant in state
cases brought by the attorneys general of eleven states, all of
which are being defended. in february 2009, the kansas attorney
general filed suit against merck and several other
manufacturers. additionally, the attorney general of arizona
voluntarily dismissed merck from its case in february 2009. the
court in the awp cases pending in hawaii listed merck and others
to be set for trial in mid-2010.
governmental
proceedings
as previously disclosed, in february2008, the company
announced that it entered into agreements with the government to
settle federal and state civil cases alleging violations of the
medicaid rebate statute, as well as federal and state false
claims acts in connection with certain nominal pricing programs
and sales and marketing activities between 1994 and 2001. in
connection with these settlements, as previously disclosed,
merck entered into a corporate integrity agreement
(cia) with the u.s. department of health and human
services office of inspector general (hhs-oig) for a
five-year term. the cia requires, among other things, that merck
maintain its ethics training program and policies and procedures
governing promotional practices and medicaid price reporting.
further, as required by the cia, merck has retained an
independent review organization (iro) to conduct a
systems review of its promotional policies and procedures and to
conduct, on a sample basis, transactional reviews of
mercks promotional programs and certain medicaid pricing
calculations. merck is also required to provide regular reports
and certifications to the hhs-oig regarding its compliance with
the cia. the iro is currently conducting the required reviews.
merck is scheduled to submit its first annual report to the
hhs-oig in may2009.
vytorin/zetia
litigation
as previously disclosed, the company and its joint venture
partner, schering-plough, have received several letters
addressed to both companies from the house committee on energy
and commerce, its subcommittee on oversight and investigations
(o&i), and the ranking minority member of the
senate finance committee, collectively seeking a combination of
witness interviews, documents and information on a variety of
issues related to the enhance clinical trial, the sale and
promotion of vytorin, as well as sales of stock by
corporate officers. in addition, since august 2008, the
companies have received three additional letters from o&i,
including one dated february19, 2009, seeking certain
information and documents related to the seas clinical trial. as
previously disclosed, the companies have each received subpoenas
from the new york and new jersey
table of contents
state attorneys general offices and a letter from the
connecticut attorney general seeking similar information and
documents. in addition, the company has received five civil
investigative demands (cids) from a multistate group
of 35 state attorneys general who are jointly investigating
whether the companies violated state consumer protection laws
when marketing vytorin. finally, in september 2008, the
company received a letter from the civil division of the doj
informing it that the doj is investigating whether the
companies conduct relating to the promotion of vytorin
caused false claims to be submitted to federal health care
programs. the company is cooperating with these investigations
and working with schering-plough to respond to the inquiries. in
addition, the company has become aware of or been served with
approximately 145 civil class action lawsuits alleging common
law and state consumer fraud claims in connection with the msp
partnerships sale and promotion of vytorin and
zetia. certain of those lawsuits allege personal injuries
and/or seek
medical monitoring. these actions, which have been filed in or
transferred to federal court, are coordinated in a multidistrict
litigation in the u.s.district court for the district
court of new jersey before district judge dennis m. cavanaugh.
the parties are presently engaged in motions practice and
briefing.
also, as previously disclosed, on april3, 2008, a merck
shareholder filed a putative class action lawsuit in federal
court in the eastern district of pennsylvania alleging that
merck and its chairman, president and chief executive officer,
richard t. clark, violated the federal securities laws. this
suit has since been withdrawn and re-filed in the district of
new jersey and has been consolidated with another federal
securities lawsuit under the caption in re merck&
co., inc. vytorin securities litigation. an amended
consolidated complaint was filed on october6, 2008 and
names as defendants merck; merck/schering-plough
pharmaceuticals, llc; and certain of the companys officers
and directors. specifically, the complaint alleges that merck
delayed releasing unfavorable results of a clinical study
regarding the efficacy of vytorin and that merck made
false and misleading statements about expected earnings, knowing
that once the results of the vytorin study were released,
sales of vytorin would decline and mercks earnings
would suffer. on april22, 2008, a member of a merck erisa
plan filed a putative class action lawsuit against the company
and certain of its officers and directors alleging they breached
their fiduciary duties under erisa. since that time, there have
been other similar erisa lawsuits filed against the company in
the district of new jersey, and all of those lawsuits have been
consolidated under the caption in re merck& co., inc.
vytorin erisa litigation. an amended consolidated
complaint was filed on february5, 2009, and names as
defendants merck and various members of mercks board of
directors and members of committees of mercks board of
directors. plaintiffs allege that the erisa plans
investment in company stock was imprudent because the
companys earnings are dependent on the commercial success
of its cholesterol drug vytorin and that defendants knew
or should have known that the results of a scientific study
would cause the medical community to turn to less expensive
drugs for cholesterol management. the company intends to defend
the lawsuits referred to in this section vigorously. unfavorable
outcomes resulting from the government investigations or the
civil litigation could have a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, liquidity and results of
operations.
in november 2008, the individual shareholder who had previously
delivered a letter to the companys board of directors
demanding that the board take legal action against the
responsible individuals to recover the amounts paid by the
company in 2007 to resolve certain governmental investigations
delivered another letter to the board demanding that the board
or a subcommittee thereof commence an investigation into the
matters raised by various civil suits and governmental
investigations relating to vytorin.
vaccine
litigation
as previously disclosed, the company is a party to individual
and class action product liability lawsuits and claims in the
united states involving pediatric vaccines (e.g., hepatitis b
vaccine) that contained thimerosal, a preservative used in
vaccines. merck has not distributed thimerosal-containing
pediatric vaccines in the united states since the fall of 2001.
as of december31, 2008, there were approximately 230
thimerosal related lawsuits pending in which the company is a
defendant, although the vast majority of those lawsuits are not
currently active. other defendants include other vaccine
manufacturers who produced pediatric vaccines containing
thimerosal as well as manufacturers of thimerosal. in these
actions, the plaintiffs allege, among other things, that they
have suffered neurological injuries as a result of exposure to
thimerosal from pediatric vaccines. there are no cases currently
scheduled for trial. the company will defend against these
lawsuits; however, it is possible that
table of contents
unfavorable outcomes could have a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, liquidity and results of
operations.
the company has been successful in having cases of this type
either dismissed or stayed on the ground that the action is
prohibited under the national childhood vaccine injury act (the
vaccine act). the vaccine act prohibits any person
from filing or maintaining a civil action (in state or federal
court) seeking damages against a vaccine manufacturer for
vaccine-related injuries unless a petition is first filed in the
united states court of federal claims (hereinafter the
vaccine court). under the vaccine act, before filing
a civil action against a vaccine manufacturer, the petitioner
must either (a)pursue his or her petition to conclusion in
vaccine court and then timely file an election to proceed with a
civil action in lieu of accepting the vaccine courts
adjudication of the petition or (b)timely exercise a right
to withdraw the petition prior to vaccine court adjudication in
accordance with certain statutorily prescribed time periods. the
company is not a party to vaccine court proceedings because the
petitions are brought against the united states department of
health and human services.
the company is aware that there are approximately 5,000 cases
pending in the vaccine court involving allegations that
thimerosal-containing vaccines
and/or the
m-m-r ii vaccine cause autism spectrum disorders. not all
of the thimerosal-containing vaccines involved in the vaccine
court proceeding are company vaccines. the company is the sole
source of the m-m-r ii vaccine domestically. the special
masters presiding over the vaccine court proceedings held
hearings in three test cases involving the theory that the
combination of m-m-r ii vaccine and thimerosal in
vaccines causes autism spectrum disorders. on february12,
2009, the special masters issued decisions in each of those
cases, finding that the theory was unsupported by valid
scientific evidence and that the petitioners in the three cases
were therefore not entitled to compensation. the special masters
have held similar hearings in three different test cases
involving the theory that thimerosal in vaccines alone causes
autism spectrum disorders. decisions have not been issued in
this second set of test cases. the special masters had
previously indicated that they would hold similar hearings
involving the theory that m-m-r ii alone causes autism
spectrum disorders, but they have stated that they no longer
intend to do so. the vaccine court has indicated that it intends
to use the evidence presented at these test case hearings to
guide the adjudication of the remaining autism spectrum disorder
cases.
patent
litigation
from time to time, generic manufacturers of pharmaceutical
products file abbreviated new drug applications
(andas) with the fda seeking to market generic
forms of the companys products prior to the expiration of
relevant patents owned by the company. generic pharmaceutical
manufacturers have submitted andas to the fda seeking to
market in the united states a generic form of fosamax,
nexium, singulair, primaxin and emend prior to the
expiration of the companys (and astrazenecas in the
case of nexium) patents concerning these products. in
addition, an anda has been submitted to the fda seeking to
market in the united states a generic form of zetia prior
to the expiration of schering-ploughs patent concerning
that product. the generic companies andas generally
include allegations of non-infringement, invalidity and
unenforceability of the patents. the company has filed patent
infringement suits in federal court against companies filing
andas for generic alendronate (fosamax),
montelukast (singulair), imipenem/cilastatin
(primaxin) and astrazeneca and the company have filed
patent infringement suits in federal court against companies
filing andas for generic esomeprazole (nexium).
also, the company and schering-plough have filed a patent
infringement suit in federal court against companies filing
andas for generic ezetimibe (zetia). similar patent
challenges exist in certain foreign jurisdictions. the company
intends to vigorously defend its patents, which it believes are
valid, against infringement by generic companies attempting to
market products prior to the expiration dates of such patents.
as with any litigation, there can be no assurance of the
outcomes, which, if adverse, could result in significantly
shortened periods of exclusivity for these products.
in february 2007, schering-plough received a notice from a
generic company indicating that it had filed an anda for
zetia and that it is challenging the u.s.patents
that are listed for zetia. merck and schering-plough
market zetia through a joint venture, msp singapore
company llc. on march22, 2007, schering-plough and msp
singapore company llc filed a patent infringement suit against
glenmark pharmaceuticals inc., usa and its parent corporation
(glenmark). the lawsuit automatically stays fda
approval of glenmarks anda until october 2010 or until an
adverse court decision, if any, whichever may occur earlier.
table of contents
as previously disclosed, in january 2007, the company received a
letter from ranbaxy laboratories ltd. (ranbaxy)
stating that it had filed an anda seeking approval of a generic
version of mercks primaxin (imipenem/cilastatin).
the lawsuit asserted infringement on mercks patent which
is due to expire on september15, 2009. in july 2008, merck
and ranbaxy entered into an agreement pursuant to which ranbaxy
can begin to market in the united states a generic form of
imipenem/cilastatin on september1, 2009.
as previously disclosed, in february 2007, the company received
a notice from teva pharmaceuticals, inc. (teva), a
generic company, indicating that it had filed an anda for
montelukast and that it is challenging the u.s.patent that
is listed for singulair. on april2, 2007, the
company filed a patent infringement action against teva. the
lawsuit automatically stays fda approval of tevas anda
until august 2009 or until an adverse court decision, if any,
whichever may occur earlier. a trial in this matter commenced on
february23, 2009.
as previously disclosed, in january 2005, the u.s.court of
appeals for the federal circuit in washington, dc found the
companys patent claims for once-weekly administration of
fosamax to be invalid. the company exhausted all options
to appeal this decision in 2005. based on the court of
appeals decision, fosamax and fosamax plus d
lost marketing exclusivity in the united states in 2008. as
a result of these events, the company is experiencing
significant declines in fosamax and fosamax plus d
u.s.sales. similarly, in most major foreign markets
the basic use patent covering alendronate expired in 2008 and
generic products are being sold.
in may 2005, the federal court of canada trial division issued a
decision refusing to bar the approval of generic alendronate on
the grounds that mercks patent for weekly alendronate was
likely invalid. this decision cannot be appealed and generic
alendronate was launched in canada in june 2005. in july 2005,
merck was sued in the federal court of canada by apotex corp.
(apotex) seeking damages for lost sales of generic
weekly alendronate due to the patent proceeding. in october
2008, the federal court of canada issued a decision awarding
apotex its lost profits for its generic alendronate product for
the period of time that it was held off the market due to
mercks lawsuit. the company has appealed this decision.
as previously disclosed, in september 2004, the company appealed
a decision of the opposition division of the european patent
office (epo) that revoked the companys patent
in europe that covers the once-weekly administration of
alendronate. on march14, 2006, the board of appeal of the
epo upheld the decision of the opposition division revoking the
patent. on march28, 2007, the epo issued another patent in
europe to the company that covers the once-weekly administration
of alendronate. under its terms, this new patent is effective
until july 2018. the company has sued multiple parties in
european countries asserting its european patent covering
once-weekly dosing of fosamax. oppositions have been
filed in the epo against this patent. a hearing in that
proceeding is scheduled for march 2009.
in addition, as previously disclosed, in japan after a
proceeding was filed challenging the validity of the
companys japanese patent for the once-weekly
administration of alendronate, the patent office invalidated the
patent. the decision is under appeal.
in october 2008, the u.s.patent for dorzolamide, covering
both trusopt and cosopt, expired, after which the
company experienced a significant decline in u.s. sales of these
products. the company is involved in litigation proceedings of
the corresponding patents in canada and great britain.
the company and astrazeneca received notice in october 2005 that
ranbaxy had filed an anda for esomeprazole magnesium. the anda
contains paragraphiv challenges to patents on
nexium. in november 2005, the company and astrazeneca
sued ranbaxy in the united states district court in new jersey.
as previously disclosed, astrazeneca, merck and ranbaxy have
entered into a settlement agreement which provides that ranbaxy
will not bring its generic esomeprazole product to market in the
united states until may27, 2014. the company and
astrazeneca each received a cid from the united states federal
trade commission (the ftc) in july 2008 regarding
the settlement agreement with ranbaxy. the company is
cooperating with the ftc in responding to this cid.
the company and astrazeneca received notice in january 2006 that
ivax pharmaceuticals, inc. (ivax), subsequently
acquired by teva, had filed an anda for esomeprazole magnesium.
the anda contains paragraphiv challenges to patents on
nexium. in march 2006, the company and astrazeneca sued
teva in the united states district court in new jersey. in
january 2008, the company and astrazeneca sued
dr.reddys
table of contents
laboratories (dr. reddys) in the district
court in new jersey based on dr.reddys filing of an
anda for esomeprazole magnesium. a trial has been scheduled for
january 2010 with respect to both ivaxs and
dr.reddys andas. in addition, the company and
astrazeneca received notice in december 2008 that sandoz inc.
(sandoz) had filed an anda for esomeprazole
magnesium. the anda contains paragraphiv challenges to
patents on nexium. in january 2009, the company and
astrazeneca sued sandoz in the district court in new jersey
based on sandozs filing of an anda for esomeprazole
magnesium.
in january 2009, the company received notice that an anda was
filed with the fda for aprepitant which contained a
paragraphiv challenge to patents on emend. the
company is evaluating the information provided with the notice
to determine what action should be taken.
in europe, the company is aware of various companies seeking
registration for generic losartan (the active ingredient for
cozaar). the company has patent rights to losartan via
license from e.i. du pont de nemours and company (du
pont). the company and du pont have filed patent
infringement proceedings against various companies in portugal,
spain, norway and austria.
other
litigation
in february 2008, an individual shareholder delivered a letter
to the companys board of directors demanding that the
board take legal action against the responsible individuals to
recover the amounts paid by the company in 2007 to resolve
certain governmental investigations.
as previously disclosed, prior to the spin-off of medco health
solutions, inc. (medco health), the company and
medco health agreed to settle, on a class action basis, a series
of lawsuits asserting violations of erisa (the gruer
cases). the company, medco health and certain
plaintiffs counsel filed the settlement agreement with the
federal district court in new york, where cases commenced by a
number of plaintiffs, including participants in a number of
pharmaceutical benefit plans for which medco health is the
pharmacy benefit manager, as well as trustees of such plans,
have been consolidated. medco health and the company agreed to
the proposed settlement in order to avoid the significant cost
and distraction of prolonged litigation. the proposed class
settlement has been agreed to by plaintiffs in five of the cases
filed against medco health and the company. under the proposed
settlement, the company and medco health have agreed to pay a
total of $42.5million, and medco health has agreed to
modify certain business practices or to continue certain
specified business practices for a period of five years. the
financial compensation is intended to benefit members of the
settlement class, which includes erisa plans for which medco
health administered a pharmacy benefit at any time since
december17, 1994. the district court held hearings to hear
objections to the fairness of the proposed settlement and
approved the settlement in 2004, but has not yet determined the
number of class member plans that have properly elected not to
participate in the settlement. the settlement becomes final only
if and when all appeals have been resolved. certain class member
plans have indicated that they will not participate in the
settlement. cases initiated by three such plans and two
individuals remain pending in the southern district of new york.
plaintiffs in these cases have asserted claims based on erisa as
well as other federal and state laws that are the same as or
similar to the claims that had been asserted by settling class
members in the gruer cases. the company and medco health are
named as defendants in these cases.
three notices of appeal were filed and the appellate court heard
oral argument in may 2005. in december 2005, the appellate court
issued a decision vacating the district courts judgment
and remanding the cases to the district court to allow the
district court to resolve certain jurisdictional issues. a
hearing was held to address such issues in february 2006. the
district court issued a ruling in august 2006 resolving such
jurisdictional issues in favor of the settling plaintiffs. the
class members and the other party that had previously appealed
the district courts judgment renewed their appeals. in
october 2007, the renewed appeals were affirmed in part and
vacated in part by the federal court of appeals. the appeals
court remanded the class settlement for further proceedings in
the district court.
the district court preliminarily approved the amended settlement
in may 2008. however, plaintiffs that had initially opted out of
the settlement class filed objections to the settlement. the
district court ordered briefing on the objections and heard
argument in october 2008. the district court has not yet issued
its ruling on those objections.
table of contents
after the spin-off of medco health, medco health assumed
substantially all of the liability exposure for the matters
discussed in the foregoing three paragraphs. these cases are
being defended by medco health.
there are various other legal proceedings, principally product
liability and intellectual property suits involving the company,
which are pending. while it is not feasible to predict the
outcome of such proceedings or the proceedings discussed in this
note, in the opinion of the company, all such proceedings are
either adequately covered by insurance or, if not so covered,
should not ultimately result in any liability that would have a
material adverse effect on the financial position, liquidity or
results of operations of the company, other than proceedings for
which a separate assessment is provided in this note.
environmental
matters
the company is a party to a number of proceedings brought under
the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and
liability act, commonly known as superfund, and other federal
and state equivalents. these proceedings seek to require the
operators of hazardous waste disposal facilities, transporters
of waste to the sites and generators of hazardous waste disposed
of at the sites to clean up the sites or to reimburse the
government for cleanup costs. the company has been made a party
to these proceedings as an alleged generator of waste disposed
of at the sites. in each case, the government alleges that the
defendants are jointly and severally liable for the cleanup
costs. although joint and several liability is alleged, these
proceedings are frequently resolved so that the allocation of
cleanup costs among the parties more nearly reflects the
relative contributions of the parties to the site situation. the
companys potential liability varies greatly from site to
site. for some sites the potential liability is de minimis
and for others the costs of cleanup have not yet been
determined. while it is not feasible to predict the outcome of
many of these proceedings brought by federal or state agencies
or private litigants, in the opinion of the company, such
proceedings should not ultimately result in any liability which
would have a material adverse effect on the financial position,
results of operations, liquidity or capital resources of the
company. the company has taken an active role in identifying and
providing for these costs and such amounts do not include any
reduction for anticipated recoveries of cleanup costs from
former site owners or operators or other recalcitrant
potentially responsible parties.
as previously disclosed, approximately 2,200 plaintiffs have
filed an amended complaint against merck and 12 other defendants
in united states district court, eastern district of california
asserting claims under the clean water act, the resource
conservation and recovery act, as well as negligence and
nuisance. the suit seeks damages for personal injury, diminution
of property value, medical monitoring and other alleged real and
personal property damage associated with groundwater and soil
contamination found at the site of a former merck subsidiary in
merced, california. the company intends to defend itself against
these claims.
in managements opinion, the liabilities for all
environmental matters that are probable and reasonably estimable
have been accrued and totaled $89.5million and
$109.6million at december31, 2008 and 2007,
respectively. these liabilities are undiscounted, do not
consider potential recoveries from other parties and will be
paid out over the periods of remediation for the applicable
sites, which are expected to occur primarily over the next
15years. although it is not possible to predict with
certainty the outcome of these matters, or the ultimate costs of
remediation, management does not believe that any reasonably
possible expenditures that may be incurred in excess of the
liabilities accrued should exceed $70.0million in the
aggregate. management also does not believe that these
expenditures should result in a material adverse effect on the
companys financial position, results of operations,
liquidity or capital resources for any year.
11.
stockholders
equity
other paid-in capital increased by $304.2million in 2008,
$848.4million in 2007 and $266.5million in 2006. the
increases in all periods reflect share-based compensation
activity, including the recognition of share-based compensation
and the impact of shares issued and related income tax benefits.
the increase in 2007 also reflects the issuance of shares
related to the acquisition of novacardia (see note4).
table of contents
a summary of treasury stock transactions (shares in millions) is
as follows:
shares
cost
shares
cost
shares
cost
balance as of january 1
811.0
$
28,174.7
808.4
$
27,567.4
794.3
$
26,984.4
purchases
69.5
2,725.0
26.5
1,429.7
26.4
1,002.3
issuances
(1)
(4.7
)
(164.2
)
(23.9
)
(822.4
)
(12.3
)
(419.3
)
balance as of december 31
875.8
$
30,735.5
811.0
$
28,174.7
808.4
$
27,567.4
(1)
issued primarily under
share-based compensation plans.
at december31, 2008 and 2007, 10million shares of
preferred stock, without par value, were authorized; none were
issued.
12.
share-based
compensation plans
the company has share-based compensation plans under which
employees, non-employee directors and employees of certain of
the companys equity method investees may be granted
options to purchase shares of company common stock at the fair
market value at the time of grant. in addition to stock options,
the company grants performance share units (psus)
and restricted stock units (rsus) to certain
management level employees. these plans were approved by the
companys shareholders. at december31, 2008,
126.8million shares were authorized for future grants
under the companys share-based compensation plans. the
company settles employee share-based compensation awards
primarily with treasury shares.
employee stock options are granted to purchase shares of company
stock at the fair market value at the time of grant. these
awards generally vest one-third each year over a three-year
period, with a contractual term of 10years. rsus are stock
awards that are granted to employees and entitle the holder to
shares of common stock as the awards vest, as well as
non-forfeitable dividend equivalents. the fair value of the
awards is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the
companys stock price. psus are stock awards where the
ultimate number of shares issued will be contingent on the
companys performance against a pre-set objective or set of
objectives. the fair value of each psu is determined on the date
of grant based on the companys stock price. over the
performance period, the number of shares of stock that are
expected to be issued will be adjusted based on the probability
of achievement of a performance target and final compensation
expense will be recognized based on the ultimate number of
shares issued. both psu and rsu payouts will be in shares of
company stock after the end of the vesting or performance
period, generally three years, subject to the terms applicable
to such awards.
the company recognizes employee share-based compensation expense
pursuant to fasb statement no.123r, share-based
payment, which requires the recognition of the fair value of
share-based compensation in net income, which the company
recognizes on a straight-line basis over the requisite service
period. in addition, the company applied the provisions of fasb
staff position 123r-3, transition election related to
accounting for the tax effects of share-based payment
awards, which provided the company an optional short-cut
method for calculating the historical pool of windfall tax
benefits. compensation expense is recognized immediately for
awards granted to retirement-eligible employees or over the
period from the grant date to the date retirement eligibility is
achieved. this approach is known as the non-substantive vesting
period approach. total pretax share-based compensation cost
recorded in the consolidated statement of income in 2008, 2007,
and 2006 was $348.0million, $330.2million and
$312.5million, respectively, with related income tax
benefits of $107.5million, $104.1million and
$98.5million, respectively.
the company uses the black-scholes option pricing model for
determining the fair value of option grants. in applying this
model, the company uses both historical data and current market
data to estimate the fair value of its options. the
black-scholes model requires several assumptions including
expected dividend yield, risk-free interest rate, volatility,
and term of the options. the expected dividend yield is based on
historical patterns of dividend payments. the risk-free rate is
based on the rate at grant date of zero-coupon
u.s.treasury notes with a term equal to the expected term
of the option. expected volatility is estimated using a blend of
historical and implied volatility. the historical component is
based on historical monthly price changes. the implied
volatility is obtained
table of contents
from market data on the companys traded options. the
expected life represents the expected amount of time that
options granted are expected to be outstanding, based on
historical and forecasted exercise behavior.
the weighted average fair value of options granted in 2008, 2007
and 2006 was $9.80, $9.51 and $7.25 per option, respectively,
and were determined using the following assumptions:
years ended december
expected dividend yield
3.5
%
3.4
%
4.2
%
risk-free interest rate
2.7
%
4.4
%
4.6
%
expected volatility
31.0
%
24.6
%
26.5
%
expected life (years)
6.1
5.7
5.7
summarized information relative to the companys stock
option plans activity (options in thousands) is as follows:
weighted
weighted
average
average
remaining
aggregate
number
exercise
contractual
intrinsic
of options
price
term
value
balance as of january1, 2008
243,014.1
$
53.47
granted
35,542.7
43.35
exercised
(2,856.4
)
35.83
forfeited
(28,049.1
)
59.97
outstanding as of december31, 2008
247,651.3
$
51.50
5.17
$
13.7
exercisable as of december31, 2008
180,678.1
$
54.63
3.95
$
13.3
additional information pertaining to the companys stock
option plans is provided in the table below:
years ended december
total intrinsic value of stock options exercised
$
40.3
$
301.2
$
67.3
fair value of stock options vested
$
259.0
$
251.1
$
857.4
cash received from the exercise of stock options
$
102.3
$
898.6
$
369.9
a summary of the companys nonvested rsu and psu activity
(shares in thousands) is as follows:
rsus
psus(1)
weighted
weighted
average
average
number
grant date
number
grant date
of shares
fair value
of shares
fair value
nonvested as of january1, 2008
5,423.3
$
37.26
1,406.8
$
37.75
granted
3,337.6
37.81
742.2
44.30
vested
(2,267.9
)
31.68
(416.3
)
31.99
forfeited
(200.8
)
41.91
(111.3
)
43.14
nonvested at december31, 2008
6,292.2
$
39.41
1,621.4
$
41.86
(1)
the psu rollforward excludes 83.2 thousand additional shares
that were ultimately issued/vested during 2008 in connection
with psus granted in 2005 that exceeded anticipated performance
targets.
at december31, 2008, there was $444.1million of
total pretax unrecognized compensation expense related to
nonvested stock options, rsu and psu awards which will be
recognized over a weighted average period of 2.0years. for
segment reporting, share-based compensation costs are
unallocated expenses.
table of contents
13.
pension
and other postretirement benefit plans
the company has defined benefit pension plans covering eligible
employees in the united states and in certain of its
international subsidiaries. pension benefits in the united
states are based on a formula that considers final average pay
and years of credited service. in addition, the company provides
medical, dental and life insurance benefits, principally to its
eligible u.s.retirees and similar benefits to their
dependents, through its other postretirement benefit plans. the
company uses december 31 as the year-end measurement date for
all of its pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans.
the net cost for the companys pension and other
postretirement benefit plans consisted of the following
components:
other postretirement
pension benefits
benefits
years ended december
service cost
$
344.1
$
377.2
$
363.7
$
73.2
$
90.8
$
91.3
interest cost
414.2
379.9
341.3
113.8
107.7
100.1
expected return on plan assets
(559.4
)
(491.4
)
(436.8
)
(129.0
)
(130.5
)
(112.6
)
net amortization
70.4
149.4
169.4
(22.6
)
(16.8
)
1.9
termination benefits
62.3
25.6
29.7
11.2
7.7
3.6
curtailments
5.7
1.1
-
(15.9
)
(16.8
)
(2.6
)
settlements
8.6
5.4
14.7
-
-
-
net pension and other postretirement cost
$
345.9
$
447.2
$
482.0
$
30.7
$
42.1
$
81.7
the net pension cost attributable to u.s.plans included in
the above table was $226.4million in 2008,
$302.2million in 2007 and $327.2million in 2006.
in connection with the companys restructuring actions (see
note3), merck recorded termination charges in 2008, 2007
and 2006 on its pension and other postretirement benefit plans
related to expanded eligibility for certain employees exiting
the company. also, in connection with these restructuring
activities, the company recorded net curtailment losses in 2008
and 2007 on its pension plans and net curtailment gains in 2008,
2007 and 2006 on its other postretirement benefit plans.
in 2006, amendments that changed participant contributions for
other postretirement benefit plans generated curtailment gains.
in addition, the company recorded settlement losses in 2008,
2007 and 2006 on certain of its domestic and international
pension plans.
table of contents
summarized information about the changes in plan assets and
benefit obligation, the funded status and the amounts recorded
at december31, 2008 and 2007 is as follows:
pension benefits
other postretirement benefits
fair value of plan assets at january 1
$
7,385.4
$
7,056.7
$
1,577.6
$
1,484.2
actual return on plan assets
(2,049.7
)
498.4
(512.0
)
95.0
company contributions
1,115.8
185.3
70.2
44.8
benefits paid from plan assets
(568.2
)
(362.5
)
(47.4
)
(46.4
)
other
4.3
7.5
-
-
fair value of plan assets at december 31
$
5,887.6
$
7,385.4
$
1,088.4
$
1,577.6
benefit obligation at january 1
$
7,049.4
$
6,926.8
$
1,936.8
$
1,821.8
service cost
344.1
377.2
73.2
90.8
interest cost
414.2
379.9
113.8
107.7
actuarial losses (gains)
167.8
(242.9
)
(136.4
)
(12.7
)
benefits paid
(643.2
)
(391.8
)
(76.7
)
(80.1
)
plan amendments
-
(20.9
)
(180.6
)
(8.0
)
curtailments
(249.6
)
(5.6
)
6.0
9.6
termination benefits
62.3
25.6
11.2
7.7
other
(4.9
)
1.1
-
-
benefit obligation at december 31
$
7,140.1
$
7,049.4
$
1,747.3
$
1,936.8
funded status at december 31
$
(1,252.5
)
$
336.0
$
(658.9
)
$
(359.2
)
recognized as:
other assets
$
142.4
$
1,132.3
$
147.7
$
387.9
accrued and other current liabilities
(46.8
)
(37.3
)
(3.4
)
(3.8
)
deferred income taxes and noncurrent liabilities
(1,348.1
)
(759.0
)
(803.2
)
(743.3
)
the fair value of u.s.pension plan assets included in the
preceding table was $3.5billion in 2008 and
$4.4billion in 2007. the pension benefit obligation of
u.s.plans included in this table was $4.6billion in
2008 and $4.3billion in 2007.
the weighted average asset allocations of the investment
portfolio for the pension and other postretirement benefit plans
at december 31 are as follows:
other
pension benefits
postretirement benefits
target
target
u.s. equities
%
%
%
%
%
55%
international equities
%
%
%
%
%
29%
fixed-income investments
%
%
%
%
%
16%
real estate and other investments
%
%
%
%
%
0%
cash and cash equivalents
%
%
%
%
%
0%
%
%
%
%
%
100%
the target investment portfolios for the companys pension
plans are determined by country based on the nature of the
liabilities and considering the demographic composition of the
plan participants (average age, years of
table of contents
service and active versus retiree status) and local regulations.
other investments include insurance contracts for certain
international pension plans. the target investment portfolio
asset allocation for the companys other postretirement
benefit plans is consistent with the long-term nature of the
plans benefit obligation and is well diversified among the
asset classes in which the portfolio invests. the actual return
on plan assets for pension and other postretirement benefit
plans reflects the portfolios allocation to global equity
markets which delivered significant negative returns during 2008.
as a result of the decline in plan assets noted above, the
company contributed $765.9million to its pension plans and
other postretirement benefit plans during the fourth quarter of
2008. contributions to the pension plans and other
postretirement benefit plans during 2009 are expected to be
$600.0million and $60.0million, respectively.
expected benefit payments are as follows:
other
pension
postretirement
benefits
benefits
$
320.1
$
79.5
328.4
86.0
357.5
92.4
388.4
97.7
421.3
103.3
2014- 2018
2,759.2
606.8
expected benefit payments are based on the same assumptions used
to measure the benefit obligations and include estimated future
employee service.
at december31, 2008 and 2007, the accumulated benefit
obligation was $5.7billion and $5.6billion,
respectively, for all pension plans. at december31, 2008
and 2007, the accumulated benefit obligation for
u.s.pension plans was $3.4billion and
$3.2billion, respectively.
for pension plans with benefit obligations in excess of plan
assets at december31, 2008 and 2007, the fair value of
plan assets was $4.8billion and $558.3million,
respectively, and the benefit obligation was $6.2billion
and $1.4billion, respectively. for those plans with
accumulated benefit obligations in excess of plan assets at
december31, 2008 and 2007, the fair value of plan assets
was $414.5million and $4.4million, respectively, and
the accumulated benefit obligation was $880.0million and
$405.0million, respectively.
effective december31, 2006, the company adopted fasb
statement no.158, employers accounting for
defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an
amendment of fasb statements no.87, 106 and 132r
(fas158), except for the requirement to
measure plan assets and benefit obligations as of the
companys fiscal year end, which was effective as of
december31, 2008. fas158 required the company to
fully recognize the funded status of its benefit plans. each
overfunded plan is recognized as an asset and each underfunded
plan is recognized as a liability. previously unrecognized net
losses and unrecognized plan changes are recognized as a
component of aoci (see note17).
table of contents
net loss amounts reflect experience differentials primarily
relating to differences between expected and actual returns on
plan assets as well as the effects of changes in actuarial
assumptions. net loss amounts in excess of certain thresholds
are amortized into net pension and other postretirement benefit
cost over the average remaining service life of employees. the
following amounts were reflected as components of other
comprehensive income:
other
pension
postretirement
year ended december31,
plans
benefit plans
total
net loss arising during the period
$
(2,586.0
)
$
(509.3
)
$
(3,095.3
)
prior service credit arising during the period
10.6
157.7
168.3
$
(2,575.4
)
$
(351.6
)
$
(2,927.0
)
net loss amortization included in benefit cost
$
50.8
$
26.1
$
76.9
prior service cost (credit) amortization included in benefit
cost
7.6
(48.7
)
(41.1
)
$
58.4
$
(22.6
)
$
35.8
year ended december31, 2007
net gain (loss) arising during the period
$
269.1
$
(16.5
)
$
252.6
prior service credit (cost) arising during the period
21.4
(21.2
)
0.2
$
290.5
$
(37.7
)
$
252.8
net loss amortization included in benefit cost
$
139.3
$
26.6
$
165.9
prior service cost (credit) amortization included in benefit cost
12.1
(43.4
)
(31.3
)
$
151.4
$
(16.8
)
$
134.6
the estimated net loss and prior service cost (credit) amounts
that will be amortized from aoci into net pension and
postretirement benefit cost during 2009 are $106.8million
and $7.9million, respectively, for pension plans and are
$72.5million and $(50.0)million, respectively, for
other postretirement benefit plans.
the company reassesses its benefit plan assumptions on a regular
basis. the weighted average assumptions used in determining
pension plan and u.s.pension and other postretirement
benefit plan information are as follows:
u.s. pension and other
postretirement
pension plans
benefit plans
december 31
net cost
discount rate
5.90%
5.35%
5.15%
6.50%
6.00%
5.75%
expected rate of return on plan assets
7.65%
7.65%
7.65%
8.75%
8.75%
8.75%
salary growth rate
4.30%
4.20%
4.20%
4.50%
4.50%
4.50%
benefit obligation
discount rate
5.75%
5.90%
5.35%
6.20%
6.50%
6.00%
salary growth rate
4.25%
4.30%
4.20%
4.50%
4.50%
4.50%
the expected rate of return for both the pension and other
postretirement benefit plans represents the average rate of
return to be earned on plan assets over the period the benefits
included in the benefit obligation are to be paid and is
determined on a country basis. in developing the expected rate
of return within each country, long-term historical returns data
is considered as well as actual returns on the plan assets and
other capital markets experience. using this reference
information, the long-term return expectations for each asset
category and a weighted average expected return for each
countrys target portfolio is developed, according to the
allocation among those investment categories. the expected
portfolio performance reflects the contribution of active
table of contents
management as appropriate. for 2009, the companys expected
rate of return of 8.75% will remain unchanged from 2008 for its
u.s.pension and other postretirement benefit plans.
the health care cost trend rate assumptions for other
postretirement benefit plans are as follows:
december 31
health care cost trend rate assumed for next year
9.0
%
9.0
%
rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline
5.0
%
5.0
%
year that the trend rate reaches the ultimate trend rate
a one percentage point change in the health care cost trend rate
would have had the following effects:
one percentage
point
increase
decrease
effect on total service and interest cost components
$
32.9
$
(26.1
)
effect on benefit obligation
$
250.0
$
(204.5
)
14.
other
(income) expense, net
years ended december
interest income
$
(631.4
)
$
(741.1
)
$
(764.3
)
interest expense
251.3
384.3
375.1
exchange losses (gains)
147.4
(54.3
)
(25.0
)
minority interests
123.9
121.4
120.5
other, net
(2,085.4
)
335.9
(89.0
)
$
(2,194.2
)
$
46.2
$
(382.7
)
the fluctuation in exchange losses (gains) in 2008 from 2007 is
primarily due to the higher cost of foreign currency contracts
due to lower u.s.interest rates and unfavorable impacts of
period-to-period changes in foreign currency exchange rates on
net long or net short foreign currency positions, considering
both net monetary assets and related foreign currency contracts.
the change in other, net for 2008 primarily reflects an
aggregate gain in 2008 from azlp of $2.2billion (see
note8), the impact of a $671million charge in 2007
related to the resolution of certain civil governmental
investigations, and a 2008 gain of $249million related to
the sale of the companys remaining worldwide rights to
aggrastat, partially offset by a $300million
expense for a contribution to the merck company foundation,
higher recognized losses of $153million, net, in the
companys investment portfolio and a $58million
charge related to the resolution of an investigation into
whether the company violated consumer protection laws with
respect to the sales and marketing of vioxx (see
note10). the change in other, net for 2007 primarily
reflects a charge in 2007 related to the resolution of certain
civil governmental investigations, partially offset by the
favorable impact of 2007 gains on sales of assets and product
divestitures, as well as a net gain on the settlements of
certain patent disputes. interest paid was $247.0million
in 2008, $406.4million in 2007 and $387.5million in
2006.
table of contents
15.
taxes on
income
a reconciliation between the companys effective tax rate
and the u.s.statutory rate is as follows:
amount
tax rate
amount
tax rate
amount
tax rate
u.s. statutory rate applied to income before taxes
$
3,432.7
35.0
%
$
1,179.8
35.0
%
$
2,177.5
35.0
%
differential arising from:
foreign earnings
(1,155.2
)
(11.7
)
(1,196.0
)
(35.5
)
(1,024.1
)
(16.5
)
foreign tax credit utilization
(192.0
)
(2.0
)
-
-
-
-
state tax settlements
(191.6
)
(2.0
)
-
-
-
-
tax exemption for puerto rico operations
-
-
-
-
(87.6
)
(1.4
)
state taxes
310.9
3.2
11.6
0.3
129.6
2.1
acquired research
-
-
113.8
3.4
266.9
4.3
other
(1)
(205.4
)
(2.1
)
(13.9
)
(0.4
)
325.3
5.2
$
1,999.4
20.4
%
$
95.3
2.8
%
$
1,787.6
28.7
%
(1)
other includes the tax effect of minority interests,
contingency reserves, research credits, export incentives and
miscellaneous items.
the 2007 tax rate reconciliation percentage of (35.5)% for
foreign earnings reflects the change in mix of foreign and
domestic earnings primarily resulting from the
$4.85billion u.s.vioxx settlement agreement
charge.
income (loss) before taxes consisted of:
years ended december
domestic
$
5,086.2
$
(2,647.2
)
$
2,124.4
foreign
4,721.6
6,017.9
4,097.0
$
9,807.8
$
3,370.7
$
6,221.4
taxes on income consisted of:
years ended december
current provision
federal
$
1,053.6
$
988.1
$
1,618.4
foreign
292.4
687.0
458.3
state
123.3
202.2
241.1
1,469.3
1,877.3
2,317.8
deferred provision
federal
419.0
(1,671.5
)
(374.1
)
foreign
55.8
157.2
(130.3
)
state
55.3
(267.7
)
(25.8
)
530.1
(1,782.0
)
(530.2
)
$
1,999.4
$
95.3
$
1,787.6
table of contents
deferred income taxes at december 31 consisted of:
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
other intangibles
$
-
$
177.3
$
-
$
229.7
inventory related
248.6
-
267.4
9.0
accelerated depreciation
-
1,045.1
-
1,096.3
advance payment
-
-
338.6
-
equity investments
-
75.1
-
690.2
pensions and other postretirement benefits
796.5
129.9
239.3
184.0
compensation related
347.5
-
374.8
-
vioxx litigation reserve
1,755.1
-
2,130.0
-
unrecognized tax benefits
984.1
-
980.8
-
net operating losses
224.7
-
339.5
-
other
1,012.9
60.2
899.1
8.7
subtotal
5,369.4
1,487.6
5,569.5
2,217.9
valuation allowance
(94.2
)
(94.0
)
total deferred taxes
$
5,275.2
$
1,487.6
$
5,475.5
$
2,217.9
net deferred income taxes
$
3,787.6
$
3,257.6
recognized as:
deferred income taxes and other current assets
$
2,436.9
$
829.5
other assets
1,666.7
2,823.7
income taxes payable
$
3.8
$
-
deferred income taxes and noncurrent liabilities
312.2
395.6
the company has net operating loss (nol)
carryforwards in a number of jurisdictions, the most significant
of which is the united kingdom with nol carryforwards of
$76.5million which have no expiration date. the valuation
allowance in both years primarily relates to certain canadian
nol carryforwards resulting from a legal entity reorganization.
income taxes paid in 2008, 2007 and 2006 were $1.8billion,
$3.5billion and $2.4billion, respectively. stock
option exercises reduced income taxes paid by
$138.4million in 2007. stock option exercises did not have
a significant impact on taxes paid in 2008 or 2006.
on january1, 2007, the company adopted the provisions of
fasb interpretation no.48, accounting for uncertainty
in income taxes an interpretation of fasb statement
no.109, (fin48), which resulted in
the recognition of an $81million decrease in the
companys existing liability for unrecognized tax benefits,
with a corresponding increase to the january1, 2007
retained earnings balance. after the implementation of
fin48, as of january1, 2007, the companys
liability for unrecognized tax benefits was $5.01billion,
excluding liabilities for interest and penalties.
table of contents
a reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of
unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
balance as of january 1
$
3,689.5
$
5,008.4
additions related to current year positions
269.4
284.5
additions related to prior year positions
64.2
187.8
reductions for tax positions of prior years
(310.5
)
(87.0
)
settlements
(1)
(38.8
)
(1,703.5
)
lapse of statute of limitations
(8.8
)
(0.7
)
balance as of december 31
$
3,665.0
$
3,689.5
(1)
reflects the settlement with the
internal revenue service (irs) discussed
below.
if the company were to recognize the unrecognized tax benefits
of $3.66billion at december31, 2008, the income tax
provision would reflect a favorable net impact of
$2.91billion.
the company recognizes interest, penalties and exchange gains
and losses associated with uncertain tax positions as a
component of taxes on income in the consolidated statement of
income. interest and penalties associated with uncertain tax
positions amounted to $101million in 2008 and
$270million in 2007. liabilities for accrued interest and
penalties included in the consolidated balance sheet were
$1.68billion, $1.60billion and $2.40billion as
of december31, 2008, december31, 2007 and
january1, 2007.
as previously disclosed, the irs has completed its examination
of the companys tax returns for the years 1993 to 2001. as
a result of the examination, the company made an aggregate
payment of $2.79billion in february 2007. this payment was
offset by (i)a tax refund of $165million received in
2007 for amounts previously paid for these matters and
(ii)a federal tax benefit of approximately
$360million related to interest included in the payment,
resulting in a net cash cost to the company of approximately
$2.3billion in 2007. the impact for years subsequent to
2001 for items reviewed as part of the examination was included
in the payment although those years remain open in all other
respects. the closing of the irs examination did not have a
material impact on the companys results of operations in
2007 as these amounts had been previously provided for.
the company reported the results of the irs adjustments for the
years 1993 through 2001 to various state tax authorities. this
resulted in additional tax, as well as interest and penalty
payments of $20million and $9million, respectively,
in 2008 and $57million and $67million, respectively,
in 2007, and an equivalent reduction in the balances of
unrecognized tax benefits, accrued interest and penalties.
the amount of unrecognized tax benefits will change in the next
12months due to the anticipated closure of various foreign
and state tax examinations, including the settlement with the
canada revenue agency (cra) discussed below. the
company estimates that the change could result in a reduction in
unrecognized tax benefits of approximately $1.2billion.
as previously disclosed, in october 2006, the cra issued the
company a notice of reassessment containing adjustments related
to certain intercompany pricing matters. in february 2009, merck
and the cra negotiated a settlement agreement in regard to these
matters. the settlement calls for merck to pay an additional tax
of approximately $300million (u.s.dollars) and
interest of approximately $360million (u.s.dollars)
with no additional amounts or penalties due on this assessment.
in accordance with fin48, the settlement will be accounted
for in the first quarter of 2009. the company had previously
established reserves for these matters. a significant portion of
the taxes paid is expected to be creditable for u.s.tax
purposes. the resolution of these matters will not have a
material effect on the companys financial position or
liquidity, other than with respect to the associated collateral
as discussed below.
in addition, in july 2007 and november 2008, the cra proposed
additional adjustments for 1999 and 2000, respectively, relating
to other intercompany pricing matters. the adjustments would
increase canadian tax due by approximately $260million
(u.s.dollars) plus $240million (u.s.dollars)
of interest. it is possible that the cra will propose similar
adjustments for later years. the company disagrees with the
positions taken by the cra and believes they are without merit.
the company intends to contest the assessments through the cra
appeals
table of contents
process and the courts if necessary. management believes that
resolution of these matters will not have a material effect on
the companys financial position or liquidity.
in connection with the appeals process, during 2007, the company
pledged collateral to two financial institutions, one of which
provided a guarantee to the cra and the other to the quebec
ministry of revenue representing a portion of the tax and
interest assessed. the collateral is included in deferred income
taxes and other current assets and other assets in the
consolidated balance sheet and totaled approximately
$1.2billion and $1.4billion at december31,
2008 and 2007, respectively. the guarantees will be reduced and
the related collateral released following payments to the cra
and quebec ministry of revenue, causing the restricted amounts
to be reclassified to cash and investments as appropriate on the
consolidated balance sheet.
the irs is examining the companys 2002 to 2005 federal
income tax returns. in addition, various state and foreign tax
examinations are in progress. tax years that remain subject to
examination by major tax jurisdictions include germany from
1999, italy from 2000 and japan from 2002.
at december31, 2008, foreign earnings of
$22.0billion have been retained indefinitely by subsidiary
companies for reinvestment, therefore no provision has been made
for income taxes that would be payable upon the distributions of
such earnings. in addition, the company has subsidiaries
operating in puerto rico and singapore under tax incentive
grants that expire in 2028 and 2026, respectively.
16.
earnings
per share
the weighted average common shares used in the computations of
basic earnings per common share and earnings per common share
assuming dilution (shares in millions) are as follows:
years ended december
average common shares outstanding
2,135.8
2,170.5
2,177.6
common shares issuable
(1)
9.5
22.4
10.1
average common shares outstanding assuming dilution
2,145.3
2,192.9
2,187.7
(1)
issuable primarily under
share-based compensation plans.
in 2008, 2007 and 2006, 201.2million, 123.7million
and 222.5million, respectively, of common shares issuable
under the companys share-based compensation plans were
excluded from the computation of earnings per common share
assuming dilution because the effect would have been
antidilutive.
table of contents
17.
comprehensive
income
the components of other comprehensive income are as follows:
pretax(1)
tax
after tax
year ended december31, 2008
net unrealized gain on derivatives
$
208.9
$
(83.5
)
$
125.4
net loss realization
43.3
(17.1
)
26.2
derivatives
252.2
(100.6
)
151.6
net unrealized loss on investments
(212.9
)
79.2
(133.7
)
net loss realization
116.9
(63.7
)
53.2
investments
(96.0
)
15.5
(80.5
)
benefit plan net (loss) gain and prior service cost (credit),
net of amortization
(2,891.2
)
1,129.5
(1,761.7
)
cumulative translation adjustment related to equity
investees
(37.2
)
-
(37.2
)
$
(2,772.2
)
$
1,044.4
$
(1,727.8
)
year ended december31, 2007
net unrealized loss on derivatives
$
(50.5
)
$
20.7
$
(29.8
)
net loss realization
43.0
(17.6
)
25.4
derivatives
(7.5
)
3.1
(4.4
)
net unrealized gain on investments
106.2
(24.5
)
81.7
net gain realization
(36.1
)
12.4
(23.7
)
investments
70.1
(12.1
)
58.0
benefit plan net gain (loss) and prior service cost (credit),
net of amortization
387.4
(147.1
)
240.3
cumulative translation adjustment related to equity investees
34.4
9.9
44.3
$
484.4
$
(146.2
)
$
338.2
year ended december31, 2006
net unrealized loss on derivatives
$
(111.2
)
$
45.2
$
(66.0
)
net loss realization
25.5
(10.4
)
15.1
derivatives
(85.7
)
34.8
(50.9
)
net unrealized gain on investments
33.9
(7.8
)
26.1
net loss realization
0.2
(0.2
)
-
investments
34.1
(8.0
)
26.1
minimum pension liability
34.8
(12.3
)
22.5
cumulative translation adjustment related to equity investees
29.0
(10.1
)
18.9
$
12.2
$
4.4
$
16.6
(1)
net of applicable minority
interest.
table of contents
the components of accumulated other comprehensive loss are as
follows:
december 31
net unrealized gain (loss) on derivatives
$
111.9
$
(39.7
)
net unrealized gain on investments
63.1
143.6
pension plan net loss
(2,440.7
)
(853.6
)
other postretirement benefit plan net loss
(596.5
)
(305.4
)
pension plan prior service cost
(26.4
)
(38.0
)
other postretirement benefit plan prior service cost
309.0
204.1
cumulative translation adjustment related to equity investees
25.7
62.9
$
(2,553.9
)
$
(826.1
)
at december31, 2008, $1.4million of the net
unrealized gain on derivatives is associated with options
maturing in the next 12months, which hedge anticipated
foreign currency denominated sales over that same period.
18.
segment
reporting
the companys operations are principally managed on a
products basis and are comprised of two reportable segments: the
pharmaceutical segment and the vaccines and infectious diseases
segment. segment composition reflects certain managerial changes
that were implemented in early 2008. in addition, in the first
quarter of 2008, the company revised the calculation of segment
profits to include a greater allocation of costs to the
segments. segment disclosures for prior periods have been recast
on a comparable basis with 2008.
the pharmaceutical segment includes human health pharmaceutical
products marketed either directly by merck or through joint
ventures. these products consist of therapeutic and preventive
agents, sold by prescription, for the treatment of human
disorders. merck sells these human health pharmaceutical
products primarily to drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals,
government agencies and managed health care providers such as
health maintenance organizations, pharmacy benefit managers and
other institutions. the vaccines and infectious diseases segment
includes human health vaccine and infectious disease products
marketed either directly by merck or, in the case of vaccines,
also through a joint venture. vaccine products consist of
preventive pediatric, adolescent and adult vaccines, primarily
administered at physician offices. merck sells these human
health vaccines primarily to physicians, wholesalers, physician
distributors and government entities. a large component of
pediatric and adolescent vaccines is sold to the
u.s.centers for disease control and prevention vaccines
for children program, which is funded by the
u.s.government. infectious disease products consist of
therapeutic agents for the treatment of infection sold primarily
to drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals and government
agencies. the vaccines and infectious diseases segment includes
the majority of the companys aggregate vaccine and
infectious disease product sales, but excludes sales of these
products by
non-u.s.subsidiaries
which are included in the pharmaceutical segment.
table of contents
other segments include other non-reportable human and animal
health segments. the accounting policies for the segments
described above are the same as those described in note2.
revenues and profits for these segments are as follows:
vaccines and
infectious
pharmaceutical
diseases
all other
total
year ended december31, 2008
segment revenues
$
19,382.9
$
4,237.0
$
81.8
$
23,701.7
segment profits
12,400.4
2,798.9
419.3
15,618.6
included in segment profits:
equity income from affiliates
1,786.6
121.4
416.2
2,324.2
depreciation and amortization
(96.2
)
(5.2
)
-
(101.4
)
year ended december31, 2007
segment revenues
$
19,617.6
$
4,321.5
$
162.0
$
24,101.1
segment profits
13,430.6
2,625.0
452.7
16,508.3
included in segment profits:
equity income from affiliates
2,260.0
65.8
390.1
2,715.9
depreciation and amortization
(131.0
)
(6.1
)
-
(137.1
)
year ended december31, 2006
segment revenues
$
19,835.6
$
2,244.7
$
162.1
$
22,242.4
segment profits
12,476.5
1,253.1
380.7
14,110.3
included in segment profits:
equity income from affiliates
1,673.1
72.4
315.2
2,060.7
depreciation and amortization
(153.0
)
(5.0
)
-
(158.0
)
segment profits are comprised of segment revenues less certain
elements of materials and production costs and operating
expenses, including components of equity income (loss) from
affiliates and depreciation and amortization expenses. for
internal management reporting presented to the chief operating
decision maker, the company does not allocate the vast majority
of indirect production costs, research and development expenses
and general and administrative expenses, as well as the cost of
financing these activities. separate divisions maintain
responsibility for monitoring and managing these costs,
including depreciation related to fixed assets utilized by these
divisions and, therefore, they are not included in segment
profits.
table of contents
sales(1)of
the companys products were as follows:
years ended december
pharmaceutical:
singulair
$
4,336.9
$
4,266.3
$
3,579.0
cozaar/hyzaar
3,557.7
3,350.1
3,163.1
fosamax
1,552.7
3,049.0
3,134.4
januvia
1,397.1
667.5
42.9
cosopt/trusopt
781.2
786.8
697.1
zocor
660.1
876.5
2,802.7
maxalt
529.2
467.3
406.4
propecia
429.1
405.4
351.8
arcoxia
377.3
329.1
265.4
vasotec/vaseretic
356.7
494.6
547.2
janumet
351.1
86.4
-
proscar
323.5
411.0
618.5
emend
263.8
204.2
130.8
other
pharmaceutical
(2)
2,278.9
2,422.9
2,780.5
vaccine and infectious disease product sales included in the
pharmaceutical
segment
(3)
2,187.6
1,800.5
1,315.8
pharmaceutical segment revenues
19,382.9
19,617.6
19,835.6
vaccines(4)
and infectious diseases:
gardasil
1,402.8
1,480.6
234.8
proquad/m-m-r ii/varivax
1,268.5
1,347.1
820.1
rotateq
664.5
524.7
163.4
zostavax
312.4
236.0
38.6
hepatitis vaccines
148.3
279.9
248.5
other vaccines
354.6
409.9
354.0
primaxin
760.4
763.5
704.8
cancidas
596.4
536.9
529.8
isentress
361.1
41.3
-
crixivan/stocrin
275.1
310.2
327.3
invanz
265.0
190.2
139.2
other infectious disease
15.5
1.7
-
vaccine and infectious disease product sales included in the
pharmaceutical segment
(3)
(2,187.6
)
(1,800.5
)
(1,315.8
)
vaccines and infectious diseases segment revenues
4,237.0
4,321.5
2,244.7
other segment
revenues
(5)
81.8
162.0
162.1
total segment revenues
23,701.7
24,101.1
22,242.4
other
(6)
148.6
96.6
393.6
$
23,850.3
$
24,197.7
$
22,636.0
(1)
presented net of discounts and
returns.
(2)
other pharmaceutical primarily
includes sales of other human pharmaceutical products and
revenue from the companys relationship with azlp primarily
relating to sales of
nexium, as well as
prilosec. revenue from azlp was $1.6billion,
$1.7billion and $1.8billion in 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively. in 2006, other pharmaceutical also reflects
certain supply sales, including supply sales associated with the
companys arrangement with dr.reddys
laboratories for the sale of generic simvastatin.
(3)
sales of vaccine and infectious
disease products by
non-u.s.
subsidiaries are included in the pharmaceutical
segment.
(4)
these amounts do not reflect
sales of vaccines sold in most major european markets through
the companys joint venture, sanofi pasteur msd, the
results of which are reflected in equity income from affiliates.
these amounts do, however, reflect supply sales to sanofi
pasteur msd.
(5)
includes other non-reportable
human and animal health segments.
(6)
other revenues are primarily
comprised of miscellaneous corporate revenues, sales related to
divested products or businesses and other supply sales not
included in segment results.
table of contents
consolidated revenues by geographic area where derived are as
follows:
years ended december
united states
$
13,370.5
$
14,690.9
$
13,776.8
europe, middle east and africa
5,773.8
5,159.0
4,977.1
japan
1,823.5
1,533.2
1,479.0
other
2,882.5
2,814.6
2,403.1
$
23,850.3
$
24,197.7
$
22,636.0
a reconciliation of total segment profits to consolidated income
before taxes is as follows:
years ended december
segment profits
$
15,618.6
$
16,508.3
$
14,110.3
other profits
90.4
21.8
256.7
adjustments
424.7
367.7
516.3
unallocated:
interest income
631.4
741.1
764.3
interest expense
(251.3
)
(384.3
)
(375.1
)
equity income from affiliates
236.5
260.6
233.7
depreciation and amortization
(1,529.8
)
(1,851.0
)
(2,110.4
)
research and development
(4,805.3
)
(4,882.8
)
(4,782.9
)
gain on distribution from astrazeneca lp
2,222.7
-
-
u.s. vioxx settlement agreement charge
-
(4,850.0
)
-
other expenses, net
(2,830.1
)
(2,560.7
)
(2,391.5
)
$
9,807.8
$
3,370.7
$
6,221.4
other profits are primarily comprised of miscellaneous corporate
profits as well as operating profits related to divested
products or businesses and other supply sales. adjustments
represent the elimination of the effect of double counting
certain items of income and expense. equity income from
affiliates includes taxes paid at the joint venture level and a
portion of equity income that is not reported in segment
profits. other expenses, net, include expenses from corporate
and manufacturing cost centers and other miscellaneous income
(expense), net.
long-lived
assets
(1)by geographic area where located is as
follows:
years ended december
united states
$
10,546.7
$
10,943.0
$
11,542.7
europe, middle east and africa
1,672.5
1,650.3
1,730.7
japan
756.7
885.3
942.4
other
987.8
1,035.4
1,353.8
$
13,963.7
$
14,514.0
$
15,569.6
(1)
long-lived assets are comprised
of property, plant and equipment, net; goodwill and intangible
assets, net.
the company does not disaggregate assets on a products and
services basis for internal management reporting and, therefore,
such information is not presented.
table of contents
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and
shareholders of merck& co., inc.:
in our opinion, the consolidated balance sheets and the related
consolidated statements of income, of retained earnings, of
comprehensive income and of cash flows present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of merck&
co., inc. and its subsidiaries at december31, 2008 and
december31, 2007, and the results of their operations and
their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended
december31, 2008 in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states of america. also in our
opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects,
effective internal control over financial reporting as of
december31, 2008, based on criteria established in
internal control integrated framework issued
by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission (coso). the companys management is responsible
for these financial statements, for maintaining effective
internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting, included in managements report under
item9a. our responsibility is to express opinions on these
financial statements and on the companys internal control
over financial reporting based on our integrated audits. we
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states). those
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
free of material misstatement and whether effective internal
control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects. our audits of the financial statements included
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. our audit of internal control over financial
reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a
material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design
and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the
assessed risk. our audits also included performing such other
procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we
believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our
opinions.
as discussed in note13 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company changed the manner in which it accounts
for defined benefit pension and other post-retirement plans in
2006.
as discussed in note15 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company changed the manner in which it accounts
for unrecognized tax benefits in 2007.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
florham park, new jersey
february26, 2009
table of contents
(b)
supplementary
data
selected quarterly financial data for 2008 and 2007 are
contained in the condensed interim financial data table below.
condensed
interim financial data (unaudited)
($ in millions except per share
amounts)
4th
q(1),(2)
3rd
q(2),(3)
2nd
q(2),(4)
1st
q(2),(5)
2008(6)
sales
$6,032.4
$5,943.9
$6,051.8
$5,822.1
materials and production costs
1,470.0
1,477.9
1,396.5
1,238.1
marketing and administrative expenses
1,862.1
1,730.3
1,930.2
1,854.4
research and development expenses
1,386.6
1,171.1
1,169.3
1,078.3
restructuring costs
103.1
757.5
102.2
69.7
equity income from affiliates
(720.0
)
(665.6
)
(523.0
)
(652.1
)
other (income) expense, net
3.2
61.8
(81.9
)
(2,177.3
)
income before taxes
1,927.4
1,410.9
2,058.5
4,411.0
net income
1,644.8
1,092.7
1,768.3
3,302.6
basic earnings per common share
$0.78
$0.51
$0.82
$1.53
earnings per common share assuming dilution
$0.78
$0.51
$0.82
$1.52
2007(6)
sales
$6,242.8
$6,074.1
$6,111.4
$5,769.4
materials and production costs
1,544.8
1,517.7
1,552.3
1,525.8
marketing and administrative expenses
1,719.5
1,951.4
2,083.7
1,802.0
research and development expenses
1,381.7
1,440.5
1,030.5
1,030.0
restructuring costs
156.2
49.3
55.8
65.8
equity income from affiliates
(796.3
)
(768.5
)
(759.1
)
(652.6
)
u.s. vioxx settlement agreement charge
4,850.0
-
-
-
other (income) expense, net
567.4
(180.9
)
(84.0
)
(256.0
)
(loss) income before taxes
(3,180.5
)
2,064.6
2,232.2
2,254.4
net (loss) income
(1,630.9
)
1,525.5
1,676.4
1,704.3
basic (loss) earnings per common share
$(0.75
)
$0.70
$0.77
$0.79
(loss) earnings per common share assuming dilution
$(0.75
)
$0.70
$0.77
$0.78
(1)
the fourth quarter 2008 tax
provision reflects the favorable impact of foreign exchange rate
changes and a benefit relating to the u.s. research and
development tax credit. amounts for the fourth quarter of 2007
include the impact of the u.s.
vioxx settlement
agreement charge, a civil governmental investigations charge and
an insurance arbitration gain (see note10). the fourth
quarter 2007 tax provision, in addition to these items, also
reflects the favorable impacts of adjustments relating to
certain federal and state tax items.
(2)
amounts for fourth quarter 2008
and third and second quarter 2007 include the impact of
additional vioxx
legal defense reserves (see note10). amounts for first
quarter 2008 include the impact of additional fosamax
legal defense reserves (see note10).
(3)
amounts for third quarter 2007
include acquired research expense associated with an acquisition
(see note4)and a net gain on the settlements of
certain patent disputes.
(4)
amounts for 2008 reflect the
favorable impact of tax settlements.
(5)
amounts for 2008 include a gain
on distribution from astrazeneca lp (see note8), a gain
related to the sale of the companys remaining worldwide
rights to aggrastat,
the realization of foreign tax credits and an expense for a
contribution to the merck company foundation. amounts for 2007
include gains on sales of assets and product divestitures.
(6)
amounts for 2008 and 2007
include the impact of restructuring actions (see
note3).
table of contents
item9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure.
not applicable.
item9a.
controls
and procedures.
management of the company, with the participation of its chief
executive officer and chief financial officer, evaluated the
effectiveness of the companys disclosure controls and
procedures. based on their evaluation, as of the end of the
period covered by this
form10-k,
the companys chief executive officer and chief financial
officer have concluded that the companys disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in
rules13a-15(e)
or 15d-15(e)
under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (the
act)) are effective.
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term
is defined in
rule13a-15(f)
of the act. management conducted an evaluation of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting based
on the framework in internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso).
based on this evaluation, management concluded that internal
control over financial reporting was effective as of
december31, 2008. pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an
independent registered public accounting firm, has performed its
own assessment of the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting and its attestation
report is included in this
form10-k
filing.
there have been no significant changes in internal control over
financial reporting for the period covered by this report that
have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially
affect, the companys internal control over financial
reporting. as the company has previously disclosed, it is in the
process of a multi-year implementation of an enterprise wide
resource planning system. the implementation of this system in
the united states is planned for 2009, which will include
modifications to the design, operation and documentation of its
internal controls over financial reporting. any material problem
with the planned implementation or subsequent interruption of
this system or data contained within could have a material
effect on the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting. the company will plan for contingency measures to
minimize the risk of any disruption.
managements
report
managements
responsibility for financial statements
responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the
companys financial statements rests with management. the
financial statements report on managements stewardship of
company assets. these statements are prepared in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles and, accordingly,
include amounts that are based on managements best
estimates and judgments. nonfinancial information included in
the annual report on
form10-k
has also been prepared by management and is consistent with the
financial statements.
to assure that financial information is reliable and assets are
safeguarded, management maintains an effective system of
internal controls and procedures, important elements of which
include: careful selection, training and development of
operating and financial managers; an organization that provides
appropriate division of responsibility; and communications aimed
at assuring that company policies and procedures are understood
throughout the organization. a staff of internal auditors
regularly monitors the adequacy and application of internal
controls on a worldwide basis.
to ensure that personnel continue to understand the system of
internal controls and procedures, and policies concerning good
and prudent business practices, the company periodically
conducts the managements stewardship program for key
management and financial personnel. this program reinforces the
importance and understanding of internal controls by reviewing
key corporate policies, procedures and systems. in addition, the
company has compliance programs, including an ethical business
practices program to reinforce the companys long-standing
commitment to high ethical standards in the conduct of its
business.
the financial statements and other financial information
included in the annual report on
form10-k
fairly present, in all material respects, the companys
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. our
table of contents
formal certification to the securities and exchange commission
is included in this
form10-k
filing. in addition, in may 2008, the company submitted to the
new york stock exchange (nyse) a certificate of the
ceo certifying that he was not aware of any violation by the
company of nyse corporate governance listing standards.
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term
is defined in
rule13a-15(f)
under the securities exchange act of 1934. the companys
internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles in the united states of america.
management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework
in internal control integrated framework
issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the
treadway commission. based on this evaluation, management
concluded that internal control over financial reporting was
effective as of december31, 2008.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods
are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
the effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting as of december31, 2008, has been
audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered
public accounting firm, as stated in their report which appears
herein.
richard t. clark
chairman, president
and chief executive officer
peter n. kellogg
executive vice president
and chief financial officer
item9b.
other
information.
none.
partiii
item10.
directors,
executive officers and corporate governance.
the required information on directors and nominees is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under item1.
election of directors of the companys proxy statement for
the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april28,
2009. information on executive officers is set forth in
parti of this document on pages 42 through 44.
the required information on compliance with section16(a)
of the securities exchange act of 1934 is incorporated by
reference from the discussion under the heading
section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance of the companys proxy statement for the
annual meeting of stockholders to be held april28, 2009.
the company has adopted a code of conduct our
values and standards applicable to all employees, including
the principal executive officer, principal financial officer,
and principal accounting officer. the code of conduct is
available on the companys website at
www.merck.com/about/corporategovernance. the
company intends to post on this website any amendments to, or
waivers from, its code of conduct. a printed copy will be sent,
without charge, to any stockholder who requests it by writing to
the chief ethics officer of merck& co., inc., one
merck drive, whitehouse station, nj
08889-0100.
table of contents
the required information on the identification of the audit
committee and the audit committee financial expert is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
board committees of the companys proxy
statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held
april28, 2009.
item11.
executive
compensation.
the information required on executive compensation is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the headings
compensation discussion and analysis, summary
compensation table, all other compensation
table, grants of plan-based awards table,
outstanding equity awards at fiscal year-end table,
option exercises and stock vested table, retirement
plan benefits and related pension benefits table,
nonqualified deferred compensation and related tables, potential
payments on termination or change in control, including the
discussion under the subheadings separation,
separation plan payment and benefit estimates table,
individual agreements, change in control
and change in control payment and benefit estimates
table, as well as all footnote information to the various
tables, of the companys proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held april28, 2009.
the required information on director compensation is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
director compensation and related director
compensation table and schedule of director
fees table of the companys proxy statement for the
annual meeting of stockholders to be held april28, 2009.
the required information under the headings compensation
committee interlocks and insider participation and
compensation and benefits committee report is
incorporated by reference from the companys proxy
statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held
april28, 2009.
item12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters.
information with respect to securities authorized for issuance
under equity compensation plans is incorporated by reference
from the discussion under the heading equity compensation
plan information of the companys proxy statement for
the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april28,
2009. information with respect to security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management is incorporated by reference
from the discussion under the heading security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management of the
companys proxy statement for the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april28, 2009.
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions, and director
independence.
the required information on transactions with related persons is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
related person transactions of the companys
proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be
held april28, 2009.
the required information on director independence is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
independence of directors of the companys
proxy statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be
held april28, 2009.
item14.
principal
accountant fees and services.
the information required for this item is incorporated by
reference from the discussion under audit committee
beginning with the caption pre-approval policy for
services of independent registered public accounting firm
through all other fees of the companys proxy
statement for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held
april28, 2009.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibits
and financial statement schedules.
(a)the following documents are filed as part of this
form10-k
1.
financial statements
consolidated statement of income for the years
ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006
consolidated statement of retained earnings
for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006
consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the years
ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006
consolidated balance sheet as of
december31, 2008 and 2007
consolidated statement of cash flows for the
years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006
notes to consolidated financial statements
report of pricewaterhousecoopers llp,
independent registered public accounting firm
table of contents
2.
financial statement schedules
merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership combined financial
statements
merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership
combined statements of net sales and contractual expenses
years ended december31,
($ in millions)
net sales
$
4,561
$
5,186
$
3,884
cost of sales
selling, general and administrative
1,062
1,151
1,056
research and development
1,406
1,523
1,396
income from operations
$
3,155
$
3,663
$
2,488
merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership
combined balance sheets
december31,
($ in millions)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
accounts receivable, net
inventories
prepaid expenses and other assets
total assets
$
$
1,014
liabilities and partners capital
rebates payable
$
$
payable to merck, net
payable to schering-plough, net
accrued expenses and other liabilities
total liabilities
commitments and contingent liabilities (notes3 and 5)
partners capital
total liabilities and partners capital
$
$
1,014
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined
financial statements.
table of contents
merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership
combined statements of cash flows
years ended december31,
($ in millions)
operating activities:
income from operations
$
3,155
$
3,663
$
2,488
adjustments to reconcile income from operations to net cash
provided by operating activities:
accounts receivable, net
(109
)
(63
)
inventories
(18
)
(21
)
prepaid expenses and other assets
(2
)
(1
)
rebates payable
(114
)
payable to merck and schering-plough, net
(53
)
(130
)
accrued expenses and other liabilities
(1
)
non-cash charges
net cash provided by operating activities
3,174
3,739
2,481
financing activities:
contributions from partners
distributions to partners
(3,868
)
(4,006
)
(3,206
)
net cash used for financing activities
(3,461
)
(3,284
)
(2,485
)
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(287
)
(4
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
$
$
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined
financial statements.
table of contents
merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership
combined statements of partners capital (deficit)
($ in millions)
schering-
plough
merck
total
balance, january1, 2006
$
$
(169
)
$
(136
)
contributions from partners
income from operations
1,273
1,215
2,488
distributions to partners
(1,648
)
(1,558
)
(3,206
)
balance, december31, 2006
(83
)
(81
)
contributions from partners
income from operations
1,831
1,832
3,663
distributions to partners
(1,944
)
(2,062
)
(4,006
)
balance, december31, 2007
contributions from partners
income from operations
1,665
1,490
3,155
distributions to partners
(1,964
)
(1,836
)
(3,800
)
balance, december31, 2008
$
$
$
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined
financial statements.
table of contents
merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership
notes to combined financial statements
1.
description
of business and basis of presentation
description
of business
in may 2000, merck& co., inc. (merck) and
schering-plough corporation (schering-plough)
(collectively the partners) entered into agreements
(the agreements) to jointly develop and market in
the united states, schering-ploughs then investigational
cholesterol absorption inhibitor (cai) ezetimibe
(marketed today in the united states as zetia and as ezetrol in
most other countries) (the cholesterol
collaboration) and a fixed-combination tablet containing
the active ingredients montelukast sodium and loratadine (the
respiratory collaboration). montelukast sodium, a
leukotriene receptor antagonist, is sold by merck as singulair
and loratadine, an antihistamine, is sold by schering-plough as
claritin, both of which are indicated for the relief of symptoms
of allergic rhinitis. the respiratory collaboration was
terminated in 2008 in accordance with the applicable agreements,
following the receipt of a not-approvable letter from the
u.s.food and drug administration (fda) for the
fixed-combination tablet.
the cholesterol collaboration is formally referred to as the
merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership (the
partnership). in december 2001, the cholesterol
collaboration agreements were expanded to include all countries
of the world, except japan. the cholesterol collaboration
agreements provide for ezetimibe to be developed and marketed in
the following forms:
ezetimibe, a once daily cai, non-statin cholesterol reducing
medicine used alone or co-administered with any statin
drug,and
ezetimibe and simvastatin (mercks existing zocor statin
cholesterol modifying medicine) combined into one tablet
(marketed today in the united states as vytorin and as inegy in
most other countries).
vytorin and zetia were approved by the fda in july 2004 and
october 2002, respectively. together, these products, whether
marketed as vytorin, zetia or under other trademarks locally,
are referred to as the cholesterol products.
under the cholesterol collaboration agreements, the partners
established jointly-owned, limited purpose legal entities based
in canada and the united states through which to carry out the
contractual activities of the partnership in these countries. an
additional jointly-owned, limited purpose legal entity based in
singapore was established to own the rights to the intellectual
property and to fund and oversee research and development and
manufacturing activities of the cholesterol collaboration. in
all other markets except latin america, subsidiaries of merck or
schering-plough perform marketing activities for the cholesterol
products under contract with the partnership. these legal entity
and subsidiary operations are collectively referred to as the
combined companies. in latin america, the
partnership sells directly to schering-plough and mercks
latin american subsidiaries and schering-plough and merck
compete against one another in the cholesterol market.
consequently, selling, promotion and distribution activities for
the cholesterol products within latin america are not included
in the combined companies.
the partnership is substantially reliant on the infrastructures
of merck and schering-plough. there are a limited number of
employees of the legal entities of the partnership and most
activities are performed by employees of either merck or
schering-plough under service agreements with the partnership.
profits, which are shared by the partners under differing
arrangements in countries around the world, are generally
defined as net sales minus (1)agreed upon manufacturing
costs and expenses incurred by the partners and invoiced to the
partnership, (2)direct promotion expenses incurred by the
partners and invoiced to the partnership, (3)expenses for
a limited specialty sales force in the united states incurred by
the partners and invoiced to the partnership, and certain
amounts for sales force physician detailing of the cholesterol
products in the united states, puerto rico, canada and italy,
(4)administration expenses based on a percentage of
cholesterol product net sales, which are invoiced by one of the
partners, and (5)other costs and expenses incurred by the
partners that were not contemplated when the cholesterol
collaboration agreements were entered into but that were
subsequently agreed to by both partners.
table of contents
agreed upon research and development expenses incurred by the
partners and invoiced to the partnership are shared equally by
the partners, after adjusting for special allocations in the
nature of milestones due to one of the partners.
the partnerships future results of operations, financial
position, and cash flows may differ materially from the
historical results presented herein because of the risks and
uncertainties related to the partnerships business. the
partnerships future operating results and cash flows are
dependent on the cholesterol products. any events that adversely
affect the market for those products could have a significant
impact on the partnerships results of operations and cash
flows. these events could include loss of patent protection,
increased costs associated with manufacturing, increased
competition from the introduction of new, more effective
treatments, exclusion from government reimbursement programs,
discontinuation or removal from the market of a product for
safety or other reason, and the results of future clinical or
outcomes studies (note5).
basis of
presentation
the accompanying combined balance sheets and combined statements
of net sales and contractual expenses, cash flows and
partners capital (deficit) include the cholesterol and
respiratory collaboration activities of the combined companies.
the respiratory collaboration activities primarily pertained to
clinical development work and pre-launch marketing activities.
spending on respiratory-related activities ceased in 2008
following termination of the collaboration, and is not material
to the income from operations in any of the years presented.
net sales include the net sales of the cholesterol products sold
by the combined companies. expenses include amounts that merck
and schering-plough have contractually agreed to directly
invoice to the partnership, or are shared through the
contractual profit sharing arrangements between the partners, as
described above.
the accompanying combined financial statements were prepared for
the purpose of complying with certain rules and regulations of
the securities and exchange commission and reflect the
activities of the partnership based on the contractual
agreements between the partners. such combined financial
statements include only the expenses agreed by the partners to
be shared or included in the calculation of profits under the
contractual agreements of the partnership, and are not intended
to be a complete presentation of all of the costs and expenses
that would be incurred by a stand-alone pharmaceutical company
for the discovery, development, manufacture, distribution and
marketing of pharmaceutical products.
under the cholesterol collaboration agreements, certain
activities are charged to the partnership by the partners based
on contractually agreed upon allocations of partner-incurred
expenses as described below. in the opinion of management, any
allocations of expenses described below are made on a basis that
reasonably reflects the actual level of support provided. all
other expenses are expenses of the partners and are reflected in
their separate consolidated financial statements.
as described above, the profit sharing arrangements under the
cholesterol collaboration agreements provide that only certain
partner-incurred costs and expenses be invoiced to the
partnership by the partners and therefore become part of the
profit sharing calculation. the following paragraphs list the
typical categories of costs and expenses that are generally
incurred in the discovery, development, manufacture,
distribution and marketing of the cholesterol products and
provide a description of how such costs and expenses are treated
in the accompanying combined statements of net sales and
contractual expenses, and in determining profits under the
contractual agreements.
manufacturing costs and expenses all contractually
agreed upon manufacturing plant costs and expenses incurred by
the partners related to the manufacture of the cholesterol
products are included as cost of sales in the accompanying
combined statements of net sales and contractual expenses,
including direct production costs, certain production variances,
expenses for plant services and administration, warehousing,
distribution, materials management, technical services, quality
control, and asset utilization. all other manufacturing costs
and expenses incurred by the partners not agreed to be included
in the determination of profits under the contractual agreements
are not invoiced to the partnership and, therefore, are excluded
from the accompanying combined financial statements. these costs
and expenses include, but are not limited to, yield gains and
losses in excess of jointly agreed upon yield rates and
excess/idle capacity of manufacturing plant assets.
table of contents
direct promotion expenses direct promotion
represents direct and identifiable out-of-pocket expenses
incurred by the partners on behalf of the partnership including,
but not limited to, contractually agreed upon expenses related
to market research, detailing aids, agency fees,
direct-to-consumer advertising, meetings and symposia, trade
programs, launch meetings, special sales force incentive
programs and product samples. all such contractually agreed upon
expenses are included in selling, general and administrative in
the accompanying combined statements of net sales and
contractual expenses. all other promotion expenses incurred by
the partners not agreed to be included in the determination of
profits under the contractual agreements are excluded from the
accompanying combined financial statements.
selling expenses in the united states, canada,
puerto rico and other markets outside the united states
(primarily italy), the general sales forces of the partners
provide a majority of the physician detail activity at an agreed
upon cost which is included in selling, general and
administrative in the accompanying combined statements of net
sales and contractual expenses. in addition, the agreed upon
costs of a limited specialty sales force for the united states
market that calls on opinion leaders in the field of cholesterol
medicine are also included in selling, general and
administrative. all other selling expenses incurred by the
partners not agreed to be included in the determination of
profits under the contractual agreements are excluded from the
accompanying combined financial statements. these expenses
include the total costs of the general sales forces of the
partners detailing the cholesterol products in most countries
other than the united states, canada, puerto rico and italy.
administrative expenses administrative support is
primarily provided by one of the partners. the contractually
agreed upon expenses for support are determined based on a
percentage of the net sales of the cholesterol products. such
amounts are included in selling, general and administrative in
the accompanying combined statements of net sales and
contractual expenses. selected contractually agreed upon direct
costs of employees of the partners for support services and
out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the partners on behalf of the
partnership are also included in selling, general and
administrative. all other expenses incurred by the partners not
agreed to be included in the determination of profits under the
contractual agreements are excluded from the accompanying
combined financial statements. these expenses include, but are
not limited to, certain u.s.managed care services,
partners subsidiary management in most international
markets, and other indirect expenses such as corporate overhead
and interest.
research and development (r&d)
expenses r&d activities are performed by the
partners and agreed upon costs and expenses are invoiced to the
partnership. these agreed upon expenses generally represent an
allocation of each partners estimate of full time
equivalents devoted to pre-clinical and post-marketing clinical
development and regulatory activities and include grants and
other third-party expenses. these contractually agreed upon
allocated costs are included in research and development in the
accompanying combined statements of net sales and contractual
expenses. all other r&d costs that are incurred by the
partners but not jointly agreed upon, are excluded from the
accompanying combined financial statements.
2.
summary
of significant accounting policies
principles
of combination
the accompanying combined balance sheets and combined statements
of net sales and contractual expenses, cash flows and
partners capital (deficit) include the cholesterol and
respiratory collaboration activities of the combined companies.
interpartnership balances and profits are eliminated.
use of
estimates
the combined financial statements are prepared based on
contractual agreements between the partners, as described above,
and include certain amounts that are based on managements
best estimates and judgments. estimates are used in determining
such items as provisions for sales discounts and returns and
government and managed care rebates. because of the uncertainty
inherent in such estimates, actual results may differ from these
estimates.
table of contents
foreign
currency translation
the net assets of the partnerships foreign operations are
translated into u.s.dollars at current exchange rates. the
u.s.dollar effects arising from translating the net assets
of these operations are included in partners capital, and
are not significant.
cash and
cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of highly liquid
money market instruments with original maturities of less than
three months. in 2007, the partnership changed certain cash
management practices, increasing the amount of cash held by the
partnership. the partnerships cash, which is primarily
invested in highly liquid money market instruments, is used to
fund trade obligations coming due in the month and for
distributions to the partners. interest income earned on cash
and cash equivalents is reported as a reduction to selling,
general and administrative in the accompanying combined
statements of net sales and contractual expenses and amounted to
$10million, $8million, and $5million in 2008,
2007 and 2006, respectively.
inventories
substantially all inventories are valued at the lower of first
in, first out cost or market.
intangible
assets
intangible assets consist of licenses, trademarks and trade
names owned by the partnership. these intangible assets were
recorded at the partners historical cost at the date of
contribution, at a nominal value.
revenue
recognition, rebates, returns and allowances
revenues from sales of cholesterol products are recognized when
title and risk of loss pass to the customer. recognition of
revenue also requires reasonable assurance of collection of
sales proceeds and completion of all performance obligations.
net sales of vytorin/inegy and zetia/ezetrol for the years ended
december 31 are as follows:
$ in millions
vytorin/inegy
$
2,360
$
2,779
$
1,955
zetia/ezetrol
2,201
2,407
1,929
total
$
4,561
$
5,186
$
3,884
in the united states, sales discounts are issued to customers as
direct discounts at the point-of-sale or indirectly through an
intermediary wholesale purchaser, known as chargebacks, or
indirectly in the form of rebates. additionally, sales are
generally made with a limited right of return under certain
conditions. sales are recorded net of provisions for sales
discounts and returns for which reliable estimates can be made
at the time of sale. reserves for chargebacks, discounts and
returns and allowances are reflected as a direct reduction to
accounts receivable and amounted to $34million and
$44million at december31, 2008 and 2007,
respectively. accruals for rebates are reflected as rebates
payable, shown separately in the combined balance sheets.
income
taxes
generally, taxable income or losses of the partnership are
allocated to the partners and included in each partners
income tax return. in some states and other jurisdictions, the
partnership is subject to an income tax, which is included in
the combined financial statements and shared between the
partners. except for these income taxes, which are not
significant to the combined financial statements, no provision
has been made for federal, foreign or state income taxes. at
december31, 2008, the partnership had $49million of
deferred tax assets comprised solely of net operating loss
carryforwards (nols) generated by a branch of a
legal entity of the partnership. these nols expire between 2009
and 2015, and carry a full valuation allowance. in january 2007,
the partnership adopted financial accounting standards board
interpretation no.48, accounting for uncertainty in
income taxes (fin48). adoption of fin48
had no impact on the partnerships financial statements.
concentrations
of credit risk& segment information
the partnerships concentrations of credit risk consist
primarily of accounts receivable. the partnership does not
normally require collateral or other security to support credit
sales. bad debts for the years ended
table of contents
december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 have been minimal. at
december31, 2008, three customers each represented 25%,
19% and 17% of accounts receivable, net. the same three
customers each accounted for more than 10% of net sales as shown
in the table below.
percent of net sales
mckesson drug company
%
%
%
cardinal health, inc.
%
%
%
amerisourcebergen corp.
%
%
%
the partnership derived approximately 65%, 75% and 80% of its
combined net sales from the united states in 2008, 2007 and
2006, respectively.
termination
of the respiratory collaboration
the respiratory collaboration was terminated in 2008 in
accordance with the applicable agreements, following the receipt
of a not-approvable letter from the fda for the proposed
montelukast/loratadine combination tablet. as a result of
termination, schering-plough received $105million in
incremental allocations of partnership profits in 2008. except
for the allocation of certain profits, termination had no other
impact on the cholesterol collaboration.
3.
inventories
inventories at december 31 consisted of:
$ in millions
finished goods
$
$
raw materials and work in process
total
$
$
the partnership has entered into long-term agreements with the
partners for the supply of active pharmaceutical ingredients
(api) and for the formulation and packaging of the cholesterol
products at an agreed upon cost. in connection with these supply
agreements, the partnership has entered into capacity agreements
under which the partnership has committed to take a specified
annual minimum supply of api and formulated tablets or pay a
penalty. these capacity agreements are in effect for a period of
seven years following the first full year of production by one
of the partners and expire beginning in 2009. the partnership
had no payment obligation under the capacity agreements at
december31, 2008.
4.
related
party transactions
the partnership receives substantially all of its goods and
services, including pharmaceutical product, manufacturing
services, sales force services, administrative services and
r&d services, from its partners. the partnership had a net
payable to merck and schering-plough for these services of
$81million and $100million, respectively, at
december31, 2008, and $119million and
$115million, respectively, at december31, 2007.
selling, general and administrative expense includes
contractually defined costs for physician detailing provided by
schering-plough and merck of $223million and
$201million, respectively, in 2008, $242million and
$197million, respectively, in 2007 and $204million
and $203million, respectively, in 2006. these expenses are
not necessarily reflective of the actual cost of the
partners sales efforts in the countries in which the
amounts are contractually defined. included in these amounts are
$68million, $60million and $52million in 2008,
2007 and 2006, respectively, relating to contractually defined
costs of physician detailing in italy. these amounts were not
invoiced or paid by the partnership to the partners, but are a
component of the profit sharing calculation.
cost of sales and selling, general and administrative expense
also include contractually defined costs for distribution and
administrative services provided by merck and schering-plough of
$39million, $34million and $27million in 2008,
2007 and 2006, respectively. these amounts are not necessarily
reflective of the actual costs for such distribution and
administrative services.
table of contents
the partnership also sells cholesterol products directly to the
partners, principally to merck and schering-plough affiliates in
latin america. in latin america, where the partners compete with
one another in the cholesterol market, merck and schering-plough
purchase cholesterol products from the partnership and sell
directly to third parties. sales to the partners are included in
net sales at their invoiced price in the accompanying combined
statements of net sales and contractual expenses and totaled
$74million, $82million and $61million in 2008,
2007 and 2006, respectively.
5.
legal and
other matters
the partnership may become party to claims and legal proceedings
of a nature considered normal to its business, including product
liability and intellectual property. the partnership records a
liability in connection with such matters when it is probable a
liability has been incurred and an amount can be reasonably
estimated. legal costs associated with litigation and
investigation activities are expensed as incurred.
the partnership maintains insurance coverage with deductibles
and self-insurance as management believes is cost beneficial.
the partnership self-insures all of its risk as it relates to
product liability and accrues an estimate of product liability
claims incurred but not reported.
in february 2007, schering-plough received a notice from
glenmark pharmaceuticals inc. usa (glenmark), a
generic pharmaceutical company, indicating that it had filed an
abbreviated new drug application (anda) for a
generic form of zetia and that it is challenging the
u.s.patents that are listed for zetia. in march 2007,
schering-plough and the partnership filed a patent infringement
suit against glenmark and its parent company. the lawsuit
automatically stays fda approval of glenmarks anda until
the earlier of october 2010 or an adverse court decision, if
any. schering-plough and the partnership intend to vigorously
defend its patents, which they believe are valid, against
infringement by generic companies attempting to market products
prior to the expiration dates of such patents. as with any
litigation, there can be no assurances of the outcomes which, if
adverse, could result in significantly shortened periods of
exclusivity.
in january 2008, the partners announced the results of the
effect of combination ezetimibe and high-dose simvastatin vs.
simvastatin alone on the atherosclerotic process in patients
with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
(enhance) clinical trial, an imaging trial in
720patients with heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia, a rare genetic condition that causes very
high levels of ldl bad cholesterol and greatly
increases the risk for premature coronary artery disease.
despite the fact that ezetimibe/simvastatin 10/80 mg (vytorin)
significantly lowered ldl bad cholesterol more than
simvastatin 80mg alone, there was no significant
difference between treatment with ezetimibe/simvastatin and
simvastatin alone on the pre-specified primary endpoint, a
change in the thickness of carotid artery walls over two years
as measured by ultrasound. there also were no significant
differences between treatment with ezetimibe/simvastatin and
simvastatin on the four pre-specified key secondary endpoints:
percent of patients manifesting regression in the average
carotid artery intima-media thickness (ca imt);
proportion of patients developing new carotid artery plaques
>1.3 mm; changes in the average maximum ca imt; and changes
in the average ca imt plus in the average common femoral artery
imt. in enhance, when compared to simvastatin alone,
ezetimibe/simvastatin significantly lowered ldl bad
cholesterol, as well as triglycerides and c-reactive protein
(crp). ezetimibe/simvastatin is not indicated for
the reduction of crp. in the enhance study, the overall safety
profile of ezetimibe/simvastatin was generally consistent with
the product label. the enhance study was not designed nor
powered to evaluate cardiovascular clinical events. the improved
reduction in high-risk subjects presenting with acute coronary
syndrome (improve-it) trial is underway and is
designed to provide cardiovascular outcomes data for
ezetimibe/simvastatin in patients with acute coronary syndrome.
no incremental benefit of ezetimibe/simvastatin on
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality over and above that
demonstrated for simvastatin has been established. in march
2008, the results of enhance were reported at the annual
scientific session of the american college of cardiology. in
january 2009, the fda announced that it had completed its review
of the final clinical study report of enhance. the fda stated
that the results from enhance did not change its position that
an elevated ldl cholesterol is a risk factor for cardiovascular
disease and that lowering ldl cholesterol reduces the risk for
cardiovascular disease. the fda also stated that, based on
current available data, patients should not stop taking vytorin
or other cholesterol lowering medications and should talk to
their doctor if they have any questions about vytorin, zetia, or
the enhance trial.
table of contents
on july21, 2008, efficacy and safety results from the
simvastatin and ezetimibe in aortic stenosis (seas)
study were announced. seas was designed to evaluate whether
intensive lipid lowering with vytorin 10/40 mg would reduce the
need for aortic valve replacement and the risk of cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality versus placebo in patients with
asymptomatic mild to moderate aortic stenosis who had no
indication for statin therapy. vytorin failed to meet its
primary end point for the reduction of major cardiovascular
events. there also was no significant difference in the key
secondary end point of aortic valve events; however, there was a
reduction in the group of patients taking vytorin compared to
placebo in the key secondary end point of ischemic
cardiovascular events. vytorin is not indicated for the
treatment of aortic stenosis. no incremental benefit of vytorin
on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality over and above that
demonstrated for simvastatin has been established. in the study,
patients in the group who took vytorin 10/40 mg had a higher
incidence of cancer than the group who took placebo. there was
also a nonsignificant increase in deaths from cancer in patients
in the group who took vytorin versus those who took placebo.
cancer and cancer deaths were distributed across all major organ
systems. the partners and the partnership believe the cancer
finding in seas is likely to be an anomaly that, taken in light
of all the available data, does not support an association with
vytorin. in august 2008, the fda announced that it was
investigating the results from the seas trial. in this
announcement, the fda also cited interim data from two large
ongoing cardiovascular trials of vytorin the study
of heart and renal protection (sharp) and the
improve-it clinical trials in which there was no
increased risk of cancer with the combination of simvastatin
plus ezetimibe. the sharp trial is expected to be completed in
2010. the improve-it trial is scheduled for completion around
2012. the fda determined that, as of that time, these findings
in the seas trial plus the interim data from ongoing trials
should not prompt patients to stop taking vytorin or any other
cholesterol lowering drug.
the partners and the partnership are committed to working with
regulatory agencies to further evaluate the available data and
interpretations of those data, and do not believe that changes
in the clinical use of vytorin are warranted.
as previously disclosed, since december 2007, merck and
schering-plough have received several letters addressed to both
companies from the house committee on energy and commerce, its
subcommittee on oversight and investigations
(o&i), and the ranking minority member of the
senate finance committee, collectively seeking a combination of
witness interviews, documents and information on a variety of
issues related to the enhance clinical trial, the sale and
promotion of vytorin, as well as sales of stock by corporate
officers of merck and schering-plough. in addition, since august
2008, the partners have received three additional letters from
o&i, including one dated february19, 2009, seeking
certain information and documents related to the seas clinical
trial. also, as previously disclosed, the partners and the
partnership have received subpoenas from the new york and new
jersey state attorneys general offices and a letter from the
connecticut attorney general seeking similar information and
documents. in addition, the partners and the partnership have
received five civil investigative demands (cids)
from a multistate group of 35 state attorneys general who are
jointly investigating whether violations of state consumer
protection laws occurred when marketing vytorin. finally, in
september 2008, merck and schering-plough received a letter from
the civil division of the u.s.department of justice
(doj) informing them that the doj is investigating
whether the companies conduct relating to the promotion of
vytorin caused false claims to be submitted to federal health
care programs. the partners and the partnership are cooperating
with these investigations and responding to the inquiries. in
addition, the partners and the partnership have become aware of
or been served with approximately 145 civil class action
lawsuits alleging common law and state consumer fraud claims in
connection with the partnerships sale and promotion of
vytorin and zetia. certain of those lawsuits allege personal
injuries
and/or seek
medical monitoring. these actions, which have been filed in or
transferred to federal court, are coordinated in a multidistrict
litigation in the u.s.district court for the district
court of new jersey before district judge dennis m. cavanaugh.
the parties are presently engaged in motions practice and
briefing.
while it is not feasible to predict the outcome of the
investigations or lawsuits arising from the enhance and seas
clinical trials, unfavorable outcomes could have a significant
adverse effect on the partnerships financial position,
results of operations and cash flows.
table of contents
independent
auditors report
the partners of the merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership
we have audited the accompanying combined balance sheets of the
merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership (the
partnership) as of december31, 2008 and 2007,
as described in note1, and the related combined statements
of net sales and contractual expenses, partners capital
(deficit) and cash flows, as described in note1, for each
of the three years in the period ended december31, 2008.
these financial statements are the responsibility of the
management of the partnership, merck& co., inc., and
schering-plough corporation. our responsibility is to express an
opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
we conducted our audits in accordance with generally accepted
auditing standards as established by the auditing standards
board (united states) and in accordance with the auditing
standards of the public company accounting oversight board
(united states). those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement. the
partnership is not required to have, nor were we engaged to
perform, an audit of its internal control over financial
reporting. our audits included consideration of internal control
over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit
procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not
for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of
the partnerships internal control over financial
reporting. accordingly, we express no such opinion. an audit
also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting
the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements,
assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
the accompanying statements were prepared for the purpose of
complying with certain rules and regulations of the securities
and exchange commission and, as described in note1, are
not intended to be a complete presentation of the financial
position, results of operations or cash flows of all the
activities of a stand-alone pharmaceutical company involved in
the discovery, development, manufacture, distribution and
marketing of pharmaceutical products.
in our opinion, the financial statements referred to above
present fairly, in all material respects, the combined financial
position of the merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership,
as described in note1, as of december31, 2008 and
2007, and the combined results of its net sales and contractual
expenses and its combined cash flows, as described in
note1, for each of the three years in the period ended
december31, 2008, in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states of america.
deloitte& touche llp
parsippany, new jersey
february26, 2009
table of contents
schedules other than those listed above have been omitted
because they are either not required or not applicable.
financial statements of other affiliates carried on the equity
basis have been omitted because, considered individually or in
the aggregate, such affiliates do not constitute a significant
subsidiary.
3.
exhibits
exhibit
number
description
.1
master restructuring agreement dated as of june19, 1998
between astra ab, merck& co., inc., astra merck inc.,
astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises, inc.,
kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals,
l.p. (portions of this exhibit are subject to a request for
confidential treatment filed with the commission)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.2
agreement and plan of merger by and among merck& co.,
inc., spinnaker acquisition corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of
merck& co., inc. and sirna therapeutics, inc., dated
as of october30, 2006 incorporated by
reference to current report on
form8-k
dated october30, 2006
.1
restated certificate of incorporation of merck& co.,
inc. (may17, 2007) incorporated by reference
to current report on
form8-k
dated may17, 2007
.2
by-laws of merck& co., inc. (as amended effective
may31, 2007) incorporated by reference to
current report on
form8-k
dated may31, 2007
.1
indenture, dated as of april1, 1991, between
merck& co., inc. and morgan guaranty
trustcompany of new york, as trustee
incorporated by reference to exhibit4 to registration
statement on
forms-3
(no.33-39349)
.2
first supplemental indenture between merck& co., inc.
and first trust of new york, national association, as
trustee incorporated by reference to
exhibit4(b) to registration statement on
forms-3
(no.333-36383)
*10
.1
executive incentive plan (as amended effective february27,
1996) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1995
*10
.2
base salary deferral plan (as adopted on october22, 1996,
effective january1, 1997) incorporated by
reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1996
*10
.3
merck& co., inc. deferral program (amended and
restated as of january1, 2009)
*10
.4
1996 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of
december19, 2006) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.5
2001 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of
december19, 2006) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.6
2004 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of
december19, 2006) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.7
2007 incentive stock plan (as amended effective
december19, 2006) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.8
merck& co., inc. change in control separation
benefits plan incorporated by reference to current
report on
form8-k
dated november23, 2004
*10
.9
merck& co., inc. separation benefits plan for
nonunion employees (amended and restated effective as of
july11, 2006) incorporated by reference to
current report on
form8-k
dated july11, 2006
*10
.10
merck& co., inc. special separation program for
separated employees (effective as of january1,
2009)
*10
.11
merck& co., inc. special separation program for
bridged employees (effective as of january1,
2009)
*10
.12
merck& co., inc. special separation program for
separated retirement eligible employees (effective
as of january1, 2009)
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
*10
.13
1996 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended
april27, 1999) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1999
*10
.14
2001 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended
april19, 2002) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2002
*10
.15
2006 non-employee directors stock option plan (effective
april25, 2006; as amended and restated february27,
2007) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.16
supplemental retirement plan (as amended and restated effective
january1, 2009)
*10
.17
retirement plan for the directors of merck& co., inc.
(amended and restated june21, 1996)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1996
*10
.18
plan for deferred payment of directors compensation
(amended and restated as of january1, 2009)
*10
.19
offer letter between merck& co., inc. and peter s.
kim, dated december15, 2000 incorporated by
reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003
*10
.20
offer letter between merck& co., inc. and peter n.
kellogg, dated june18, 2007 incorporated by
reference to current report on
form8-k
dated june28, 2007
.21
amended and restated license and option agreement dated as of
july1, 1998 between astra ab and astra merck
inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.22
kbi shares option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and
among astra ab, merck& co., inc. and merck holdings,
inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.23
kbi-e asset option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by
and among astra ab, merck& co., inc., astra merck
inc. and astra merck enterprises inc. incorporated
by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.24
kbi supply agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra
merck inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this
exhibit are subject to a request for confidential treatment
filed with the commission). incorporated by
reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.25
second amended and restated manufacturing agreement dated as of
july1, 1998 among merck& co., inc., astra ab,
astra merck inc. and astra usa, inc. incorporated by
reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.26
limited partnership agreement dated as of july1, 1998
between kb usa, l.p. and kbi sub inc. incorporated
by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.27
distribution agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between
astra merck enterprises inc. and astra pharmaceuticals,
l.p. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.28
agreement to incorporate defined terms dated as of june19,
1998 between astra ab, merck& co., inc., astra merck
inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises
inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.29
cholesterol governance agreement, dated as of may22, 2000,
by and among msp distribution services(c)llc, msp
marketing services (c)llc, msp technology (us) company
llc, merck cardiovascular health company, merck technology (us)
company, inc., schering msp corporation, schering sales
management, inc., schering sales corporation, schering msp
pharmaceuticals l.p., msp cholesterol llc, msp singapore
company, llc, msd technology singapore pte. ltd., msd ventures
singapore pte. ltd., osammor pte. ltd. (to be renamed
schering-plough (singapore) pte. ltd.), citimere pte. ltd. (to
be renamed schering-plough (singapore) research pte. ltd.),
schering corporation, schering-plough corporation, and
merck& co., inc. (portions of this exhibit are
subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the
commission) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2008
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
.30
first amendment to the cholesterol governance agreement, dated
as of december18, 2001, by and among msp distribution
services (c)llc, msp marketing services (c)llc, msp
technology (us) company llc, merck cardiovascular health
company, merck technology (us) company, inc., schering msp
corporation, schering sales management, inc., schering sales
corporation, schering msp pharmaceuticals l.p., msp singapore
company, llc (the singapore partnership), msd
technology singapore pte. ltd., msd ventures singapore pte.
ltd., schering-plough (singapore) pte. ltd., schering-plough
(singapore) research pte. ltd., schering corporation,
schering-plough corporation, and merck& co., inc.
(portions of this exhibit are subject to a request for
confidential treatment filed with the commission)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2008
.31
master agreement, dated as of december18, 2001, by and
among msp technology (u.s.) company llc, msp singapore company,
llc, schering corporation, schering-plough corporation, and
merck& co., inc. (portions of this exhibit are
subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the
commission) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2008
.32
master merial venture agreement, dated as of may23, 1997,
by and among rhne-poulenc s.a., institut mrieux
s.a., rhne-mrieux s.a., merck& co., inc.,
merck sh inc., and merial limited (portions of this exhibit are
subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the
commission) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2008
.33
form of voting agreement made and entered into as of
october30, 2006 by and between merck& co., inc.
and sirna therapeutics, inc. incorporated by
reference to current report on
form8-k
dated october30, 2006
.34
settlement agreement, dated november9, 2007, by and
between merck& co., inc. and the counsel listed on
the signature pages hereto, including the exhibits
thereto incorporated by reference to current report
on
form8-k
dated november9, 2007
computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
subsidiaries of merck& co., inc.
.1
consent of independent registered public accounting
firm contained on page162 of this report
.2
independent auditors consent contained on
page163 of this report
.1
power of attorney
.2
certified resolution of board of directors
.1
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)
certification of chief executive officer
.2
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)
certification of chief financial officer
.1
section1350 certification of chief executive officer
.2
section1350 certification of chief financial officer
*
management contract or
compensatory plan or arrangement.
copies of the exhibits may be obtained by stockholders upon
written request directed to the office of the secretary,
merck& co., inc., p.o.box100
ws 3ab-05, whitehouse station, new jersey
08889-0100.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
dated: february27, 2009
merck& co., inc.
by
richard t. clark
(chairman, president and chief executive officer)
by
celia a. colbert
celia a. colbert
(attorney-in-fact)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act
of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following
persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on
the dates indicated.
signatures
title
date
richard
t. clark
chairman, president and chief executive officer; principal
executive officer; director
february 27, 2009
peter
n. kellogg
executive vice president and chief financial officer; principal
financial officer
february 27, 2009
john
canan
senior vice president and global controller; principal
accounting officer
february 27, 2009
leslie
a. brun
director
february 27, 2009
johnnetta
b. cole
director
february 27, 2009
steven
f. goldstone
director
february 27, 2009
william
b. harrison, jr.
director
february 27, 2009
harry
r. jacobson
director
february 27, 2009
william
n. kelley
director
february 27, 2009
carlos
e. represas
director
february 27, 2009
thomas
e. shenk
director
february 27, 2009
samuel
o. thier
director
february 27, 2009
wendell
p. weeks
director
february 27, 2009
peter
c. wendell
director
february 27, 2009
celia a. colbert, by signing her name hereto, does hereby
sign this document pursuant to powers of attorney duly executed
by the persons named, filed with the securities and exchange
commission as an exhibit to this document, on behalf of such
persons, all in the capacities and on the date stated, such
persons including a majority of the directors of the company.
by
celia a.
colbert
celia a. colbert
(attorney-in-fact)
table of contents
exhibit23.1
consent
of independent registered public accounting firm
we hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the
registration statements on
forms-3
(no.
333-146356)
and on
forms-8
(nos.
33-21087,
33-21088,
33-51235,
33-53463,
33-64273,
33-64665,
333-91769,
333-30526,
333-31762,
333-53246,
333-56696,
333-72206,
333-65796,
333-101519,
333-109296,
333-117737,
333-117738,
333-139561
and
333-139562)
of merck& co., inc. of our report dated
february26, 2009 relating to the financial statements and
the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting,
which appears in this
form10-k.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
florham park, new jersey
february26, 2009
table of contents
exhibit23.2
independent
auditors consent
we consent to the incorporation by reference in registration
statement no.
333-146356
on
forms-3
and registration statement nos.
33-21087,
33-21088,
33-51235,
33-53463,
33-64273,
33-64665,
333-91769,
333-30526,
333-31762,
333-53246,
333-56696,
333-72206,
333-65796,
333-101519,
333-109296,
333-117737,
333-117738,
333-139561
and
333-139562
on
forms-8
of merck& co., inc. of our report dated
february26, 2009, relating to the combined financial
statements of the merck/schering-plough cholesterol partnership
appearing in this annual report on
form10-k
of merck& co., inc. for the year ended
december31, 2008.
deloitte & touche llp
parsippany, new jersey
february26, 2009
table of contents
exhibitindex
exhibit
number
description
.1
master restructuring agreement dated as of june19, 1998
between astra ab, merck& co., inc., astra merck inc.,
astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises, inc.,
kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra pharmaceuticals,
l.p. (portions of this exhibit are subject to a request for
confidential treatment filed with the commission)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.2
agreement and plan of merger by and among merck& co.,
inc., spinnaker acquisition corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of
merck& co., inc. and sirna therapeutics, inc., dated
as of october30, 2006 incorporated by
reference to current report on
form8-k
dated october30, 2006
.1
restated certificate of incorporation of merck& co.,
inc. (may17, 2007) incorporated by reference
to current report on
form8-k
dated may17, 2007
.2
by-laws of merck& co., inc. (as amended effective
may31, 2007) incorporated by reference to
current report on
form8-k
dated may31, 2007
.1
indenture, dated as of april1, 1991, between
merck& co., inc. and morgan guaranty
trustcompany of new york, as trustee
incorporated by reference to exhibit4 to registration
statement on
forms-3
(no.33-39349)
.2
first supplemental indenture between merck& co., inc.
and first trust of new york, national association, as
trustee incorporated by reference to
exhibit4(b) to registration statement on
forms-3
(no.333-36383)
*10
.1
executive incentive plan (as amended effective february27,
1996) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1995
*10
.2
base salary deferral plan (as adopted on october22, 1996,
effective january1, 1997) incorporated by
reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 1996
*10
.3
merck& co., inc. deferral program (amended and
restated as of january1, 2009)
*10
.4
1996 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of
december19, 2006) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.5
2001 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of
december19, 2006) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.6
2004 incentive stock plan (amended and restated as of
december19, 2006) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.7
2007 incentive stock plan (as amended effective
december19, 2006) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.8
merck& co., inc. change in control separation
benefits plan incorporated by reference to current
report on
form8-k
dated november23, 2004
*10
.9
merck& co., inc. separation benefits plan for
nonunion employees (amended and restated effective as of
july11, 2006) incorporated by reference to
current report on
form8-k
dated july11, 2006
*10
.10
merck& co., inc. special separation program for
separated employees (effective as of january1,
2009)
*10
.11
merck& co., inc. special separation program for
bridged employees (effective as of january1,
2009)
*10
.12
merck& co., inc. special separation program for
separated retirement eligible employees (effective
as of january1, 2009)
*10
.13
1996 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended
april27, 1999) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1999
*10
.14
2001 non-employee directors stock option plan (as amended
april19, 2002) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2002
*10
.15
2006 non-employee directors stock option plan (effective
april25, 2006; as amended and restated february27,
2007) incorporated by reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
*10
.16
supplemental retirement plan (as amended and restated effective
january1, 2009)
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
*10
.17
retirement plan for the directors of merck& co., inc.
(amended and restated june21, 1996)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1996
*10
.18
plan for deferred payment of directors compensation
(amended and restated as of january1, 2009)
*10
.19
offer letter between merck& co., inc. and peter s.
kim, dated december15, 2000 incorporated by
reference to
form10-k
annual report for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003
*10
.20
offer letter between merck& co., inc. and peter n.
kellogg, dated june18, 2007 incorporated by
reference to current report on
form8-k
dated june28, 2007
.21
amended and restated license and option agreement dated as of
july1, 1998 between astra ab and astra merck
inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.22
kbi shares option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by and
among astra ab, merck& co., inc. and merck holdings,
inc. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.23
kbi-e asset option agreement dated as of july1, 1998 by
and among astra ab, merck& co., inc., astra merck
inc. and astra merck enterprises inc. incorporated
by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.24
kbi supply agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between astra
merck inc. and astra pharmaceuticals, l.p. (portions of this
exhibit are subject to a request for confidential treatment
filed with the commission). incorporated by
reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.25
second amended and restated manufacturing agreement dated as of
july1, 1998 among merck& co., inc., astra ab,
astra merck inc. and astra usa, inc. incorporated by
reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.26
limited partnership agreement dated as of july1, 1998
between kb usa, l.p. and kbi sub inc. incorporated
by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.27
distribution agreement dated as of july1, 1998 between
astra merck enterprises inc. and astra pharmaceuticals,
l.p. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.28
agreement to incorporate defined terms dated as of june19,
1998 between astra ab, merck& co., inc., astra merck
inc., astra usa, inc., kb usa, l.p., astra merck enterprises
inc., kbi sub inc., merck holdings, inc. and astra
pharmaceuticals, l.p. incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 1998
.29
cholesterol governance agreement, dated as of may22, 2000,
by and among msp distribution services(c)llc, msp
marketing services(c)llc, msp technology (us) company llc,
merck cardiovascular health company, merck technology (us)
company, inc., schering msp corporation, schering sales
management, inc., schering sales corporation, schering msp
pharmaceuticals l.p., msp cholesterol llc, msp singapore
company, llc, msd technology singapore pte. ltd., msd ventures
singapore pte. ltd., osammor pte. ltd. (to be renamed
schering-plough (singapore) pte. ltd.), citimere pte. ltd. (to
be renamed schering-plough (singapore) research pte. ltd.),
schering corporation, schering-plough corporation, and
merck& co., inc. (portions of this exhibit are
subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the
commission) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2008
.30
first amendment to the cholesterol governance agreement, dated
as of december18, 2001, by and among msp distribution
services(c)llc, msp marketing services(c)llc, msp
technology (us) company llc, merck cardiovascular health
company, merck technology (us) company, inc., schering msp
corporation, schering sales management, inc., schering sales
corporation, schering msp pharmaceuticals l.p., msp singapore
company, llc (the singapore partnership), msd
technology singapore pte. ltd., msd ventures singapore pte.
ltd., schering-plough (singapore) pte. ltd., schering-plough
(singapore) research pte. ltd., schering corporation,
schering-plough corporation, and merck& co., inc.
(portions of this exhibit are subject to a request for
confidential treatment filed with the commission)
incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2008
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
.31
master agreement, dated as of december18, 2001, by and
among msp technology (u.s.) company llc, msp singapore company,
llc, schering corporation, schering-plough corporation, and
merck& co., inc. (portions of this exhibit are
subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the
commission) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2008
.32
master merial venture agreement, dated as of may23, 1997,
by and among rhne-poulenc s.a., institut mrieux
s.a., rhne-mrieux s.a., merck& co., inc.,
merck sh inc., and merial limited (portions of this exhibit are
subject to a request for confidential treatment filed with the
commission) incorporated by reference to
form10-q
quarterly report for the period ended june30, 2008
.33
form of voting agreement made and entered into as of
october30, 2006 by and between merck& co., inc.
and sirna therapeutics, inc. incorporated by
reference to current report on
form8-k
dated october30, 2006
.34
settlement agreement, dated november9, 2007, by and
between merck& co., inc. and the counsel listed on
the signature pages hereto, including the exhibits
thereto incorporated by reference to current report
on
form8-k
dated november9, 2007
computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
subsidiaries of merck& co., inc.
.1
consent of independent registered public accounting
firm contained on pagexxx of this report
.2
independent auditors consent contained on
pagexxx of this report
.1
power of attorney
.2
certified resolution of board of directors
.1
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)
certification of chief executive officer
.2
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)
certification of chief financial officer
.1
section1350 certification of chief executive officer
.2
section1350 certification of chief financial officer
*
management contract or
compensatory plan or arrangement.
