10-k
y58494e10-k.htm
pfizer inc.
annual report on form 10-k
table of contents
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
[x]
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2001
[]
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file number 1-3619
pfizer inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
13-5315170
(i.r.s. employer
identification number)
235 east 42nd street
new york, new york
(address of principal executive offices)
10017-5755
(zip code)
(212)573-2323
(registrants telephone number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
name of each exchange
title of each class
on which registered
common stock, $.05 par value
new york stock exchange
preferred stock purchase rights
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act:
none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all
reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange
act of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90days.
yes [x] no []
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
item405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained,
to the best of registrants knowledge, in the definitive proxy or information
statement incorporated by reference in part iii of this form10-k or any
amendment to this form10-k. []
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates
of the registrant computed by reference to the closing price at which the stock
was sold as of march6, 2002 was approximately $251.2billion.
the number of shares outstanding (voting)of each of the registrants
classes of common stock as of march6, 2002 was 6,265,230,721 shares of common
stock, all of one class.
documents incorporated by reference
portions of the 2001 annual report
to shareholders
parts i, ii and iv
portions of the proxy statement for
the 2002 annual meeting of shareholders
parts i and iii
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
general
business segments
pharmaceuticals segment
consumer products segment
research and product development
international operations
marketing
patents and intellectual property rights
competition
raw materials
government regulation and price constraints
environmental law compliance
banking and insurance subsidiaries
tax matters
employees
cautionary factors that may affect future results
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the company
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common equity and related stockholder matters
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
part iv
item 14. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
14(a)(1) financial statements
14(a)(2) financial statement schedules
14(a)(3) exhibits
14(b) reports on form 8-k
severance agreement
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
2001 annual report to shareholders
subsidiaries
consent of kpmg llp
consent and opinion of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
table of contents
table of contents
page
part i
item 1. business
general
business segments
pharmaceuticals segment
consumer products segment
research and product development
international operations
marketing
patents and intellectual property rights
competition
raw materials
government regulation and price constraints
environmental law compliance
banking and insurance subsidiaries
tax matters
employees
cautionary factors that may affect future results
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the company
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common equity and related stockholder matters
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
item 11. executive compensation
item
12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
part iv
item 14. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
14(a)(1) financial statements
14(a)(2) financial statement schedules
14(a)(3) exhibits
14(b) reports on form8-k
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
general
pfizer
inc. (the company, which may be referred to as we,
us or our) is a
research-based, global pharmaceutical company. we discover, develop, manufacture
and market leading prescription medicines for humans and animals as well as many
of the worlds best-known consumer products.
the company was incorporated under the laws of the state of delaware on
june2, 1942.
note that, throughout this 2001 10-k report, we incorporate by reference
certain information from parts of other documents filed with the securities and
exchange commission (sec), including our annual report to shareholders for 2001
(2001 annual report) and our proxy statement for the 2002 annual meeting of
shareholders. the sec allows us to disclose important information by referring
to it in that manner. please refer to such information.
on june19, 2000, we completed our merger with warner-lambert company
(warner-lambert). we issued approximately 2.44billion shares of common stock in
exchange for all the outstanding common stock of warner-lambert.
the merger qualified as a tax-free reorganization and was accounted for as
a pooling of interests. we restated all consolidated financial statements of
pfizer for periods prior to the merger to include the results of operations,
financial position and cash flows of warner-lambert as if we had always been
merged.
business segments
we operate in two business segments:
pharmaceuticals, which includes
prescription pharmaceuticals for treating cardiovascular diseases,
infectious diseases, central nervous system disorders, diabetes,
urogenital conditions, allergies, arthritis and other disorders;
products for food animals and companion animals; and
the manufacture of empty gelatin capsules.
consumer products, which includes self-medications, shaving and fish food
and fish care products, as well as confectionery products consisting of
chewing gums, breath mints and cough tablets.
comparative segment revenues, profits and related financial information
for 2001, 2000 and 1999 are given in the table entitled segment
information on
page 59 of our 2001 annual report. tables captioned percentage change in
revenues and percentage change in geographic revenues on page 26 of our 2001
annual report give segment information for the past three years. the information
from those sections of our 2001 annual report is incorporated by reference in
this 2001 form10-k report.
our businesses are heavily regulated in most of the countries where we
operate. in the u.s., the main regulatory authority we deal with is the food and
drug administration (fda). the fda regulates the safety and efficacy of the
products we offer, our research quality, our manufacturing processes and our
promotion and advertising. similar government authorities exist in most other
countries, and in many cases also regulate our prices. see government regulation
and price constraints, below.
pharmaceuticals segment
our pharmaceuticals segment includes our human pharmaceuticals and animal
health businesses, as well as capsugel, a capsule manufacturing business.
human pharmaceuticals
most of our human pharmaceutical revenues come from products in three
major therapeutic classes: cardiovascular diseases, infectious diseases and
central nervous system disorders. we also have products for the treatment of
table of contents
diabetes, urogenital conditions and allergies, as well as a co-promoted product
for arthritis, acute pain and menstrual pain. in 2001, human pharmaceutical
revenues increased 13%, to approximately $26billion. human pharmaceutical
revenues contributed 79% of our revenues in 2001, as compared to 77% in 2000 and
74% in 1999. we marketed eight human pharmaceutical products, including our
alliance product celebrex, with sales to third parties exceeding $1billion each
in 2001. those eight products  lipitor, norvasc, zoloft, neurontin, viagra,
zithromax, celebrex and diflucan  represented 76% of human pharmaceutical
revenues and grew at a combined rate of 17% in 2001. a table
captioned revenues
- major human pharmaceutical products on page 27 of our 2001 annual report is
incorporated by reference.
cardiovascular disease products that treat problems affecting the heart
and the blood circulatory system make up our largest therapeutic product line.
lipitor, our largest-selling product, is for treatment of high lipids
(cholesterol and triglycerides) in the bloodstream. it is one of the
largest-selling prescription drugs of any kind in the world.
norvasc is a
once-a-day medication for hypertension (high blood pressure) and angina (heart
pain). it is the largest-selling high blood pressure and heart pain medicine in
the world. our other cardiovascular products include procardia xl,
cardura and
accupril/accuretic. procardia xl is a once-a-day product for hypertension and
angina. sales of procardia xl continued to decrease during 2001 due to generic
competition. cardura is used to treat hypertension and benign prostatic
hyperplasia (enlarged prostate gland). sales of cardura declined in 2001 in the
u.s., where our patent expired in 2000. cardura xl, a sustained-release form of
cardura sold in several major european markets, has been filed for approval in
the u.s. and japan. accupril/accuretic is an angiotensin converting enzyme (ace)
inhibitor for hypertension and congestive heart failure.
in the infectious disease medicine category, our major products include
zithromax, diflucan and viracept. zithromax is an oral or injectable antibiotic.
zithromax is the second-largest-selling antibiotic worldwide and the
most-prescribed, brand-name, oral antibiotic in the u.s. in december 2001,
zithromax was approved by the fda as both a single-dose regimen and three-day
regimen for the treatment of acute otitis media (ear infections) in children.
diflucan is used to treat various fungal infections, including vaginal
infections and certain infections that afflict aids and cancer patients with
weakened immune systems. sales of diflucan increased in 2001 after 13years on
the market, reflecting the products continuing acceptance as the therapy of
choice for a wide range of fungal infections. complementing
diflucan is vfend, a
treatment for serious fungal infections. in march 2002, both the oral and
intravenous formulations of vfend were approved for marketing in the european
union (eu)for the treatment of potentially fatal fungal infections. we received
an approvable letter from the fda for vfend in both oral and intravenous
formulations in december 2001. while there is no assurance as to if or when we
will receive approval from the fda, we expect to receive such approval and to
begin selling vfend during 2002 in the u.s. viracept is the largest-selling
protease inhibitor in the u.s., used in combination with other antiretroviral
drugs for treatment of hiv infections. sales of viracept declined in 2001
largely due to increasing competition from other aids medicines.
in june 1999, the eus committee for proprietary medicinal products
suspended the eu licenses of the oral and intravenous formulations of our
antibiotic trovan for 12months. the suspension has since been made permanent.
in the rest of the world, including the u.s., the use of trovan is limited to
serious infections in institutionalized patients.
for treatment of central
nervous system disorders, we offer zoloft,
neurontin and geodon and co-promote the product aricept. zoloft is approved for
the treatment of depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults and
children, panic disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder. it is the most
prescribed medicine in the u.s. for mood and
table of contents
anxiety disorders. in december 2001, we received an approvable letter from the
fda for the use of zoloft in the treatment of premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
neurontin is a leading epilepsy medicine, approved as an add-on therapy with
other anti-epileptic medications to treat partial seizures in patients over
three years of age. it also is approved in more than 50 markets for the
treatment of neuropathic pain; a u.s. filing for this indication was completed
in august 2001. geodon (known as zeldox in many markets outside the u.s.) has
been approved in 31 countries for the treatment of symptoms associated with
schizophrenia. we launched geodon in sweden in 2000 and in the u.s. in the first
quarter of 2001. in march 2001, we received an approvable letter from the fda
for an intramuscular dosage form of geodon, used to treat agitated or
hospitalized patients. we have submitted additional data requested by the fda on
this formulation, and the product is currently under review by the fda. we
launched zeldox in both the oral and intramuscular formulations in several
european countries in march 2002. we co-promote aricept, for the treatment of
mild-to-moderate alzheimers disease, with eisai co., ltd., the company that
discovered and developed the drug. eisai contracted with us to license and
co-promote the product in the u.s. and several other countries.
aricept substantially expanded the market for pharmaceutical treatment of that disease.
in june 2001, the european mutual recognition process was completed for
relpax, a treatment for migraines. relpax was approved in the eu in dosage
levels of 20 mg., 40 mg. and 80 mg., and launches have begun in europe. in the
fourth quarter of 2000, the fda sent us an approvable letter for
relpax in which we were asked to conduct an additional, short-term cardiovascular physiology
study. we expect to file this study with the fda in 2002.
viagra, our medication for the treatment of erectile dysfunction, is the
most widely prescribed medication in the world for the treatment of this
condition.
our
other pharmaceutical products include glucotrol xl, a pancreatic
stimulator to produce insulin for the treatment of diabetes, and
zyrtec, which
is used for the treatment of year-round indoor and outdoor allergies and related
problems. zyrtec is licensed to us by the belgian company ucb s.a. we co-promote
zyrtec as a prescription medicine in the u.s. with a subsidiary of ucb s.a., and
we have a license to sell zyrtec as an over-the-counter (otc)medicine (under
the brand name reactine in certain markets) in canada, europe, australia and
south africa. see item3, legal proceedings, below for a discussion of a
proceeding before the fda seeking to switch zyrtec from prescription to otc
status in the u.s. in the third quarter of 2001, we launched
zyrtec-d 12-hour,
an oral antihistamine decongestant combination medicine, which treats both
indoor and outdoor allergies as well as nasal congestion.
in
february 1999, we participated in the launch of celebrex with g.d.
searle & co., a division of pharmacia corporation, which discovered and
developed celebrex. celebrex is used for the relief of symptoms of adult
rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis and familial adenomatous polyposis. in
october 2001, celebrex also was approved in the u.s. for the treatment of acute
pain and menstrual pain. we co-promote celebrex with pharmacia in all world
markets except japan.
bextra was approved by the fda in november 2001, for the relief of pain
and inflammation of osteoarthritis and adult rheumatoid arthritis and for
menstrual pain. we will co-promote bextra with pharmacia, which discovered and
developed the drug. a launch is planned in 2002.
on march21, 2000, we announced that we were discontinuing the sale of
rezulin, a product acquired in the merger with warner-lambert. since march 1997,
warner-lambert marketed rezulin in the u.s. with an affiliate of sankyo company,
ltd., from whom we licensed the product for north america and other areas (see
item3, legal proceedings, below).
table of contents
animal health
our animal health group discovers, develops, manufactures and sells
products for the prevention and treatment of diseases in livestock and companion
animals. among the products we market are parasiticides, anti-inflammatories,
vaccines, antibiotics and related medicines for livestock and companion animals.
animal health revenues accounted for approximately 3% of our revenues in 2001,
4% in 2000 and 5% in 1999. in 2001, animal health revenues declined 3%, to $1.0
billion. excluding the impact of foreign exchange and the feed-additive product
lines that were sold in november 2000, animal health revenues increased 13% in
2001. the increase was due to the increased sales of revolution, an
anti-parasitic for companion animals, new promotional and distribution practices
as well as various restructuring initiatives, partially offset by the impact of
mad-cow and foot-and-mouth diseases in europe.
over the past few years we have substantially increased our investment in
research for animal health products. we now have over 40 programs advancing at
various stages of development. emerging products from this investment are
expected to reach the market starting in 2004 and drive long-term growth for the
animal health group.
parasiticides constitute the largest segment of the companion
animal market, consisting mainly of medicines for external parasites, such as
fleas, and heartworm preventatives. our product revolution is the first and only
topical medicine that protects against fleas and heartworm in a simple,
once-a-month administration.
rimadyl relieves pain and inflammation associated with osteoarthritis, a
condition that afflicts about 15% of all dogs. the chewable form provides the
pet owner with the convenience of once-a-day administration.
capsugel
capsugel is the worlds largest producer of two-piece capsules used in
manufacturing prescription and otc pharmaceuticals and nutritional supplements.
capsugels sales accounted for about 1% of our revenues in each of 2001, 2000
and 1999. in 2001, capsugels sales increased 1%, to $409million.
consumer products segment
our consumer products segment includes our consumer healthcare,
confectionery, shaving and fish products businesses.
consumer healthcare
with 2001 revenues of $2.4billion, our consumer healthcare division (chc)
markets many of the worlds best-known consumer health brands. sales of chc
accounted for about 8% of our revenues in each of 2001 and 2000 and 9% in 1999.
in 2001, revenues of chc increased 4%, about twice the industry growth rate,
mainly due to increased sales of sudafed, benadryl and listerine mouthwash and
the successful launch of listerine pocketpaks in the u.s. in september 2001,
partly offset by the negative impact of foreign exchange.
chcs products include otc medications and compete primarily in the oral
care, upper respiratory, skin care, gastrointestinal and eye care categories.
among our better-known brands in the u.s. are
listerine mouthwash
listerine pocketpaks oral care strips
benadryl antihistamine for allergies
sudafed for sinus congestion
zantac 75 for prevention and relief of heartburn
rolaids antacid tablets
actifed for relief of cough, cold and flu
benylin cough products
sinutab for sinus pain relief
efferdent denture cleaner
neosporin antibiotic ointment
table of contents
e.p.t. home pregnancy tests
visine eye care
bengay topical analgesic
cortizone hydrocortisone skin cream
lubriderm skin care lotions
unisom sleep aids
desitin ointments for treatment of diaper rash
several product-line extensions building on these brands have been introduced in
recent years. other products are sold only in selected international markets.
in the second quarter of 2000, we sold the rid line of lice-control
products to bayer corporation. in the fourth quarter of 1999, we sold the bain
de soleil suncare product line to schering-plough healthcare products, inc.
chc can extend the life of some of our prescription medications by
converting them to otc medications. for example, an otc formulation of diflucan,
known as diflucan one, is sold in the u.k. as a treatment for vaginal
candidiasis. similarly, zyrtec is sold as an otc product in certain markets
outside the u.s. under the brand name reactine. as market conditions permit, and
when we have necessary approval from drug regulatory authorities, we plan to
pursue similar launches for other products.
confectionery products
our confectionery division markets a broad range of leading products.
sales of the confectionery division accounted for about 6% of our revenues in
2001 and 7% in each of 2000 and 1999. in 2001, confectionery sales declined 3%,
to approximately $2.0billion, primarily due to increased competition, weaker
economies in europe, canada and other markets and the negative impact of foreign
exchange, partly offset by the strong performance of dentyne ice in north
american markets.
among our better-known brands are
halls cough drops
trident sugarless gums
bubbaloo, bubblicious, chiclets and freshen-up gums
dentyne, dentyne ice, certs, clorets and max air breath-freshening gums
and mints
shaving products
our shaving products business consists of schick and wilkinson sword
razors and blades and a range of manicure and toiletry products. sales of our
shaving products accounted for about 2% of our revenues in 2001 and 3% in each
of 2000 and 1999. in 2001, sales of our shaving products declined 7%, to $716
million. sales declines in older-line products were partly offset by strong
sales of the triple blade xtreme 3, which was launched in major european markets
in 2001.
our better-known brands are
protector razor products with wire-wrapped blades to prevent nicks and
cuts
the silk effects and lady protector razor lines for women
slim twin razors with a rubber handle for increased control
the fx product line with flexible cartridges
xtreme 3 razors with a triple blade system
we sold our barbasol shaving cream brand to perio inc. in 2001.
fish products
tetra is the worlds leading provider of products for the ornamental fish
food market, including tetramin fish foods and fish care accessories. tetras
sales accounted for less than 1% of our revenues in each of 2001, 2000 and 1999.
in 2001, tetras sales declined 4%, to $183million.
on march4, 2002, we announced that we are exploring strategic options for
tetra, including the possible sale of this business.
table of contents
research and product development
innovation by our research and development operations is very important to
the companys success. our goal is to discover, develop and bring to market
innovative products that address major unmet medical needs. this goal has been
supported by our substantial research and development investments. we spent
approximately $4.8billion in 2001, $4.4billion in 2000 and $4.0billion in
1999 on research and development, and we anticipate investing approximately $5.3
billion on research and development in 2002.
we are in the process of significantly expanding our research and
development operations. in 2001, we added approximately 2.4million square feet
of laboratory and office space at three of our major research centers. we
currently have approximately 1.0million square feet of additional laboratory
and office space under construction at two of our major research centers. other
research facilities are also being added or expanded.
we conduct research internally, and also through contracts with third
parties, through collaborations with universities and biotechnology companies
and in cooperation with other pharmaceutical firms. we also seek out innovative
technologies developed by third parties to acquire or incorporate into our
product lines through licensing or other arrangements.
drug development is time consuming, expensive and unpredictable. on
average, only one out of many thousands of chemical compounds discovered by
researchers proves to be both medically effective and safe enough to become an
approved medicine. the process from discovery to regulatory approval can take
more than ten years. drug candidates can fail at any stage of the process.
candidates may not receive regulatory approval even after many years of
research, and products that have been approved and marketed can be ordered to be
withdrawn from the market by regulatory authorities.
we believe that our investments in research have been rewarded by the
number of pharmaceutical compounds and new therapies we have in all stages of
development; we currently are working on more than 160 projects in development
and several hundred projects in research. in recent years, our discovery
scientists have delivered dozens of new chemical compounds to early development.
while each new candidate is far from regulatory approval, new drug candidates
are the foundation for future products.
our research operations add value to our existing products by improving
their effectiveness and by discovering new uses for them. in 2001, for example,
the fda approved the additional use of zithromax as a single-dose and three-day
regimen for acute otitis media in children.
information concerning several of our drug candidates in development as
well as supplemental filings for existing products is set forth under the
heading product developments on pages 29 and 30 of our 2001 annual report. that
information is incorporated by reference.
our competitors also devote substantial funds and resources to research
and development. in addition, the consolidation that has occurred in our
industry has created companies with substantial research and development
resources. the extent to which our competitors are successful in their research
could result in erosion of sales and unanticipated product obsolescence.
international operations
we have significant operations outside the united states. they are
conducted both through our subsidiaries and through distributors, and involve
the same business segments  pharmaceuticals and consumer products  as our u.s.
operations.
revenues from operations outside the u.s. of $12.3billion accounted for
38% of our total revenues in 2001. revenues exceeded $500million in each of
seven countries outside the u.s. in 2001. no single country outside the u.s.
contributed more than 10% of our total revenues. japan is our second-largest
single national market, with 7% of our revenues in each of 2001 and 2000 and 6%
in 1999.
table of contents
for a geographic breakdown of revenues and changes in revenues, see the
table geographic data on page 59 of our 2001 annual report and the table
percentage change in geographic revenues on page 26 of our 2001 annual report.
those tables are incorporated by reference.
our international businesses are subject, in varying degrees, to a number
of risks inherent in carrying on business in other countries. these include
currency fluctuations
capital and exchange control regulations
expropriation and nationalization
other restrictive government actions
our international businesses are also subject to government-imposed constraints,
including laws on pricing or reimbursement for use of products. see
government
regulation and price constraints below for discussion of these matters.
depending on the direction of change relative to the u.s. dollar, foreign
currency values can either improve or reduce the reported dollar value of our
net assets and results of operations. in 2001, revenue growth was negatively
impacted by foreign exchange, as currency movements relative to the u.s. dollar
reduced our reported revenues in many countries. changes in foreign exchange
rates decreased total revenues by $861million in 2001. while we cannot predict
with certainty future changes in foreign exchange rates or the effect they will
have on us, we attempt to mitigate their impact through operational means and by
using various financial instruments. see note 6-d to our financial statements,
derivative financial instruments and hedging activities, on pages 48 and 49 of
our 2001 annual report. that discussion is incorporated by reference. related
information about valuation and risks associated with such financial instruments
in parts e and f of that same note is also incorporated by reference.
marketing
in our global pharmaceuticals business, we promote our products to health
care providers such as doctors, nurse practitioners, physician assistants,
pharmacists, hospitals, pharmacy benefit managers (pbms) and managed care
organizations (mcos). we also market directly to consumers in the united states
through direct-to-consumer print and television advertising. in addition, we
sponsor general advertising to educate the public about our innovative medical
research.
our operations include several pharmaceutical sales organizations. each
sales organization markets a distinct group of products.
our prescription pharmaceutical products are sold principally to
wholesalers, but we also sell directly to retailers, hospitals, clinics,
government agencies and pharmacies.
through our marketing organizations, we explain the approved uses and
advantages of our products to medical professionals. we work to gain access to
health authority, pbm and mco formularies (lists of recommended or approved
medicines and other products) and reimbursement lists by demonstrating the
qualities and treatment benefits of our products. we also work with mcos and
pbms to assist them with disease management, patient education and other tools
that help their medical treatment routines. for example, in 2001 we entered into
a program with the state of florida agency for health care administration that
is designed to help manage chronic diseases among floridas medicaid population.
marketing of prescription pharmaceuticals depends to a degree on complex
decisions about the scope of clinical trials made years before product approval.
all drugs must complete clinical trials required by regulatory authorities to
show they are safe and effective for treating one or more particular medical
problems. a manufacturer may choose, however, to undertake additional studies,
including comparative clinical trials with competitive products, to demonstrate
additional advantages of a compound.
table of contents
those studies can be costly and take years to complete, and the results
are uncertain. balancing these considerations makes it difficult to decide
whether and when to undertake such additional studies. but, when they are
successful, such studies can have a major impact on approved marketing claims
and strategies.
separate sales organizations are used by our animal health business to
promote its products. its advertising and promotion are generally targeted to
health professionals, directly and through medical journals. animal health and
nutrition products are sold through veterinarians, drug wholesalers,
distributors and retail outlets as well as directly to users. where appropriate,
these products are also marketed through print and television advertising.
our consumer products businesses primarily use their own representatives
to directly promote their products. we also use print and television consumer
advertising and offer sales incentives such as coupons to promote our consumer
products. these products are sold through various retailers.
during 2001, sales to our three largest pharmaceutical and consumer healthcare
products wholesalers were
mckesson, inc.  14.6% of our revenues;
cardinal health, inc.  13.4% of our revenues; and
amerisourcebergen corporation  13.0% of our revenues.
sales to these wholesalers were concentrated in the pharmaceuticals
segment. apart from these instances, none of our business segments is dependent
on any one customer or group of related customers.
patents and intellectual property rights
our products are sold around the world under brand-name, logo and certain
product design trademarks we consider in the aggregate to be of material
importance. trademark protection continues in some countries for as long as the
mark is used and, in other countries, for as long as it is registered.
registrations generally are for fixed, but renewable, terms.
we own or license a number of u.s. and foreign patents. these patents
cover
pharmaceutical products and their uses
pharmaceutical formulations
product manufacturing processes
intermediate chemical compounds used in manufacturing
patents for individual products extend for varying periods according to
the date of patent filing or grant and the legal term of patents in the various
countries where patent protection is obtained. the actual protection afforded by
a patent, which can vary from country to country, depends upon the type of
patent, the scope of its coverage and the availability of legal remedies in the
country.
in the aggregate, our patent and related rights are of material importance
to our businesses in the united states and most other countries. based on
current product sales, and considering the vigorous competition with products
sold by others, the patent rights we consider significant in relation to our
business as a whole, together with the year in which the basic u.s. patent
expires, are those for the following drugs:
basic u.s. patent
drug
expiration year
accupril
diflucan
zithromax
norvasc
zoloft
zyrtec
lipitor
viagra
viracept
celebrex
neurontin
see below
table of contents
in some instances, there are later expiring patents relating to these products
directed to particular forms or compositions of the drug or to methods of
manufacturing or using the drug in the treatment of further diseases or
conditions. such patents may not protect the companys drug from generic drug
competition after the expiration of the basic patent.
zithromax is patented by pliva, a croatian pharmaceutical company. the
drug is licensed exclusively to us by pliva for sales and marketing in major
countries, and we purchase the compound in bulk crude form from pliva.
celebrex is patented by pharmacia corporation, with whom we co-promote
celebrex in all world markets except japan. an action alleging patent
infringement with respect to the sale of celebrex is pending against pharmacia,
the company and others.
zyrtec is patented by the belgian company, ucb s.a., and is licensed to us
for sales in the u.s., canada, europe, australia and south africa. we co-promote
zyrtec as a prescription medicine in the u.s. with a subsidiary of ucb s.a. and
have a license to sell zyrtec as an otc medicine in the other markets.
the basic u.s. patents relating to neurontin expired in 1994 and 2000.
however, in april 2000, a broad u.s. patent was granted relating to stable
pharmaceutical compositions of neurontin containing low levels of lactam
impurity. this patent expires in 2017. other companies have filed applications
with the fda seeking approval of products that appear to infringe this patent.
in addition, other companies have filed applications with the fda seeking
approval of products that appear to infringe our patents on zoloft, diflucan,
accupril, glucotrol xl, procardia xl, estrostep fe and femhrt 1/5.
we have other patent rights covering additional products that have smaller
revenues.
we expect that the patents on some of our newest products and late-stage
product candidates could become significant to our business as a whole in the
future.
the expiration of a product patent or loss of patent protection resulting
from a legal challenge normally results in significant competition from generic
products against the covered product and, particularly in the u.s., can result
in a significant reduction in sales of the pioneering product. in some cases,
however, we can continue to obtain commercial benefits from
product manufacturing trade secrets
patents on uses for products
patents on processes and intermediates for the economical manufacture of
the active ingredients
patents for special formulations of the product or delivery mechanisms
conversion of the active ingredient to otc products
the
effect of product patent expiration or loss also depends upon
the nature of the market and the position of the product in it
the growth of the market
the complexities and economics of manufacture of the product
the requirements of generic drug laws
one of the main limitations on our operations in some countries outside
the u.s. is the lack of effective intellectual property protection of our
products. under international agreements in recent years, global protection of
intellectual property rights is improving. the general agreement on tariffs and
trade requires participant countries to amend their intellectual property laws
to provide patent protection for pharmaceutical products by the end of a
ten-year transition period. a number of countries are doing this. we have
experienced significant growth in our businesses in some of those nations, and
our continued business expansion in those countries depends to a large degree on
further patent protection improvement.
see item3, legal proceedings, below for a discussion of patent
litigation.
table of contents
competition
competition is intense in all of our businesses and includes many large
and small competitors.
the principal means of competition vary among product categories and
business groups. technological innovations affecting
efficacy
safety
patients ease of use
cost effectiveness
are important to success in all of our businesses. our businesses also focus on
unmet medical needs and therapeutic improvements. our emphasis on innovation has
led to our multi-billion-dollar research and development investments over the
past decade.
our human pharmaceutical business competes with other worldwide
research-based drug companies, many smaller research companies with more limited
therapeutic focus and generic drug manufacturers. our pharmaceutical operations
are among the largest in the world.
in recent years, a comparison of the total cost of medical treatments
using pharmaceuticals versus alternative treatments for the same condition has
become an important basis of competition. mcos and pbms look to cost advantages
as well as medical benefits in making their drug formulary decisions.
our pharmaceutical sales and marketing organization is a valuable
competitive asset. our salespeoples ability to reach medical professionals with
information about our products helps us respond to competitive efforts and
launch new products.
we have a significant presence in the animal health marketplace, but many
other companies offer competitive products. altogether, there are hundreds of
producers of animal health products throughout the world. the principal methods
of competition vary somewhat depending on the particular product. they include
product innovation
service
price
quality
effective promotion to veterinary professionals and consumers
we promote our products directly through our sales representatives as well as
through advertising.
many other companies, large and small, manufacture and sell one or more
products that are similar to our consumer products. sources of competitive
advantage include
product quality and efficacy
brand identity
advertising and promotion
product innovation
broad distribution capabilities
customer satisfaction
price
significant expenditures for advertising, promotion and marketing are generally
required to achieve both consumer and trade acceptance of consumer products.
in the current environment of competitive pressures on profit margins, we
continue efforts to control the growth of our expenses. we have kept our costs
down in areas such as manufacturing, distribution and sales administration by
restructuring and consolidating facilities. these measures have brought us new
efficiencies and reduced or contained our operating expenses.
managed care organizations
the growth of mcos in the u.s. has been a major factor in the competitive
make-up of the health care marketplace. over half the u.s. population now
participates in some version of managed care. because of the size of the patient
population covered by mcos, marketing of prescription drugs to them and the pbms
that serve many of those organizations has become important to our business.
table of contents
mcos can include medical insurance companies, medical plan administrators,
health-maintenance organizations, alliances of hospitals and physicians and
other physician organizations. the purchasing power of mcos has been increasing
in recent years due to their growing numbers of enrolled patients. at the same
time, those organizations have been consolidating into fewer, even larger
entities. this enhances their purchasing strength and importance to us.
a major objective of mcos is to contain and, where possible, reduce health
care expenditures. they typically use formularies, volume purchases and
long-term contracts to negotiate discounts from pharmaceutical providers. they
use their purchasing power to bargain for lower supplier prices. they also
emphasize primary and preventive care, out-patient treatment and procedures
performed at doctors offices and clinics. hospitalization and surgery,
typically the most expensive forms of treatment, are carefully managed.
as
discussed above in marketing, mcos and pbms typically develop
formularies to reduce their cost for medications. formularies can be based on
the prices and therapeutic benefits of the available products. due to their
generally lower cost, generic medicines are often favored. the breadth of the
products covered by formularies can vary considerably from one mco to another,
and many formularies include alternative and competitive products for treatment
of particular medical problems. mcos use a variety of means to encourage
patients use of products listed on their formularies.
exclusion of a product from a formulary can lead to its sharply reduced
usage in the mco patient population. consequently, pharmaceutical companies
compete aggressively to have their products included. where possible, companies
compete for inclusion based upon unique features of their products, such as
greater efficacy, better patient ease of use or fewer side effects. a lower
overall cost of therapy is also an important factor. products that demonstrate
fewer therapeutic advantages must compete for inclusion based primarily on
price.
the growth of mcos also appears to have led to greater usage of some
drugs. the use of certain drugs can prevent the need for more costly treatments
such as hospitalization, professional therapy or even surgery. because of these
advantages, such drugs can become favored first-line treatments. in addition,
the current trend of some patients to opt for managed care alternatives to
medicare may increase overall pharmaceutical usage among that segment of the
elderly population. medicare does not pay for outpatient use of medicines, so
patients who do not have another source of prescription drug coverage must bear
that cost. mcos, however, often offer drug benefits for their participants.
these developments have not only created pressure on prices, but also have
increased sales of products on formularies. we have been generally, although not
universally, successful in having our major products included on mco
formularies.
another way we address the interests of mcos is by developing disease
management programs. these programs can be attractive to mcos by improving
patient communications and compliance with dosage directions, which are
important for effective disease treatment. they can help mcos address various
aspects of disease management, such as prevention, diagnosis and treatment of
certain diseases, including use of pharmaceutical products. this comprehensive
approach can improve the quality of care and lower costly complications of
chronic diseases. as noted above in marketing, one such program, which we
entered into in 2001 with the state of florida agency for health care
administration, is designed to help manage chronic diseases among floridas
medicaid population.
generic products
one of the biggest competitive challenges that we face in the u.s. and
that is growing internationally is from generic pharmaceutical manufacturers.
upon the expiration or loss of
table of contents
u.s. patent protection on a product, we can lose the major portion of u.s. sales
of that product within a year. generic competitors operate without our large
research and development expenses and our costs of conveying medical information
about the product to the medical community. in addition, the fda approval
process exempts generics from costly and time-consuming clinical trials to
demonstrate their safety and efficacy, and allows generic manufacturers to rely
on the safety and efficacy of the pioneer product. generic products need only
demonstrate a level of availability in the bloodstream equivalent to that of the
pioneer product. this means that after we have borne the expenses of
discovering, developing and testing a medicine for safety and efficacy,
obtaining regulatory approval and informing the medical community about its
therapeutic benefits, generic competitors can market a competing version of our
product after the expiration of our patent, charge much less and still be
profitable.
as noted above, mcos that focus primarily on the immediate cost of drugs
often favor generics over brand-name drugs. many governments also encourage the
use of generics as alternatives to brand-name drugs in their health care
programs, including medicaid in the u.s. laws in the u.s. generally allow, and
in some cases require, pharmacists to substitute generic drugs that have been
rated under government procedures to be therapeutically equivalent to a
brand-name drug. the substitution must be made unless the prescribing physician
expressly forbids it.
raw materials
raw materials essential to our businesses are purchased worldwide in the
ordinary course of business from numerous suppliers. in general, these materials
are available from multiple sources. no serious shortages or delays were
encountered in 2001, and none are expected in 2002.
government regulation and price constraints
pharmaceutical companies are subject to extensive regulation by numerous
national, state and local agencies. of particular importance is the
fda in the united states. it
has jurisdiction over virtually all of our businesses and administers
requirements covering the testing, safety, effectiveness, approval,
manufacturing, labeling, marketing, advertising and post-marketing surveillance
of our pharmaceutical products. fda requirements and/or reviews have increased
the amount of time and money necessary to develop new products and bring them to
market.
the fda also regulates most of our consumer products and, along with the
u.s. department of agriculture and the u.s. environmental protection agency, our
animal health products.
since 1998, the approval of new drugs across the eu is possible only using
the european medicines evaluation agencys (emea)mutual recognition or central
approval processes. the use of either of these procedures provides a more rapid
and consistent approval within the 15 member states than was the case when the
approval processes were operating independently within each member state.
further, on january1, 2000, norway and iceland became full participants in the
eu central approval processes. in addition, the agreement between the eu and 12
other european states to base their approvals on the centralized eu approval
will significantly speed the regulatory process in those countries. the emea
does not have jurisdiction over patient reimbursement or pricing matters in eu
member countries, however. we continue to deal with individual countries on such
issues.
in recent years in the u.s., various legislative proposals have been
offered at the federal and state levels that would bring about major changes in
the affected health care systems. some states have passed such legislation, and
further federal and state proposals are possible. such proposals and
table of contents
legislation include, and future proposals could include, price or patient
reimbursement constraints on medicines, increases in required rebates or
discounts and restrictions on access to certain products. similar issues exist
in many foreign countries where we do business. we cannot predict the outcome of
such initiatives, but we will work to maintain patient access to our products
and to oppose price constraints.
in the u.s., federal proposals have called for substantial changes in the
medicare program, and federal and state proposals have called for substantial
changes in the medicaid program. if such changes are enacted, they may require
significant reductions from currently projected government expenditures for
these programs. driven by budget concerns, medicaid managed care systems have
been implemented in many states. if the medicare and medicaid programs implement
changes that restrict the access of a significant population of patients to our
innovative medicines, our business could be materially affected. on the other
hand, relatively little pharmaceutical use is currently covered by medicare. if
changes to these programs shift patients to mcos that cover pharmaceuticals, or
if an outpatient drug benefit is added to medicare, usage of pharmaceuticals
could increase. pricing pressures likely would ensue in either case given the
enhancement of the purchasing power of the mcos or the federal government.
medicare currently does not provide outpatient prescription drug coverage.
in this context, in order to help address the issue of affordable access to
health care for those most in need, we announced the pfizer for living share
card program in january 2002. through this program, low-income medicare
recipients without prescription drug coverage can purchase a 30-day supply of a
pfizer prescription medicine and of the co-promoted products
zyrtec and aricept
at many retail pharmacies for $15.
u.s. law requires us to give rebates to state medicaid agencies based on
each states reimbursement of pharmaceutical products under the medicaid
program. some states are seeking rebates in excess of the amounts required by
federal law. we also must give discounts or rebates on purchases or
reimbursements of pharmaceutical products by certain other federal and state
agencies and programs. also, in late 2000 and early 2001, the states of vermont
and maine received centers for medicare and medicaid services approval of
waivers that would expand medicaid rebates beyond the current medicaid
population. both of these waivers have been challenged in court. the vermont
program was struck down by a federal appeals court in 2001. the maine program
was upheld by a federal district court in february 2002; an appeal of that
decision is expected. if the maine program is upheld on appeal, other states may
seek similar approval of waivers that would expand medicaid rebates beyond the
current medicaid population. rebates potentially could be viewed as price
discounts without appreciable increases in volume as an offset. see the
discussion regarding rebates on page 27 of our 2001 annual report, which
discussion is incorporated by reference.
we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other
countries. in europe and some other international markets, the government
provides health care at low direct cost to consumers and regulates
pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for the
government-sponsored health care system. this international patchwork of price
regulation has led to inconsistent prices and some third-party trade in our
products from markets with lower prices. such trade exploiting price differences
between countries can undermine our sales in markets with higher prices.
in addition to the fda, the u.s. department of agriculture and the u.s.
environmental protection agency, we are subject to the jurisdiction of various
other regulatory and enforcement departments and agencies, such as the
department of health and human services, the federal trade commission and the
department of justice in the u.s. we are, therefore, subject to possible
administrative and legal proceedings and actions by those
table of contents
regulatory bodies (see item3, legal
proceedings, below). such actions may
include product recalls, seizures and other civil and criminal sanctions. in
some cases, we have initiated product recalls voluntarily.
following the september11, 2001 terrorist attacks, the federal government
requested assistance from pfizer and other pharmaceutical companies in
connection with the threat of bioterrorism. in response, we have contributed
pfizer antibiotics to the u.s. national stockpile and coordinated with
authorities to ensure supplies of essential pharmaceuticals.
it is difficult to predict the future impact of the broad and expanding
legislative and regulatory requirements affecting us.
environmental law compliance
most of our manufacturing and certain research operations are affected by
federal, state and local environmental laws. we have made, and intend to
continue to make, necessary expenditures for compliance with applicable laws. we
are also cleaning up environmental contamination from past industrial activity
at certain sites (see item3, legal proceedings, below). as a result, we
incurred capital and operational expenditures in 2001 for environmental
protection and clean-up of certain past industrial activity as follows:
environmental-related capital expenditures  $83million
other environmental-related expenses  $121million
while we cannot predict with certainty the future costs of such clean-up
activities, capital expenditures or operating costs for environmental
compliance, we do not believe they will have a material effect on our capital
expenditures, earnings or competitive position.
banking and insurance subsidiaries
we conduct international banking operations through a subsidiary, pfizer
international bank europe (pibe), based in dublin, ireland. pibe, incorporated
under the laws of ireland, operates under a banking license from the central
bank of ireland. it makes loans and accepts deposits in several currencies in
international markets. pibe is an active euromarket lender to high quality
corporations and governments through its portfolio of loans and money market
instruments. loans are made primarily on a short and medium term basis,
typically with floating interest rates.
we also own an insurance operation, the kodiak company limited, which
reinsures certain assets, inland transport and marine cargo of our international
operations.
financial data for these subsidiaries are set forth in note 5 to our
financial statements, banking and insurance subsidiaries, on page 46 of our 2001
annual report, and information relating to our banking operations is set forth
under the heading banking operation on page 33 of our 2001 annual report. such
data and information are incorporated by reference.
tax matters
the discussion of tax-related matters (including certain proceedings
involving proposed tax adjustments relating to prior years) in note 11 to our
financial statements, taxes on income, on pages 50 and 51 of our 2001 annual
report is incorporated by reference.
employees
in our innovation-intensive business, our employees are vital to our
success. we believe we have good relationships with our employees. as of
december31, 2001, we employed approximately 90,000 people in our operations
throughout the world.
cautionary factors that may affect future results
(cautionary statements under the private securities litigation reform act of 1995)
our disclosure and analysis in this report and in our 2001 annual report to
shareholders contain some forward-looking statements that
table of contents
set forth anticipated results based on managements plans and assumptions. from
time to time, we also provide forward-looking statements in other materials we
release to the public as well as oral forward-looking statements. such
statements give our current expectations or forecasts of future events; they do
not relate strictly to historical or current facts. we have tried, wherever
possible, to identify such statements by using words such as anticipate,
estimate, expect, project, intend, plan, believe and words and terms
of similar substance in connection with any discussion of future operating or
financial performance. in particular, these include statements relating to
future actions, prospective products or product approvals, future performance or
results of current and anticipated products, sales efforts, expenses, interest
rates, foreign exchange rates, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal
proceedings, and financial results.
we cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statement will be realized,
although we believe we have been prudent in our plans and assumptions.
achievement of future results is subject to risks, uncertainties and inaccurate
assumptions. should known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, or
should underlying assumptions prove inaccurate, actual results could vary
materially from those anticipated, estimated or projected. investors should bear
this in mind as they consider forward-looking statements.
we undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements,
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. you are
advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects
in our 10-q and 8-k reports to the sec. also note that we provide the following
cautionary discussion of risks, uncertainties and possibly inaccurate
assumptions relevant to our businesses. these are factors that, individually or
in the aggregate, we think could cause our actual results to differ materially
from expected and historical results. we note these factors for investors as
permitted by the private securities litigation reform act of 1995. you should
understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors.
consequently, you should not consider the following to be a complete discussion
of all potential risks or uncertainties.
balancing current growth and investment for the future remains a major
challenge. our ongoing investments in new product introductions and research and
development for future products could exceed corresponding sales growth. this
could produce higher costs without a proportional increase in revenues.
in the u.s., many pharmaceutical products are subject to increasing pricing
pressures, which could be significantly impacted by the outcome of the current
national debate over medicare reform. if the medicare program provided
outpatient pharmaceutical coverage for its beneficiaries, the federal
government, through its enormous purchasing power under the program, could
demand discounts from pharmaceutical companies that may implicitly create price
controls on prescription drugs. on the other hand, a medicare drug reimbursement
provision may increase the volume of pharmaceutical drug purchases, offsetting
at least in part these potential price discounts. in addition, mcos,
institutions and other government agencies continue to seek price discounts.
government efforts to reduce medicare and medicaid expenses are expected to
increase the use of mcos. this may result in managed cares influencing
prescription decisions for a larger segment of the population. in addition,
certain states have proposed and certain other states have adopted various
programs to control prices for their seniors drug programs, including price or
patient reimbursement constraints, restrictions on access to certain products,
importation from other countries and bulk purchasing of drugs.
we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other
countries. in europe and some other international markets, the government
provides health care at low direct cost to consumers and regulates
pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement
table of contents
levels to control costs for the government-sponsored health care system. this
international patchwork of price regulation has led to inconsistent prices and
some third-party trade in our products from markets with lower prices. such
trade exploiting price differences between countries can undermine our sales in
markets with higher prices.
as a result, it is expected that pressures on the pricing component of
operating results will continue.
thirty-eight percent of our 2001 revenues arose from international operations,
including 7% from japan, and we expect revenue and net income growth in 2002 to
be impacted by changes in foreign exchange rates.
these international-based revenues as well as our substantial
international assets result in our exposure to currency exchange rate changes.
in addition, our interest-bearing investments, loans and borrowings are subject
to interest rate change risk. the risks of such changes and the measures we have
taken to help contain those risks are discussed in the section entitled
financial risk management on page 35 of our 2001 annual report. for additional
details, see note 6-d to our financial statements, derivative financial
instruments and hedging activities, on pages 48 and 49 of our 2001 annual
report. those sections of our 2001 annual report are incorporated by reference.
notwithstanding our efforts to foresee and mitigate the effects of changes
in fiscal circumstances, we cannot predict with certainty all changes in
currency and interest rates, inflation or other related factors affecting our
businesses.
a european currency (euro)was introduced in january 1999 to replace the
separate currencies of 12 individual countries and did replace such currencies
on january1, 2002. we modified systems and commercial arrangements to deal with
the new currency, including the availability of dual currency processes to
permit transactions to be denominated in legacy currencies, as well as the euro,
during the 1999-2001 transition period. the cost of this effort was not material
to our financial position or results of operations. we continue to evaluate the
economic and operational impact of the euro, including its impact on
competition, pricing and foreign currency exchange risks.
international operations could be affected by changes in intellectual property
legal protections and remedies, trade regulations and procedures and actions
affecting approval, production, pricing, reimbursement and marketing of
products, as well as by unstable governments and legal systems,
intergovernmental disputes and possible nationalization.
cost-containment measures employed by governments that have the effect of
limiting patient access to medicines and related issues described above in
government regulation and price constraints affect the growth and profitability
of our operations in some countries.
business combinations among our competitors could affect our competitive
position in the pharmaceutical, consumer products and animal health businesses.
similarly, combinations among our major customers could increase their
purchasing power in dealing with us.
competition from manufacturers of generic drugs is a major challenge in the
u.s. and is growing internationally. loss of patent protection typically leads
to significant loss of sales in the u.s. market. the patents covering several of
the companys medicines are being challenged by generic drug manufacturers.
table of contents
risks and uncertainties particularly apply with respect to product-related
forward-looking statements. the outcome of the lengthy and complex process of
identifying new compounds and developing new products is inherently uncertain.
there can be no assurance as to if or when we will receive regulatory approval
for new products or for new indications or dosage forms for existing products.
there are also many considerations that can affect marketing of pharmaceutical
products around the world. regulatory delays, the inability to successfully
complete clinical trials, claims and concerns about safety and efficacy, new
discoveries, patent disputes and claims about adverse side effects are a few of
the factors that could adversely affect the realization of research and
development and product-related forward-looking statements.
as discussed above in marketing, decisions about research studies made early
in the development process of a drug candidate can have a substantial impact on
the marketing strategy once the drug receives approval. more detailed studies
may demonstrate additional benefits that can help in the marketing, but they
consume time and resources and can delay submitting the drug candidate for
initial approval. we try to plan clinical trials prudently, but there is no
guarantee that a proper balance of speed and testing will be made in each case.
the quality of our decisions in this area could affect our future results.
difficulties or delays in product manufacturing or marketing, including, but
not limited to, the inability to build up production capacity commensurate with
demand, or the failure to predict market demand for, or to gain market
acceptance of, approved products, could affect future results.
we currently market eight products with annual sales to third parties
exceeding $1billion each: lipitor, norvasc, zoloft, neurontin, viagra,
zithromax, diflucan and our alliance product celebrex. those products accounted
for more than half of our 2001 revenues. if these or any of our other major
products were to become subject to a problem such as loss of patent protection,
unexpected side effects, regulatory proceedings, publicity affecting doctor or
patient confidence or pressure from competitive products, or if a new, more
effective treatment should be introduced, the impact on our revenues could be
significant. the patents covering neurontin, diflucan and zoloft are the subject
of pending legal challenges, and an action alleging patent infringement with
respect to the sale of celebrex also is pending.
we cannot predict with accuracy the timing or impact of the introduction of
competitive products or their possible future effect on our sales. products that
potentially could compete with a number of our drugs, including some of our
best-selling medicines, are in various stages of development, and some have been
filed for approval with the fda.
growth in costs and expenses, changes in product mix and the impact of
divestitures, restructuring, product withdrawals and other unusual items that
could result from evolving business strategies, evaluation of asset realization
and organizational restructuring could affect future results. for example, we
may be unable to maintain or further enhance the margin improvements achieved in
recent years.
on january1, 2002, we adopted the provisions of statement of financial
accounting standards (sfas)no.141, business combinations, and sfas no.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets. sfas no.141 eliminates the pooling of
interests method of accounting for business combinations initiated after june
30, 2001. under the provisions of sfas no.142, intangible assets with
indefinite lives and goodwill are no longer amortized but are subject to annual
impairment tests. separable intangible assets with finite lives continue to be
amortized over their useful lives. the adoption of sfas no.141 does not impact
our financial position or results of operations. application of the
non-amortization provisions of sfas no.142 will not have a material effect on
our financial condition or results of operations. the effect on diluted earnings
per share is expected to be less than one cent per share for 2002. we have not
yet determined the
table of contents
impact, if any, of adopting the goodwill impairment provisions of sfas no.142.
however, we expect to record a charge in the first quarter of 2002 for the
impairment provisions as they relate to identifiable intangible assets. this
charge is not expected to have a material effect on our financial condition or
results of operations.
in june 2001, the financial accounting standards board issued sfas no.
143, accounting for asset retirement obligations. sfas no.143 addresses
financial accounting requirements for retirement obligations associated with
tangible long-lived assets. we do not expect the provisions of sfas no.143 to
have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. we will adopt
the provisions of sfas no.143 as of january1, 2003.
on
january1, 2002, we adopted the provisions of sfas no.144,
accounting
for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets, that replaces sfas no.121,
accounting for the impairment of long-lived assets and for long-lived assets to
be disposed of. sfas no.144 requires that long-lived assets to be disposed of
by sale, including those of discontinued operations, be measured at the lower of
carrying amount or fair value less cost to sell, whether reported in continuing
operations or in discontinued operations. discontinued operations will no longer
be measured at net realizable value or include amounts for operating losses that
have not yet been incurred. sfas no.144 also broadens the reporting of
discontinued operations to include all components of an entity with operations
that can be distinguished from the rest of the entity and that will be
eliminated from the ongoing operations of the entity in a disposal transaction.
the adoption of sfas no.144 has no impact on our current operations.
on january1, 2002, we adopted the provisions of the emerging issues task
force (eitf)issue no.00-25, vendor income statement characterization of
consideration paid to a reseller of the vendors products. eitf no.00-25
requires the cost of certain vendor consideration to be classified as a
reduction of revenue rather than as a marketing expense. our adoption of eitf
no.00-25 will result in reclassifications of certain marketing expenses to
reflect them as a reduction of revenues. these reclassifications will have no
effect on net income
from time to time, new or revised accounting standards and rules are
issued. although the standards mentioned above are not expected to have a
material effect on our financial condition or results of operations (or, as
noted, in one instance we have not yet determined the impact), future standards
and rules could have such an effect.
changes in the u.s. tax code and the tax laws of other countries, as well as
our effective tax rate for the fiscal year, can affect our net earnings. during
2001, no major u.s. or international tax legislation was enacted that would
materially impact our net earnings. it is not possible, however, to predict the
impact on our future results of any tax legislation enacted in the future.
our future results could be affected by changes in business, political and
economic conditions, including the cost and availability of insurance, due to
the september11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the u.s., the threat of future
terrorist activity in the u.s. and other parts of the world and related u.s.
military action overseas.
we are involved in various patent, product liability, consumer, environmental
and tax claims and litigations and additional matters that arise from time to
time in the ordinary course of our business. these include challenges to the
coverage and/or validity of patents on products or processes and allegations of
injuries caused by drugs or medical devices. in addition, we are subject to
national, state and local environmental laws and regulations. we are also
involved in or are the subject of governmental or regulatory agency inquiries or
investigations from time to time. litigation is inherently unpredictable, and
excessive verdicts that are not justified by the evidence can occur. we believe that we have valid defenses with respect to the legal matters pending
against us and, taking into account our insurance and reserves, we believe that
the ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a material adverse impact
on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. it is possible,
however, that cash flows or results of operations could be affected in any
particular period by the resolution of one or more of these contingencies.
table of contents
item 2. properties
our corporate and divisional headquarters are located at our world
headquarters, which includes several buildings in new york city, and at our
campus in morris plains, new jersey. in the new york world headquarters, we own
two of the buildings, including our main 33-story office tower, and rent other
nearby space. our 33-story office tower is located on a site we have leased
under a long-term ground lease. altogether, our new york headquarters operations
occupy over 1.75million square feet of owned and leased office space. on the
morris plains campus, we own five buildings with total occupied space of
approximately 1.3million square feet, located on approximately 175 acres.
additional leased space in the vicinity of the morris plains campus totals
approximately 0.25million square feet.
for our pharmaceutical business, we own and lease space for sales and
marketing, administrative support and customer service functions around the
world.
our major research and development operations are located in owned
facilities in amboise, france; ann arbor, michigan; freiburg, germany; fresnes,
france; groton/new london, connecticut; holland, michigan; morris plains, new
jersey; nagoya, japan; sandwich, england, u.k.; and mississauga, ontario,
canada. we also lease facilities in la jolla, california, for research and
development operations.
the research and development buildings at our groton, connecticut facility
contain approximately 2.9million square feet of floor space. in 2001, we
completed construction of a 780,000 square-foot facility on a 29-acre site in
new london, connecticut.
buildings on our 334-acre sandwich, england campus house research
facilities and a production plant. the research and development facilities
contain approximately 2.6million square feet of floor space. an additional
390,000 square feet of new research space is under construction.
at our facility in nagoya, japan, approximately 280,000 square feet of
floor space is used for research and development.
at our facility in holland, michigan, approximately 140,000 square feet of
floor space is used for research and development.
our ann arbor, michigan research and development facility currently
contains approximately 1.2million square feet of floor space. in addition, we
have begun construction of approximately 600,000 square feet of new research and
office space at this facility.
our leased research and development facility in la jolla, california
contains approximately 650,000 square feet of floor space.
we own or lease other important research facilities in terre haute,
indiana and cambridge, massachusetts. a number of smaller research and
development operations around the world focus principally on their local
markets.
we have been expanding our research and development facilities in recent
years to meet the challenges of handling growing research activities. in 2001,
we completed construction of approximately 2.4million square feet of additional
research and office space at our sites in groton/new london, sandwich and la
jolla.
our global manufacturing division operates 54 plants that produce products
for our pharmaceutical, consumer healthcare and animal health businesses around
the world. twenty-five of these are major facilities. these plants handle one or
more of three types of production processes:
table of contents
fermentation
organic synthesis
product production
we have two major fermentation plants:
nagoya, japan
sandwich, england, u.k.
our major organic synthesis facilities are in seven locations:
barceloneta, puerto rico, u.s.
groton, connecticut, u.s.
holland, michigan, u.s.
little island, ireland
loughbeg, ireland
ringaskiddy, ireland
sandwich, england, u.k.
in addition, construction is underway on a new organic synthesis site in tuas,
singapore.
we have major product production plants at 21 sites in 11 countries:
amboise, france
barceloneta, puerto rico, u.s.
brooklyn, new york, u.s.
dalian, china
freiburg, germany
illertissen, germany
latina, italy
lees summit, missouri, u.s.
lincoln, nebraska, u.s.
lititz, pennsylvania, u.s.
loughbeg, ireland
louvain-la-neuve, belgium
orleans, france
nagoya, japan
parsippany, new jersey, u.s.
sandwich, england, u.k.
san jose iturbide, mexico
so paulo, brazil
terre haute, indiana, u.s.
toluca, mexico
vega baja, puerto rico, u.s.
our animal health group has its principal executive offices in leased
facilities in one of the buildings comprising the companys new york world
headquarters. animal health owns a building in exton, pennsylvania and leases an
additional office building nearby.
the research for animal health products is generally conducted at our
major research and development facilities.
our consumer healthcare division has its principal executive offices and
research operations in morris plains, new jersey and parsippany, new jersey.
chcs sales and marketing offices are generally located in leased space and
shared with local pharmaceutical or other consumer group businesses.
our global manufacturing division operates our distribution operations in
the u.s., including facilities in aurora, colorado; elk grove, illinois; fort
worth, texas; guilderland center, new york; lees summit, missouri; lititz,
pennsylvania; marietta, georgia; memphis, tennessee; parsippany, new jersey;
reno, nevada; and south bend, indiana. we also operate distribution facilities
in major markets around the world.
the confectionery division operates 24 plants globally, including 13 major
facilities:
bangkok, thailand
barcelona, spain
bauru, brazil
cali, columbia
dublin, ireland
guangzhou, china
guarulhos, brazil
manchester, england, u.k.
nagoya, japan (joint venture, meito-adams)
puebla, mexico
rockford, illinois, u.s.
sa paulo, brazil
scarborough, canada
the shaving products division operates five manufacturing sites:
acton, england, u.k.
caracas, venezuela
guangzhou, china
milford, connecticut, u.s.
solingen, germany
table of contents
distribution of these products is managed through both company-owned and
contracted distribution facilities.
the capsugel division operates nine hard-gelatin capsule manufacturing
sites:
bornem, belgium
cibinong, indonesia
colmar, france
greenwood, south carolina, u.s.
navanakorn, thailand
puebla, mexico
rio de janeiro, brazil
sagamihara, japan
suzhou, china
in addition, the division operates one soft-gelatin capsule manufacturing
facility in ploermel, france. distribution of capsugel products is generally
done through distribution facilities located on or near the plant sites.
tetra operates three manufacturing sites:
blacksburg, virginia, u.s.
melle, germany
offelten, germany
tetra also operates distribution facilities from sites near the blacksburg and
melle manufacturing facilities. on march4, 2002, we announced that we are
exploring strategic options for tetra, including the possible sale of this
business.
in general, our properties are well maintained, adequate and suitable to
their purposes. the growth of our businesses has created space pressures for
certain operations, however. we have responded to such challenges with plans to
provide appropriate facilities as needs are demonstrated. note 9 to our
financial statements, property, plant and equipment, on page 50 of our 2001
annual report, which discloses amounts invested in land, buildings and
equipment, and the discussion of investing activities under the heading summary
of cash flows on pages 32 and 33 of our 2001 annual report, which describes our
capital expenditures, are incorporated by reference. see also the discussion
under note 13 entitled lease commitments on page 53 of our 2001 annual report,
which is also incorporated by reference.
item 3. legal proceedings
we are involved in various patent, product liability, consumer,
environmental and tax claims and litigations and additional matters that arise
from time to time in the ordinary course of our business. these include
challenges to the coverage and/or validity of patents on products or processes
and allegations of injuries caused by drugs or medical devices. in addition, we
are subject to national, state and local environmental laws and regulations. we
are also involved in or are the subject of governmental or regulatory agency
inquiries or investigations from time to time. litigation is inherently
unpredictable, and excessive verdicts that are not justified by the evidence can
occur. we believe that we have valid defenses with respect to the legal matters
pending against us and, taking into account our insurance and reserves, we
believe that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a material
adverse impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
it is possible, however, that cash flows or results of operations could be
affected in any particular period by the resolution of one or more of these
contingencies. among the principal matters pending against us are the following:
patent litigation
generic drug manufacturers
generic competition is a major challenge in the u.s. and is growing
internationally. we are involved in a number of patent suits, the majority of
which involve claims by generic drug manufacturers that patents covering our
products, processes or dosage forms are invalid and/or do not cover the product
of the generic manufacturer. in some of these suits, the challengers also claim
that our assertions of or attempts to enforce rights under our patents
table of contents
constitute unfair competition and/or violations of the antitrust laws.
pending suits include challenges to patents covering, among other
products, sertraline (zoloft), gabapentin (neurontin),
fluconazole (diflucan),
quinapril (accupril), glipizide (glucotrol xl),
nifedipine (procardia xl),
estrostep fe (oral contraceptive) and femhrt 1/5 (hormone replacement therapy).
a loss in any of these cases could result in a loss of patent protection for the
drug at issue, could lead to significant loss of sales of that drug in the u.s.
market and could affect future results.
diflucan
the patent suit relating to diflucan is pending in the u.s. district court
for the northern district of illinois. trial is expected in the latter part of 2002
or early 2003.
neurontin
with respect to neurontin, suits against five generic drug manufacturers
are pending in the u.s. district court for the district of new jersey. motions
for summary judgment of non-infringement of the patent on our stable, low -
lactam pharmaceutical composition have been filed by two generic manufacturers
and await decision. any further motions are due to be filed by late june. in the
event that summary judgment is denied, trials of these cases are expected in the
latter part of 2002 or early 2003.
in these neurontin cases, the generic manufacturers have filed
counterclaims against us claiming that our assertions of or attempts to enforce
rights under our patents constitute unfair competition and/or violations of
federal and state antitrust laws. in october 2001, the ftc requested certain
information concerning our gabapentin (neurontin) patents and their enforcement,
and we are cooperating with that request. in march 2002, a number of suits were
filed in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york, one by a
health plan on behalf of its members and the others by individuals, each of
which seeks class action status and each of which alleges that pfizers suits to
enforce our gabapentin patents against generic manufacturers constitute a
violation of the antitrust laws.
procardia xl
a
suit involving the patent on nifedipine (procardia xl) against a generic
manufacturer, mylan pharmaceuticals, was settled in 2000. that settlement has
been challenged in several courts under the antitrust laws by another generic
manufacturer, biovail laboratories, and by five health plans, the latter seeking
class action status on behalf of their members.
celebrex
in 2000, the university of rochester filed a patent infringement action
against pfizer; g.d. searle & co., inc.; monsanto co.; and
pharmacia corporation, in
the u. s. district court for the western district of new york, alleging that
sales of celebrex infringe the broad method of use claims of the universitys
patent. the case is in the pretrial discovery stage.
products liability matters
rezulin
the rezulin litigation arises from a diabetes drug developed by sankyo in
japan and by warner-lambert. rezulin was reported to be prescribed to
approximately two million patients. the medication treated insulin resistance,
which is the cause of type 2 diabetes, and was effective for many patients whose
diabetes had not been controlled with other medications. we believe that the
fda-approved labeling and warnings appropriately communicated the risks
associated with the medication, including the risk of liver injury, which
occurred in a small percentage of cases.
table of contents
rezulin was voluntarily withdrawn in march 2000 following approval of two
newer diabetes medications, which the fda considered to have similar efficacy
and fewer side effects.
currently, more than 2,000 suits involving rezulin have been filed in
federal and state courts involving approximately 5,100 rezulin users.
substantially all of these suits are at a preliminary stage and, consequently,
we are unable to fully evaluate the claims. a number of cases have been settled,
and a small number have been tried to verdict. the cases pending in federal
courts have all been consolidated for pretrial proceedings in a single
multi-district litigation assigned to the u.s. district court for the southern
district of new york. in addition, approximately 375 rezulin users have
submitted claims to the company (but have not filed suits). the company has
extended the statute of limitations for approximately another 18,000 persons who
do not have lawsuits on file and may or may not eventually file suits.
we are opposing class certification in all cases. class certification has
been denied by state courts in california and west virginia, the first two
decisions on the issue. in another case involving class claims, the u.s.
district court for the southern district of new york dismissed a complaint by
blue cross/blue shield of louisiana and other health-benefit plans to recover
money paid for rezulin and liver testing. other requests for class certification
are pending in various courts.
we are actively engaged in defending the litigations, and, where
appropriate, resolving the litigations and claims. as in most multiple tort
litigation, the cases present a wide variety of claims, ranging from allegations
of serious injury caused by rezulin to efforts to obtain compensation
notwithstanding the absence of any injury at all. based on the information
available to us, only a very small percentage of the claimants can demonstrate
any real injury caused by the medication. for example, at the time the drug was
withdrawn, there were 90 cases of liver failure reported to the fda that were
possibly or probably attributable to rezulin. nor is there any valid scientific
basis for concluding that rezulin had any adverse latent effect.
while we are prepared to pay reasonable compensation to the relatively
small number of claimants with injuries demonstrably caused by rezulin, we
intend to defend vigorously the vast majority of cases in which the plaintiffs
injuries, if any, cannot reasonably be attributed to the medication.
a federal grand jury in maryland has sought documents relating to rezulin
from us and testimony from former warner-lambert employees. we are cooperating
with this investigation.
asbestos
in the 1960s, pfizer acquired two businesses, the gibsonburg lime products
company (glpc)and quigley company, inc., that had limited sales of minor
products that contained small amounts of chrysotile asbestos and that now form
the basis for the companys asbestos litigation. between 1967 and 1982,
warner-lambert owned american optical corporation, which manufactured and sold
respiratory protective devices and asbestos safety clothing.
approximately 169,000 claims naming pfizer and/or quigley, and numerous
other defendants, are currently pending in state and federal courts seeking
damages for alleged asbestos exposure. because many claimants name both pfizer
and quigley, despite the fact that their work histories make exposure to both
glpc and quigley products highly unlikely, the number of claims overstates the
number of claimants, which we estimate to be approximately 118,000. in addition,
approximately 63,000 claimants have named american optical as a defendant. based
upon available data and our experience in handling asbestos claims, we believe
that the vast majority of plaintiffs do not have any impairing medical
condition. for those claimants who do, we believe we have meritorious defenses
and are defending these cases vigorously.
table of contents
since the inception of this litigation, pfizer and quigley have closed,
through settlement for varying amounts or through litigation, in excess of
185,000 asbestos suits or claims. in the same period, american optical has
closed in excess of 40,000 such suits or claims.
other products liability matters
we are also defending claims and lawsuits involving a number of other
products, in which the relief sought includes money damages on behalf of
individuals or claims by purported classes of users of the products, who seek
money damages, injunctive relief and/or medical monitoring.
antitrust matters
in 1993, both pfizer and warner-lambert were named, together with numerous
other manufacturers of brand-name prescription drugs and certain companies that
distribute brand-name prescription drugs, in suits in federal and state courts
brought by various groups of retail pharmacy companies, alleging that the
manufacturers violated the sherman act by agreeing not to give retailers certain
discounts and that the failure to give such discounts violated the
robinson - patman act. a class action was brought on the sherman act claim, as well as
additional actions by numerous individual retail pharmacies and a group of chain
and supermarket pharmacies on both the sherman act and robinson - patman act
claims. that litigation has been largely resolved, at both the federal and state
levels, with the principal exception of a group of approximately 3,800 opt-out
claimants from the original federal class action who are continuing to pursue
their claims individually in federal court in new york.
environmental matters
our operations are subject to federal, state, local and foreign
environmental laws and regulations. under the comprehensive environmental
response compensation and liability act of 1980, as amended (cercla or
superfund), we have been designated as a potentially responsible party by the
united states environmental protection agency with respect to certain waste
sites with which we may have had direct or indirect involvement. similar
designations have been made by some state environmental agencies under
applicable state superfund laws. such designations are made regardless of the
extent of our involvement. we own or previously owned several sites for which we
may be the sole responsible party. there are also claims that we may be a
responsible party or participant with respect to several waste site matters in
foreign jurisdictions. such claims have been made by the filing of a complaint,
the issuance of an administrative directive or order, or the issuance of a
notice or demand letter. these claims are in various stages of administrative or
judicial proceedings. they include demands for recovery of past governmental
costs and for future investigative or remedial actions. in many cases, the
dollar amount of the claim is not specified. in most cases, claims have been
asserted against a number of other entities for the same recovery or other
relief as was asserted against us. we are currently participating in remedial
action at a number of sites under federal, state, local and foreign laws.
to the extent possible with the limited amount of information available at
this time, we have evaluated our responsibility for costs and related liability
with respect to the above sites and are of the opinion that our liability with
respect to these sites should not have a material adverse effect on our
financial position, results of operations or cash flows. in arriving at this
conclusion, we have considered, among other things, the payments that have been
made with respect to the sites in the past; the factors, such as volume and
relative toxicity, ordinarily applied to allocate defense and remedial costs at
table of contents
such sites; the probable costs to be paid by the other potentially responsible
parties; total projected remedial costs for a site, if known; existing
technology; and the currently enacted laws and regulations. we anticipate that a
portion of these costs and related liability will be covered by available
insurance.
through our own internal audit procedures, during 2001 we became aware of
certain practices related to the sampling of waste water at our parsippany,
n.j., manufacturing facility which may not comply with regulatory requirements
enacted or adopted for the purpose of protecting the environment. we voluntarily
disclosed our initial detection of potential non-compliance to the new jersey
department of environmental protection (njdep)and to the u.s. environmental
protection agency (usepa). since then, we voluntarily disclosed information
acquired since the initial disclosure to the njdep. further disclosure to the
usepa may be required in the future. while no formal enforcement proceeding has
been initiated, it is possible that such a proceeding may be commenced in the
future and that civil penalties may be sought.
other matters
neurontin
the u.s. attorneys office in boston, massachusetts, is conducting an
investigation into warner-lamberts promotion of neurontin; and in 2000 and
2001, certain former employees of warner-lambert were subpoenaed to provide
testimony before a federal grand jury. it is possible that criminal charges and
fines could be sought as a result of this investigation. we continue to
cooperate with this inquiry.
in addition, a former employee of warner-lambert has commenced a civil
lawsuit in federal court in massachusetts against warner-lambert, on behalf of
the united states, under 31 u.s.c. 3730. the lawsuit alleges that warner-lambert
violated the federal false claims act based on certain alleged sales and
marketing practices concerning neurontin.
lipitor
the department of justice has commenced a civil investigation into
warner-lamberts pricing for lipitor during 1999 and 2000, aimed at determining
whether grants made to certain health plans and pbms should be characterized as
rebates, which would entitle the government to a further discount under the
medicaid best-price rules. we are cooperating with this investigation.
zithromax
a consortium of state attorneys general has requested and has been
evaluating information about our promotion of zithromax for use in treating
pediatric otitis media (ear infections). we are cooperating with this
investigation.
zyrtec prescription-otc switch
a petition was filed with the fda by blue cross of california, a
subsidiary of wellpoint health networks, in july 1998 requesting that second
generation antihistamines and antihistamine-decongestant combination drugs be
switched from prescription to otc status. the petition specifically targeted
zyrtec as well as two other prescription drugs. the fda held a public hearing on
the matter in 2001. the company filed comments questioning the authority of the
fda to take the requested action without affording the sponsor of the nda drugs
in question an evidentiary hearing. the fda has not yet taken action in the
matter.
securities litigation
on july20, 2001, our subsidiary, agouron pharmaceuticals, inc., was
served with the first of three related purported class actions brought by
shareholders of immune response corp. (irc)in the u. s. district court for the
southern district of california under sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the securities
exchange act
table of contents
of 1934. the complaints allege that irc and its chief executive officer and
agouron and its former chief executive officer misled the investing public about
the status of and prospects for remune, an aids treatment in development, that
had been licensed by irc to agouron in june 1998. on july16, 2001, agouron had
announced that, in accordance with the terms of the irc agreement, it had
determined not to pursue the development of remune. the cases are in the early
procedural stages.
merger litigation
warner-lambert and its directors are named as defendants in purported
class actions currently pending in delaware chancery court and in federal court
in new jersey, brought by the former shareholders of warner-lambert. these
lawsuits allege that warner-lamberts directors breached their fiduciary duties
to warner-lambert and/or its shareholders in connection with a merger agreement
entered into between warner-lambert and american home products corp., which
agreement was ultimately terminated in connection with the pfizer-warner-lambert
merger. the defendants have moved to dismiss the actions.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
not applicable.
table of contents
executive officers of the company
the executive officers of the company are set forth in this table. each
holds the offices indicated until his or her successor is chosen and qualified
at the regular meeting of the board of directors to be held immediately
following the 2002 annual meeting of shareholders. each of the executive
officers is a member of the pfizer leadership team.
name
age
position
c. l. clemente
executive vice president  corporate affairs; secretary and corporate counsel
karen l. katen
executive vice president; president  pfizer pharmaceuticals group and
president  u.s. pharmaceuticals
jeffrey b. kindler
senior vice president and general counsel
henry a. mckinnell
chairman of the board and chief executive officer
john w. mitchell
vice president; president  pfizer global manufacturing
john f. niblack
vice chairman; president  pfizer global research and development
robert w. norton
senior vice president  corporate human resources
david l. shedlarz
executive vice president and chief financial officer
information concerning mr.clemente, ms.katen, drs.mckinnell and niblack and
mr.shedlarz is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the captions
directors whose terms expire in 2004, directors whose terms expire
in 2003 and
named executive officers who are not directors in our proxy statement for the
2002 annual meeting of shareholders.
jeffrey b. kindler
mr.kindler joined us as senior vice president and general counsel in january
2002. from 1996 through 2001, he served mcdonalds corporation, a food service
company, in various positions, including senior vice president and general
counsel (1996-1997); executive vice president, corporate relations and general
counsel (1997-2001); and chairman of boston market corporation (2000-2001) and
president of partner brands (2001), both of which are owned by mcdonalds.
john w. mitchell
mr.mitchell joined us in the manufacturing division in 1964. he progressed
through various positions of increasing responsibility before becoming vice
president  manufacturing of the pfizer pharmaceuticals group in 1997. he was
appointed senior vice president  pfizer global manufacturing in 1999 and
president  pfizer global manufacturing in 2000. he was elected vice president;
president  pfizer global manufacturing in april 2001.
robert w. norton
mr.norton joined us in 1969 in the corporate personnel division. he has held a
number of international and domestic positions in human resources, and from 1985
to 1997 he was our senior international human resources executive. in 1997, he
was appointed senior vice president, employee resources, pfizer pharmaceuticals
group. in february 2001, he was elected senior vice president  corporate human
resources.
table of contents
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common equity and related stockholder matters
the principal market for our common stock is the new york stock exchange.
it is also listed on the london, euronext and swiss stock exchanges and is
traded on various united states regional stock exchanges. additional information
required by this item is incorporated by reference from the table quarterly
consolidated financial data on page 60 of our 2001 annual report.
item 6. selected financial data
historical financial information is incorporated by reference from the
financial summary on page 61 of our 2001 annual report.
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
financial review on pages 24 through 37 of our 2001 annual report.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
discussion under the heading financial risk management on page 35 of our 2001
annual report.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
independent auditors report on page 39 of our 2001 annual report and from the
consolidated financial statements, related notes and supplementary data on pages
40 through 60 of our 2001 annual report.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
information about our directors is incorporated by reference from the
discussion under item1 of our proxy statement for the 2002 annual meeting of
shareholders. information about compliance with section16(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934 is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the
heading section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance in our proxy
statement for the 2002 annual meeting of shareholders. the balance of the
response to this item is contained in the discussion entitled executive officers
of the company in part i of this 2001 10-k report.
item 11. executive compensation
information about director and executive compensation is incorporated by
reference from the discussion under the headings compensation of non-employee
directors, executive compensation, retirement annuity plan, pension plan table,
and employment,
table of contents
consulting and severance agreements in our proxy statement for the 2002 annual
meeting of shareholders.
item 12. security ownership of
certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
information about security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
securities ownership of officers and directors in our proxy statement for the
2002 annual meeting of shareholders.
table of contents
this table provides certain information as of december31, 2001 with
respect to our equity compensation plans:
equity compensation plan information
(a)
(b)
(c)
number of securities remaining
number of securities to be
available for future issuance
issued upon exercise of
weighted-average exercise price
under equity compensation plans
outstanding options,
of outstanding options,
(excluding securities reflected
plan category
warrants and rights
warrants and rights
in column(a))
equity compensation plans
approved by security holders
413,923,000
$
28.05
273,719,036*
equity compensation plans not
approved by security holders
n/a
total
413,923,000
$
28.05
273,719,036*
*
the shares available for future issuance as of december31, 2001 consisted of
the following:
249,572,000 shares were available for issuance pursuant to stock
option awards that could be granted in the future under the 2001
stock and incentive plan. a maximum of 2,482,900 of such shares was
available, alternatively, for issuance pursuant to future restricted
stock awards; if such awards are granted, they will reduce the
number of shares available for issuance pursuant to future stock
option awards.
12,500,000 shares were available for issuance pursuant to
performance-contingent share awards that could be granted in the
future under the 2001 performance-contingent share award plan. an
additional 10,950,300 shares were available for issuance pursuant to
outstanding performance-contingent share awards that had been
granted under the previous performance-contingent share award
program but had not been earned as of december 31, 2001. the
number of shares, if any, to be issued pursuant to such future
awards or outstanding awards will be determined by a non-discretionary formula that
measures our performance, in terms of total shareholder return and
diluted earnings-per-share growth, over the applicable performance
period relative to the performance of the industry peer group.
696,736 shares were available for issuance pursuant to the
warner-lambert 1996 stock plan in settlement of warner-lambert
directors compensation that had been deferred by certain former
warner-lambert directors prior to the merger of the two companies.
for additional information concerning our equity compensation plans, see
the discussion in note 18 to our financial statements, stock option and
performance unit awards, on pages 55 and 56 of our 2001 annual report.
table of contents
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
information about certain relationships and transactions with related
parties is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
related party transactions in our proxy statement for the 2002 annual meeting of
shareholders.
table of contents
part iv
item 14. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
14(a)(1)
financial statements. the following consolidated financial
statements, related notes, independent auditors report and supplementary data
from our 2001 annual report to shareholders are incorporated by reference into
item8 of part ii of this 10-k report:
page(s) in our 2001
annual report
independent auditors report
consolidated statement of income
consolidated balance sheet
consolidated statement of shareholders equity
consolidated statement of cash flows
notes to consolidated financial statements
44-59
quarterly consolidated financial data (unaudited)
14(a)(2)
financial statement schedules. schedules are omitted because they
are not required or the information is given elsewhere in the financial
statements. the financial statements of unconsolidated subsidiaries are omitted
because, considered in the aggregate, they would not constitute a significant
subsidiary.
14(a)(3)
exhibits. these exhibits are available upon request. requests
should be directed to margaret m. foran, vice president-corporate governance and
assistant secretary, pfizer inc., 235 east 42nd street, new york, ny
10017-5755.
the exhibit numbers preceded by an asterisk (*) indicate exhibits physically
filed with this 10-k report. all other exhibit numbers indicate exhibits filed
by incorporation by reference. exhibit numbers 10(1) through 10(24) are
management contracts or compensatory plans or arrangements.
3(1)
our restated certificate of incorporation as of april27, 2000, is
incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period
ended april2, 2000.
3(2)
our by-laws as amended april27, 2000, are incorporated by
reference from our 10-q report for the period ended april2, 2000.
4(1)
our rights agreement dated as of october6, 1997, with
chasemellon shareholders services, l.l.c. is incorporated by
reference from our report on form8-k dated october6, 1997.
4(2)
indenture, dated as of january30, 2001, between us and the chase
manhattan bank is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report
filed on january30, 2001.
4(3)
except as set forth in exhibits 4(1) and 4(2) above, the
instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt
securities of the company and its subsidiaries have been omitted.
we agree to furnish to the commission, upon request, a copy of
each instrument with respect to issuances of
table of contents
long-term debt of the company and its subsidiaries.
10(1)
2001 stock and incentive plan is incorporated by reference from
our proxy statement for the 2001 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(2)
stock and incentive plan as amended through july1, 1999 is
incorporated by reference from our 1999 10-k report.
10(3)
pfizer retirement annuity plan as amended through november6, 1997
is incorporated by reference from our 1997 10-k report.
10(4)
the form of severance agreement with each of the named executive
officers identified in our proxy statement for the 2002 annual
meeting of shareholders is incorporated by reference from our 1994
10-k report.
*10(5)
severance agreement, dated as of january1, 2002, between us and
jeffrey b. kindler.
10(6)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of our
non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 1996
10-k report.
10(7)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of the named
executive officers identified in our proxy statement for the 2002
annual meeting of shareholders is incorporated by reference from
our 1997 10-k report.
10(8)
nonfunded deferred compensation and supplemental savings plan is
incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(9)
executive annual incentive plan is incorporated by reference from
our proxy statement for the 1997 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(10)
2001 performance-contingent share award plan is incorporated by
reference from our proxy statement for the 2001 annual meeting of
shareholders.
10(11)
performance-contingent share award program is incorporated by
reference from our 10-q report for the period ended september29,
1996.
10(12)
nonfunded supplemental retirement plan is incorporated by
reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(13)
non-employee directors retirement plan (frozen as of october
1996) is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(14)
annual retainer unit award plan (for non-employee directors) is
incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period
ended september29, 1996.
10(15)
nonfunded deferred compensation and unit award plan for
non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 10-q
report for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(16)
restricted stock plan for non-employee directors is incorporated
by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(17)
deferred compensation plan is incorporated by reference from our
1997 10-k report.
10(18)
warner-lambert company 1996 stock plan, as amended, is
incorporated by reference from warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(19)
warner-lambert company incentive compensation plan, as amended, is
incorporated by reference from warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(20)
warner-lambert company supplemental pension income plan, as
amended, is incorporated by reference from warner-lamberts 1999
10-k report.
10(21)
warner-lambert company executive severance plan, as amended, is
incorporated by reference from warner-lamberts 10-q report for
the quarter ended march31, 1999.
10(22)
summary of annual incentive plan is incorporated by reference from
our 2000 10-k report.
table of contents
10(23)
post-retirement consulting agreement, dated as of april20, 2000,
between us and william c. steere, jr., is incorporated by
reference from our 10-q report for the period ended april2, 2000.
10(24)
employment agreement, dated as of january1, 2001, between us and
henry a. mckinnell is incorporated by reference from our 8-k
report filed on february2, 2001.
*12
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
*13
the 2001 annual report to shareholders, which, except for those
portions incorporated by reference, is furnished solely for the
information of the commission and is not to be deemed filed.
*21
subsidiaries of the company.
*23.1
consent of kpmg llp, independent certified public accountants.
*23.2
consent and opinion of pricewaterhousecoopers llp, independent
certified public accountants.
*24
power of attorney (included as part of the signature page)
14(b) reports on form 8-k. we filed a form8-k on october24, 2001, which
attached and incorporated by reference the companys press release dated october
17, 2001 reporting our financial results for the third quarter and first nine
months of 2001.
table of contents
signatures
under the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange
act of 1934, this report was signed on behalf of the registrant by the
authorized person named below.
pfizer inc.
dated: march 27, 2002
by:
/s/ c.l. clemente
c.l. clemente, executive vice president -
corporate affairs; secretary and
corporate counsel
we, the undersigned directors and officers of pfizer inc., hereby
severally constitute c. l. clemente and margaret m. foran, and each of them
singly, our true and lawful attorneys with full power to them and each of them
to sign for us, and in our names in the capacities indicated below, any and all
amendments to this annual report on form10-k filed with the securities and
exchange commission.
under the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report
was signed by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the date indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ henry a. mckinnell
(henry a. mckinnell)
chairman of the board and chief
executive officer and director
(principal executive officer)
march27, 2002
/s/ david l. shedlarz
(david l. shedlarz)
executive vice president and
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
march27, 2002
/s/ loretta v. cangialosi
(loretta v. cangialosi)
vice president  controller
(principal accounting officer)
march27, 2002
/s/ michael s. brown
(michael s. brown)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ m. anthony burns
(m. anthony burns)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ robert n. burt
(robert n. burt)
director
march27, 2002
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ w. don cornwell(w. don cornwell)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ william h. gray iii(william h. gray iii)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ constance j. horner(constance j. horner)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ william r. howell(william r. howell)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ stanley o. ikenberry(stanley o. ikenberry)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ harry p. kamen(harry p. kamen)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ george a. lorch(george a. lorch)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ alex j. mandl(alex j. mandl)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ dana g. mead(dana g. mead)
director
march27, 2002
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ john f. niblack(john f. niblack)
vice chairman and director
march27, 2002
/s/ franklin d. raines(franklin d. raines)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ ruth j. simmons(ruth j. simmons)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ william c. steere, jr.(william c. steere, jr.)
director
march27, 2002
/s/ jean-paul valls(jean-paul valls)
director
march27, 2002
