10-k
y83976e10vk.htm
pfizer inc.
pfizer inc.
table of contents
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10  k
x
(mark one)
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2002
o
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period fromto
commission file number 1-3619
pfizer inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
235 east 42nd street
new york, new york
(address of principal executive offices)
13-5315170
(i.r.s. employer
identification number)
10017-5755
(zip code)
(212)573-2323
(registrants telephone number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange
on which registered
common stock, $.05 par value
preferred stock purchase rights
new york stock exchange
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:
none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90days.
yesx
noo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item
405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to
the best of registrants knowledge, in the definitive proxy or information
statement incorporated by reference in part iii of this form10-k or any
amendment to this form10-k. o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer.
yesx
noo
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of
the registrant, computed by reference to the closing price as of the last
business day of the registrants most recently completed second fiscal quarter,
june28, 2002, was approximately $216billion. the registrant has no non-voting
common stock.
the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrants classes of
common stock as of march10, 2003 was 6,158,347,682 shares of common stock,
all of one class.
documents incorporated by reference
portions of the 2002 annual report to shareholders
portions of the proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareholders
parts i, ii and iv
parts i and iii
table of contents
part i 1
part i
item 1. business
general
business segments
pharmaceutical segment
consumer products segment
discontinued operations
research and product development
international operations
marketing
patents and intellectual property rights
competition
raw materials
government regulation and price constraints
environmental law compliance
banking and insurance subsidiaries
tax matters
employees
proposed acquisition of pharmacia corporation
cautionary factors that may affect future results
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the company
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common equity and related stockholder matters
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
item 14. controls and procedures
item 15. intentionally left blank
item 16. principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 17. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
17(a)(1) financial statements
17(a)(2) financial statement schedules
17(a)(3) exhibits
17(b) reports on form8-k
signatures
nonfunded deferred compensation
computation of ratio of earings
the 2002 annual report
list of subsidiaries
consent of kpmg llp
certification of ceo
certification of cfo
table of contents
table of contents
page
part i
item 1. business
general
pfizer website
business segments
pharmaceutical segment
consumer products segment
discontinued operations
research and product development
international operations
marketing
patents and intellectual property rights
competition
raw materials
government regulation and price constraints
environmental law compliance
banking and insurance subsidiaries
tax matters
employees
proposed acquisition of pharmacia corporation
cautionary factors that may affect future results
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the company
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common equity and related
stockholder matters
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition
and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting
and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
item 14. controls and procedures
item 15. intentionally left blank
item 16. principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 17. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
17(a)(1) financial statements
17(a)(2) financial statement schedules
17(a)(3) exhibits
17(b) reports on form8-k
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
general
pfizer inc. (which may be referred to as pfizer, the company, we, us or
our) is a research-based, global pharmaceutical company. we discover, develop,
manufacture and market leading prescription medicines for humans and animals as
well as many of the worlds best-known over-the-counter products.
the company was incorporated under the laws of the state of delaware on
june2, 1942.
in july 2002, we entered into an agreement to acquire pharmacia
corporation. see proposed acquisition of pharmacia corporation below.
in late 2002 and early 2003, we sold the tetra fish-care products business
and entered into agreements to sell the adams confectionery products business
and the schick-wilkinson sword shaving products business, all of which formerly
were part of our consumer products segment. in early 2003, we also entered into
an agreement to sell certain of our womens health product lines (femhrt
hormone-replacement therapy and loestrin and estrostep contraceptives), which
formerly were part of our pharmaceutical segment. all of these divested or
to-be-divested businesses and product lines are reflected as discontinued
operations in our consolidated financial statements for 2002, 2001 and 2000 and
in this 2002 form10-k. see discontinued operations below.
on june19, 2000, we completed our merger with warner-lambert company
(warner-lambert). we issued approximately 2.44billion shares of common stock
in exchange for all the outstanding common stock of warner-lambert. the merger
qualified as a tax-free reorganization and was accounted for as a pooling of
interests. we restated all consolidated financial statements of pfizer for
periods prior to the merger to include the results of operations, financial
position and cash flows of warner-lambert as if we had always been merged.
pfizer website
our annual report on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q, current
reports on form8-k and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant
to section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 are available
on our website (www.pfizer.com under the who we are  for investors  sec
filings captions) as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically
file such material with, or furnish it to, the securities and exchange
commission (sec).
throughout this 2002 form10-k, we incorporate by reference certain
information from parts of other documents filed with the sec, including our
annual report to shareholders for 2002 (2002 annual report) and our proxy
statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareholders. the sec allows us to
disclose important information by referring to it in that manner. please refer
to such information. portions of our 2002 annual report are filed as exhibit 13
to this 2002 form10-k. our 2002 annual report and our proxy statement for the
2003 annual meeting of shareholders are available on our website
(www.pfizer.com); the 2002 annual report is set forth under the who we are  for
investors  financial reports captions, and the proxy statement is set forth
under the who we are  for investors  sec filings captions.
information relating to corporate governance at pfizer, including our
corporate governance principles; director qualification standards; chief
executive officer and chief financial officer certifications; business conduct
policies; and information concerning our directors, board committees, including
committee charters, and transactions in pfizer securities by directors and
officers, is available on our website at www.pfizer.com under the who we are
for investors  corporate governance captions. information relating to
shareholder services, including our shareholder investment program, book-entry
share ownership and direct deposit of dividends, is available on our website at
www.pfizer.com under the who we are  for investors  shareholder services
captions.
table of contents
business segments
we operate in two business segments:
pharmaceutical, which includes
-
prescription pharmaceuticals for the treatment of cardiovascular
diseases, infectious diseases, central nervous system disorders,
diabetes, arthritis, urogenital conditions, allergies and other
disorders;
-
products for livestock and companion animals; and
-
the manufacture of empty soft-gelatin capsules.
consumer products, which includes self-medications for oral
care, upper respiratory health, eye care, skin care,
gastrointestinal health and other products.
comparative segment revenues, profits and related financial information
for 2002, 2001 and 2000 are presented in the table captioned segment in note 21
to our consolidated financial statements, segment, geographic and revenue
information, on page 65 of our 2002 annual report. tables captioned percentage
change in revenues and percentage change in geographic revenues on page 31 of
our 2002 annual report present additional segment information. the information
from those sections of our 2002 annual report is incorporated by reference in
this 2002 form10-k.
our businesses are heavily regulated in most of the countries where we
operate. in the u.s., the main regulatory authority we deal with is the food
and drug administration (fda). the fda regulates the safety and efficacy of the
products we offer, our research quality, our manufacturing processes and our
promotion and advertising. similar government authorities exist in most other
countries, and in many cases also regulate our prices. see government
regulation and price constraints below.
pharmaceutical segment
our pharmaceutical segment includes our human pharmaceutical and animal
health businesses, as well as capsugel, a capsule- manufacturing business.
human pharmaceutical
most of our human pharmaceutical revenues come from products in three
major therapeutic classes: cardiovascular diseases, infectious diseases and
central nervous system disorders. we also have products for the treatment of
diabetes, urogenital conditions, allergies and other disorders, as well as
copromoted products for arthritis, acute pain and menstrual pain. in 2002,
human pharmaceutical revenues increased 12%, to $28.3billion. human
pharmaceutical revenues contributed 87% of our revenues in each of 2002 and
2001 and 86% in 2000. we marketed ten human pharmaceutical products, including
our copromoted products celebrex and aricept, with sales to third parties
exceeding $1billion each in 2002. those ten products  lipitor, norvasc,
zoloft, neurontin, celebrex, viagra, zithromax, zyrtec, diflucan and aricept
represented 85% of human pharmaceutical revenues and grew at a combined rate of
15% in 2002. a table captioned revenues  major human pharmaceutical products
on page 31 of our 2002 annual report is incorporated by reference.
cardiovascular disease products that treat problems affecting the heart
and the blood circulatory system make up our largest therapeutic product line.
lipitor, our largest-selling product, is for treatment of high lipids
(cholesterol and triglycerides) in the bloodstream. it is the largest-selling
prescription drug of any kind in the world. in 2002, the fda approved two new
starting doses of liptor, enabling physicians to better tailor therapy
individually across a broad range of patients. norvasc is a once-a-day
medication for hypertension (high blood pressure) and angina (heart pain). it
is the largest-selling high blood pressure and heart pain medicine in the
world. our other cardiovascular products include cardura and
accupril/accuretic. cardura is used to treat hypertension and benign prostatic
hyperplasia (enlarged prostate gland). accupril/accuretic is an angiotensin
converting enzyme (ace)inhibitor for hypertension and congestive heart
failure.
in the infectious disease medicine category, our major products include
zithromax, diflucan and viracept. zithromax, an oral or injectable antibiotic,
is the second-largest-selling antibiotic worldwide and the most-prescribed,
brand-name, oral antibiotic in the u.s. in 2002, we launched the
table of contents
new zithromax tri-pak dosage form, the first and only three-day regimen
for the treatment of acute bacterial exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. zithromax is licensed exclusively to us by pliva, a croatian
pharmaceutical company. diflucan is the worlds leading systemic antifungal. it
is used to treat various fungal infections, including vaginal infections and
certain infections that afflict hiv/aids and cancer patients with weakened
immune systems. complementing diflucan is vfend, a treatment that can be
administered orally or intravenously for certain serious and potentially fatal
fungal infections. vfend was launched in the u.s. in july 2002 and in europe
during the latter part of the year. viracept is the largest-selling protease
inhibitor in the u.s., used in combination with other antiretroviral drugs for
treatment of hiv/aids infections. we market viracept in the u.s. and
canada.
our major products for treatment of central nervous system disorders
include zoloft, neurontin and geodon and the copromoted product aricept.
zoloft is the most-prescribed selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor in the
u.s. and a leading medicine worldwide for the treatment of depression, panic
disorder, obsessive/compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder,
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, and acute and long-term treatment for social
anxiety disorder (for which it was approved in february 2003). neurontin is a
leading epilepsy medicine, approved as an add-on therapy with other
anti-epileptic medications to treat partial seizures in patients over three
years of age. it also is approved in more than 60 markets for the treatment of
neuropathic pain. in 2002, neurontin became the first oral medication approved
in the u.s. to treat post-herpetic neuralgia, a persistent, painful condition
that afflicts many people in the aftermath of shingles. geodon (known as zeldox
in many markets outside the u.s.) is for the treatment of symptoms associated
with schizophrenia. in 2002, we launched an intramuscular formulation of
geodon, used to treat agitated or hospitalized patients, in the u.s. aricept,
discovered and developed by eisai co., ltd., is the worlds leading medicine to
treat symptoms of alzheimers disease. we copromote aricept with eisai in the
u.s. and several other countries and have an exclusive license to sell the drug
in various other countries. our other products for central nervous system
disorders include relpax and the copromoted product rebif. relpax, an oral
treatment for acute migraine headaches, is marketed throughout europe and in
japan. it was approved in the u.s. in december 2002 and launched in the u.s.
during the first quarter of 2003. rebif, discovered and developed by serono
s.a., is used to treat symptoms of relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis. in
2002, we entered into an agreement with serono to copromote rebif in the u.s.
viagra, our medication for the treatment of erectile dysfunction, is the
most widely prescribed medication in the world for the treatment of this
condition.
we copromote two medicines for the treatment of arthritis and certain
other conditions, celebrex and bextra, with pharmacia corporation, which
discovered and developed the drugs. celebrex is used for the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, acute pain, menstrual pain and familial
adenomatous polyposis. bextra was launched in the u.s. in 2002 for the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis and menstrual pain. during
2002, regulatory authorities adopted a positive opinion for granting market
authorization for bextra in the european union and, subject to receiving final
approval, launch is planned in europe for 2003.
zyrtec is used for the treatment of year-round indoor and seasonal outdoor
allergies and hives. it is indicated for use in children as young as six months
old. zyrtec syrup is the most-prescribed antihistamine syrup in the u.s., and
zyrtec-d 12 hour is the only prescription oral antihistamine/decongestant
combination medicine approved to treat both year-round indoor and outdoor
allergies as well as nasal congestion. zyrtec is licensed to us by the belgian
company ucb s.a. we copromote zyrtec as a prescription medicine in the u.s.
with a subsidiary of ucb s.a., and we have a license to sell zyrtec as an
over-the-counter (otc)medicine in canada, europe, australia and south africa.
glucotrol xl is used to treat diabetes. it is an oral medicine that
stimulates the pancreas to produce more insulin.
spiriva is used to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), a
respiratory disorder
table of contents
that includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema. we copromote spiriva with
boehringer ingelheim, which discovered and developed the drug. it was launched
in europe in 2002 and in canada in january 2003. in december 2002, spiriva
received an approvable letter from the fda for the long-term, once-daily
maintenance treatment of bronchospasm associated with copd.
animal health
our animal health business discovers, develops and sells
products for the prevention and treatment of diseases in livestock and
companion animals. animal health revenues accounted for 4% of our revenues
in each of 2002, 2001 and 2000. in 2002, animal health
revenues increased 10%, to $1.1billion.
among the products we market are parasiticides, anti-inflammatories,
vaccines, antibiotics and related medicines for livestock and companion
animals, including the products discussed below.
parasiticides constitute the largest segment of the companion animal
market, consisting mainly of medicines for external parasites, such as fleas,
and heartworm preventatives. our product revolution is the first fda-approved
topical medicine that protects against fleas and heartworm in a simple,
once-a-month administration.
rimadyl relieves pain and inflammation associated with osteoarthritis, a
condition that afflicts about 20% of adult dogs. rimadyl is the only arthritis
pain medication prescribed by veterinarians available in chewable tablets as
well as regular caplets.
respisure/stellamune is a single-dose vaccine used to treat pneumonia in
swine.
dectomax injectable and pour-on formulations remove and control internal
and external parasites in beef cattle.
capsugel
capsugel is the worlds largest producer of two-piece capsules used in
manufacturing prescription and otc pharmaceuticals and nutritional supplements.
capsugels sales accounted for about 1% of our revenues in each of 2002, 2001
and 2000. in 2002, capsugels revenues increased 6%, to $436million.
consumer products segment
our consumer products segment consists of our consumer healthcare business
(chc), one of the worlds largest suppliers of otc medicines.
chc markets many of the worlds best-known consumer healthcare brands. sales
of chc accounted for 8% of our revenues in each of 2002 and 2001 and 9% of our
revenues in 2000. in 2002, revenues of chc increased 7%, to $2.5billion.
chcs products compete primarily in the oral care, upper respiratory
health, eye care, skin care and gastrointestinal health categories. chcs
principal products include:
listerine mouthwash
listerine pocketpaks oral care strips
benadryl antihistamine for allergies
sudafed for sinus congestion
zantac 75 for prevention and relief of heartburn
rolaids antacid tablets
efferdent denture cleaner
neosporin antibiotic ointment
visine eye drops
bengay topical analgesic
cortizone skin care products
lubriderm moisturizing lotions
unisom sleep aids
desitin ointments for treatment of diaper rash
chc can extend the life of some of our prescription medications by
converting them to otc medications. for example, an otc formulation of
diflucan, known as diflucan one, is sold in the u.k. as a treatment for vaginal
candidiasis. similarly, zyrtec is sold as an otc product in certain markets
outside the u.s. as market conditions permit, and when we have necessary
approval from drug regulatory authorities, we plan to pursue similar launches
for other products.
table of contents
discontinued operations
we sold or are in the process of selling the following businesses and
product lines that do not fit our strategic goals:
in december 2002, we sold the tetra fish-care products business, formerly
part of our consumer products segment, for $238.5million in cash.
in december 2002, we entered into an agreement to sell the adams
confectionery products business, formerly part of our consumer products
segment, for $4.2billion in cash.
in january 2003, we entered into an agreement to sell the
schick-wilkinson sword business, formerly part of our consumer products
segment, for $930million in cash.
in march 2003, we entered into an agreement to sell certain of our
womens health product lines (femhrt hormone-replacement therapy and
loestrin and estrostep contraceptives), formerly part of our
pharmaceutical segment. the sale price is $359million in cash, with an
additional cash payment of up to $125million contingent on femhrt and
estrostep retaining market exclusivity until the expiration of their
respective patents.
the divestitures of the adams and schick-wilkinson sword businesses and
the womens health product lines are expected to close in the first half of
2003 and are subject to the usual regulatory approvals.
certain financial information relating to these divested or to-be-divested
businesses and product lines is set forth in note 4 to our consolidated
financial statements, discontinued operations, on page 51 of our 2002 annual
report. that information is incorporated by reference.
research and product development
innovation by our research and development operations is very important to
the companys success. our goal is to discover, develop and bring to market
innovative products that address major unmet medical needs. this goal has been
supported by our substantial research and development investments. we spent
$5.2billion in 2002, $4.8billion in 2001 and $4.4billion in 2000 on research
and development.
we conduct research internally, and also through contracts with third
parties, through collaborations with universities and biotechnology companies
and in cooperation with other pharmaceutical firms. we also seek out innovative
technologies developed by third parties to acquire or incorporate into our
discovery or development processes or projects as well as our product lines through licensing or other arrangements.
drug
discovery and development is time consuming, expensive and unpredictable. on
average, only one out of many thousands of chemical compounds discovered by
researchers proves to be both medically effective and safe enough to become an
approved medicine. the process from discovery to development to regulatory approval can take
more than ten years. drug candidates can fail at any stage of the process.
candidates may not receive regulatory approval even after many years of
research.
we believe that our investments in research have been rewarded by the
number of pharmaceutical compounds and new therapies we have in all stages of
development; we currently are working on more than 160 projects in development
and several hundred projects in discovery research. in recent years, our discovery
scientists have delivered dozens of new chemical compounds to early
development. while these new candidates may or may not eventually receive
regulatory approval, new drug candidates entering development are the foundation for future
products.
in addition to discovering and developing new products, our research
operations add value to our existing products by improving their effectiveness
and by discovering new uses for them. in february 2003, for example, the fda
approved the additional use of zoloft for the treatment of social anxiety
disorder.
information concerning several of our drug candidates in development as
well as supplemental filings for existing products is set forth under the
heading product developments on pages 33 and 34 of our 2002 annual report. that
information is incorporated by reference. in february 2003, we
submitted an application to the european medicines evaluation agency
for approval of our developmental compound pregabalin for the
treatment of neuropathic pain and for use with other medications in
the treatment of epilepsy. we expect to submit an application to the
fda for the use of pregabalin for those conditions, as well as
for generalized anxiety disorder, later this year.
our competitors also devote substantial funds and resources to research
and development. in addition, the consolidation that has occurred in our
table of contents
industry has created companies with substantial research and development
resources. the extent to which our competitors are successful in their research
could result in erosion of the sales of our products and unanticipated product
obsolescence.
international operations
we have significant operations outside the united states. they are
conducted both through our subsidiaries and through distributors, and involve
the same business segments  pharmaceutical and consumer products  as our u.s.
operations.
revenues from operations outside the u.s. of $11.6billion accounted for
35.9% of our total revenues in 2002. revenues exceeded $500million in each of
seven countries outside the u.s. in 2002. no single country outside the u.s.
contributed more than 10% of our total revenues. japan is our second-largest
national market, with 6.1% of our revenues in 2002, 6.2% in 2001 and 6.6% in
2000.
for a geographic breakdown of revenues and changes in revenues, see the
table captioned geographic in note 21 to our consolidated financial statements,
segment, geographic and revenue information, on page 65 of our 2002 annual
report and the table captioned percentage change in geographic revenues on page
31 of our 2002 annual report. those tables are incorporated by reference.
our international businesses are subject, in varying degrees, to a number
of risks inherent in carrying on business in other countries. these include
currency fluctuations
capital and exchange control regulations
expropriation and nationalization
other restrictive government actions
our international businesses are also subject to government-imposed
constraints, including laws on pricing or reimbursement for use of products.
see government regulation and price constraints below for discussion of these
matters.
depending on the direction of change relative to the u.s. dollar, foreign
currency values can increase or reduce the reported dollar value of our net
assets and results of operations. in 2002, foreign exchange had a nominal
impact on revenues. while we cannot predict with certainty future changes in
foreign exchange rates or the effect they will have on us, we attempt to
mitigate their impact through operational means and by using various financial
instruments. see the discussion under note 6-d to our consolidated financial
statements, derivative financial instruments and hedging activities, on pages
53 and 54 of our 2002 annual report. that discussion is incorporated by
reference. related information about valuation and risks associated with such
financial instruments in parts e and f of that same note is also incorporated
by reference.
marketing
in our global pharmaceutical business, we promote our products to health
care providers such as doctors, nurse practitioners, physician assistants,
pharmacists, hospitals, pharmacy benefit managers (pbms), managed care
organizations (mcos) and government agencies. we also market directly to
consumers in the united states through direct-to-consumer print and television
advertising. in addition, we sponsor general advertising to educate the public
about our innovative medical research.
our operations include several pharmaceutical sales organizations. each
sales organization markets a distinct group of products. our prescription
pharmaceutical products are sold principally to wholesalers, but we also sell
directly to retailers, hospitals, clinics, government agencies and pharmacies.
through our marketing organizations, we explain the approved uses and
advantages of our products to medical professionals. we work to gain access to
health authority, pbm and mco formularies (lists of recommended or approved
medicines and other products) and reimbursement lists by demonstrating the
qualities and treatment benefits of our products. we also work with mcos and
pbms to assist them with disease management, patient education and other tools
that help their medical treatment routines. for example, we sponsor a program
offered by the state of florida agency for health care administration that is
designed to help manage chronic diseases among floridas medicaid population.
table of contents
marketing of prescription pharmaceuticals depends to a degree on complex
decisions about the scope of clinical trials made years before product
approval. all drugs must complete clinical trials required by regulatory
authorities to show they are safe and effective for treating one or more
medical problems. a manufacturer may choose, however, to undertake additional
studies, including comparative clinical trials with competitive products, to
demonstrate additional advantages of a compound. those studies can be costly
and take years to complete, and the results are uncertain. balancing these
considerations makes it difficult to decide whether and when to undertake such
additional studies. but, when they are successful, such studies can have a
major impact on approved marketing claims and strategies.
separate sales organizations are used by our animal health business to
promote its products. its advertising and promotion are generally targeted to
health professionals, directly and through medical journals. animal health and
nutrition products are sold through veterinarians, drug wholesalers,
distributors and retail outlets as well as directly to users. where
appropriate, these products are also marketed through print and television
advertising.
our chc business primarily uses its own representatives to directly
promote its products. we also use print and television consumer advertising and
offer sales incentives such as coupons to promote our consumer products. these
products are sold through various retailers. chc also markets and advertises
certain products directly to professionals using a professional detail force.
during 2002, sales to our three largest pharmaceutical and consumer
healthcare products wholesalers were as follows:
mckesson, inc.  16.8% of our revenues;
amerisourcebergen corporation  14.8% of our revenues; and
cardinal health, inc.  13.4% of our revenues.
sales to these wholesalers were concentrated in the pharmaceutical
segment. apart from these instances, neither of our business segments is dependent
on any one customer or group of related customers.
patents and intellectual property rights
our products are sold around the world under brand-name, logo and certain
product design trademarks that we consider in the aggregate to be of material
importance. trademark protection continues in some countries for as long as the
mark is used and, in other countries, for as long as it is registered.
registrations generally are for fixed, but renewable, terms.
we own or license a number of u.s. and foreign patents. these patents
cover
pharmaceutical and other products and their uses
pharmaceutical formulations
product manufacturing processes
intermediate chemical compounds used in manufacturing
patents for individual products extend for varying periods according to
the date of patent filing or grant and the legal term of patents in the various
countries where patent protection is obtained. the actual protection afforded
by a patent, which can vary from country to country, depends upon the type of
patent, the scope of its coverage and the availability of legal remedies in the
country.
in the aggregate, our patent and related rights are of material importance
to our businesses in the united states and most other countries. based on
current product sales, and considering the vigorous competition with products
sold by others, the patent rights we consider significant in relation to our
business as a whole, together with the year in which the basic u.s. patent
expires (including, where applicable, the additional six-month pediatric
exclusivity period), are those for the following drugs:
basic u.s. patent
drug
expiration year
accupril
diflucan
zithromax
zoloft
table of contents
basic u.s. patent
drug
expiration year
norvasc
zyrtec
aricept
lipitor
viagra
viracept
celebrex
neurontin
seebelow
in some instances, there are later-expiring patents relating to these
products directed to particular forms or compositions of the drug or to methods
of manufacturing or using the drug in the treatment of further diseases or
conditions. such patents may not protect the companys drug from generic drug
competition after the expiration of the basic patent.
zithromax is patented by pliva, a croatian pharmaceutical company. the
drug is licensed exclusively to us by pliva for sales and marketing in major
countries, and we purchase the compound in bulk crude form from pliva.
celebrex is patented by pharmacia corporation, with whom we copromote
celebrex in all world markets except japan. an action against pharmacia and the
company alleging patent infringement with respect to the sale of celebrex (as
well as bextra) was dismissed on march5, 2003. the plaintiff in that action
has appealed the decision.
zyrtec is patented by the belgian company ucb s.a. and is licensed to us
for sales in the u.s., canada, europe, australia and south africa. we copromote
zyrtec as a prescription medicine in the u.s. with a subsidiary of ucb s.a. and
have a license to sell zyrtec as an otc medicine in the other markets.
aricept is patented by eisai co., ltd. we copromote aricept with eisai in
the u.s. and several other countries and have an exclusive license to sell the
drug in various other countries.
the basic u.s. patents relating to neurontin expired in 1994 and 2000.
however, in april 2000, a u.s. patent was granted relating to stable
pharmaceutical compositions of neurontin containing low levels of lactam
impurity. this patent expires in 2017. other companies have filed applications
with the fda seeking approval of products that we believe infringe this patent.
in addition, other companies have filed applications with the fda seeking
approval of products that we believe infringe our patents covering, among other
products, lipitor, norvasc, zoloft, diflucan, accupril and procardia xl. in the
case of zoloft, while generic manufacturers are challenging certain of our
patents, the outcome of these challenges will not affect the timing of generic
competition with this product due to the existence of additional patents.
we have other patent rights covering additional products that have lesser
revenues.
the expiration of a product patent or loss of patent protection resulting
from a legal challenge normally results in significant competition from generic
products against the covered product and, particularly in the u.s., can result
in a significant reduction in sales of the pioneer product. in some cases,
however, we can continue to obtain commercial benefits from
product manufacturing trade secrets
patents on uses for products
patents on processes and intermediates for the economical manufacture of the
active ingredients
patents for special formulations of the product or delivery mechanisms
conversion of the active ingredient to otc products
the effect of product patent expiration or loss also depends upon
the nature of the market and the position of the product in it
the growth of the market
the complexities and economics of manufacture of the product
the requirements of generic drug laws
one of the main limitations on our operations in some countries outside
the u.s. is the lack of effective intellectual property protection of our
products. under international agreements in recent years, global protection of
intellectual property rights is improving. the general agreement on tariffs and
trade requires participant countries to amend their intellectual property laws
to provide patent protection for pharmaceutical products by the end of a
ten-year transition period. a number
table of contents
of countries are doing this. we have experienced significant growth in our
businesses in some of those nations, and our continued business expansion in
those countries depends to a large degree on further patent protection
improvement.
see item3, legal proceedings, below.
competition
competition is intense in all of our businesses and includes many large
and small competitors.
the principal means of competition vary among product categories and
business groups. technological innovations affecting
efficacy
safety
patients ease of use
cost effectiveness
are important to success in all of our businesses.
our businesses also focus on unmet medical needs and therapeutic
improvements. our emphasis on innovation has led to our multi-billion-dollar
research and development investments over the past decade.
our human pharmaceutical business competes with other worldwide
research-based drug companies, many smaller research companies with more
limited therapeutic focus and generic drug manufacturers. our pharmaceutical
operations are the largest in the world.
in recent years, a comparison of the total cost of medical treatments
using pharmaceuticals versus alternative treatments for the same condition has
become an important basis of competition. mcos and pbms look to cost advantages
as well as medical benefits in making their drug formulary decisions.
our pharmaceutical sales and marketing organization is a valuable
competitive asset. our salespeoples ability to reach medical professionals
with information about our products helps us respond to competitive efforts and
launch new products.
we have a significant presence in the animal health marketplace, but many
other companies offer competitive products. altogether, there are hundreds of
producers of animal health products throughout the world. the principal methods
of competition vary somewhat depending on the particular product. they include
product innovation
service
price
quality
effective promotion to veterinary professionals and consumers
we promote our products directly through our sales representatives as well as
through advertising.
many other companies, large and small, manufacture and sell one or more
products that are similar to our consumer healthcare products. sources of
competitive advantage include
product quality and efficacy
brand identity
advertising and promotion
product innovation
broad distribution capabilities
customer satisfaction
price
significant expenditures for advertising, promotion and marketing are generally
required to achieve both consumer and trade acceptance of consumer products.
in the current environment of competitive pressures on profit margins, we
continue efforts to control the growth of our expenses. we have kept our costs
down in areas such as manufacturing, distribution and sales administration by
restructuring and consolidating facilities. these measures have brought us new
efficiencies and reduced or contained our operating expenses.
managed care organizations
the growth of mcos in the u.s. has been a major factor in the competitive
make-up of the health care marketplace. over half the u.s. population now
participates in some version of managed care. because of the size of the
patient population covered by mcos, marketing of prescription drugs to them and
the pbms that serve many of those organizations has become important to our
business.
mcos can include medical insurance companies, medical plan administrators,
health-
table of contents
maintenance organizations, alliances of hospitals and physicians and other
physician organizations. the purchasing power of mcos has been increasing in
recent years due to their growing numbers of enrolled patients. at the same
time, those organizations have been consolidating into fewer, even larger
entities. this enhances their purchasing strength and importance to us.
a major objective of mcos is to contain and, where possible, reduce health
care expenditures. they typically use formularies, volume purchases and
long-term contracts to negotiate discounts from pharmaceutical providers. they
use their purchasing power to bargain for lower supplier prices. they also
emphasize primary and preventive care, out-patient treatment and procedures
performed at doctors offices and clinics. hospitalization and surgery,
typically the most expensive forms of treatment, are carefully managed.
as discussed above in marketing, mcos and pbms typically develop
formularies to reduce their cost for medications. formularies can be based on
the prices and therapeutic benefits of the available products. due to their
generally lower cost, generic medicines are often favored. the breadth of the
products covered by formularies can vary considerably from one mco to another,
and many formularies include alternative and competitive products for treatment
of particular medical problems. mcos use a variety of means to encourage
patients use of products listed on their formularies.
exclusion of a product from a formulary can lead to its sharply reduced
usage in the mco patient population. consequently, pharmaceutical companies
compete aggressively to have their products included. where possible, companies
compete for inclusion based upon unique features of their products, such as
greater efficacy, better patient ease of use or fewer side effects. a lower
overall cost of therapy is also an important factor. products that demonstrate
fewer therapeutic advantages must compete for inclusion based primarily on
price.
the growth of mcos also appears to have led to greater usage of some
drugs. the use of certain drugs can prevent the need for more costly treatments
such as hospitalization, professional therapy or even surgery. because of these
advantages, such drugs can become favored first-line treatments. in addition,
the current trend of some patients to opt for managed care alternatives to
medicare may increase overall pharmaceutical usage among that segment of the
elderly population. medicare generally does not pay for outpatient use of
medicines, so patients who do not have another source of prescription drug
coverage must bear that cost. mcos, however, often offer drug benefits for
their participants.
these developments not only have created pressure on prices, but also have
increased sales of products on formularies. we have been generally, although
not universally, successful in having our major products included on mco
formularies.
another way we address the interests of mcos is by developing
disease-management programs. these programs can be attractive to mcos by
improving patient communications and compliance with dosage directions, which
are important for effective disease treatment. they can help mcos address
various aspects of disease management, such as prevention, diagnosis and
treatment of certain diseases, including use of pharmaceutical products. this
comprehensive approach can improve the quality of care and lower costly
complications of chronic diseases. as noted above in marketing, one such
program, which is sponsored by us and offered by the state of florida agency
for health care administration, is designed to help manage chronic diseases
among floridas medicaid population.
generic products
one of the biggest competitive challenges that we face in the u.s. and
that is growing internationally is from generic pharmaceutical manufacturers.
upon the expiration or loss of u.s. patent protection on a product, we can lose
the major portion of u.s. sales of that product in a very short period. generic
competitors operate without our large research and development expenses and our
costs of conveying medical information about the product to the medical
community. in addition, the fda approval process exempts generics from costly
and time-consuming clinical trials to demonstrate their safety and efficacy,
and allows generic manufacturers to rely on the safety and efficacy of the
pioneer product. generic products need only demonstrate a level of
table of contents
availability in the bloodstream equivalent to that of the pioneer product.
this means that after we have borne the expenses of discovering, developing and
testing a medicine for safety and efficacy, obtaining regulatory approval and
informing the medical community about its therapeutic benefits, generic
competitors can market a competing version of our product after the expiration
of our patent, charge much less and still be profitable.
as noted above, mcos that focus primarily on the immediate cost of drugs
often favor generics over brand-name drugs. many governments also encourage the
use of generics as alternatives to brand-name drugs in their health care
programs, including medicaid in the u.s. laws in the u.s. generally allow, and
in some cases require, pharmacists to substitute generic drugs that have been
rated under government procedures to be therapeutically equivalent to a
brand-name drug. the substitution must be made unless the prescribing physician
expressly forbids it.
raw materials
raw materials essential to our businesses are purchased worldwide in the
ordinary course of business from numerous suppliers. in general, these
materials are available from multiple sources. no serious shortages or delays
were encountered in 2002, and none are expected in 2003.
government regulation and price constraints
pharmaceutical companies are subject to extensive regulation by numerous
national, state and local agencies. of particular importance is the fda in the
united states. it has jurisdiction over virtually all of our businesses and
administers requirements covering the testing, safety, effectiveness,
manufacturing, labeling, marketing, advertising and post-marketing surveillance
of our pharmaceutical products. fda requirements and/or reviews have increased
the amount of time and money necessary to develop new products and bring them
to market.
the fda also regulates most of our consumer healthcare products and, along
with the u.s. department of agriculture and the u.s. environmental protection
agency, our animal health products.
since
1998, the approval of new drugs across the european union (eu) is possible only using
the european medicines evaluation agencys (emea)mutual recognition or central
approval processes. the use of either of these procedures provides a more rapid
and consistent approval within the 15 member states than was the case when the
approval processes were operating independently within each member state.
further, on january1, 2000, norway and iceland became full participants in the
eu central approval processes. in addition, the agreement between the eu and 12
other european states to base their approvals on the centralized eu approval
will significantly speed the regulatory process in those countries. the emea
does not have jurisdiction over patient reimbursement or pricing matters in eu
member countries, however. we continue to deal with individual countries on
such issues.
in recent years in the u.s., various legislative proposals have been
offered at the federal and state levels that would bring about major changes in
the affected health care systems. some states have passed such legislation, and
further federal and state proposals are possible. such proposals and
legislation include, and future proposals could include, price controls or
patient access constraints on medicines and increases in required rebates or
discounts. similar issues exist
in many foreign countries where we do business. we cannot predict the outcome
of such initiatives, but we will work to maintain patient access to our
products and to oppose price constraints.
in the u.s., federal proposals have called for substantial changes in the
medicare program, and federal and state proposals have called for substantial
changes in the medicaid program. driven by budget concerns, medicaid access and
reimbursement restrictions have been implemented in some states and proposed in
many others. if the medicare and medicaid programs implement changes that
restrict the access of a significant population of patients to our innovative
medicines, our business could be materially affected. on the other hand,
relatively little pharmaceutical use is currently covered by medicare. if
changes to medicare shift patients to mcos that cover
table of contents
pharmaceuticals, or if an outpatient drug benefit is added to medicare,
usage of pharmaceuticals could increase. pricing pressures likely would ensue
in either case given the enhancement of the purchasing power of the mcos or the
federal government.
medicare currently does not generally provide outpatient prescription drug
coverage. in this context, in order to help address the issue of affordable
access to health care for those most in need, we instituted the pfizer for
living share card program in 2002. through this program, low-income medicare
recipients without prescription drug coverage can purchase 30-day prescriptions
of any pfizer prescription medicine and of the copromoted product aricept at many retail pharmacies for $15.
u.s. law requires us to give rebates to state medicaid agencies based on
each states reimbursement of pharmaceutical products under the medicaid
program. some states are seeking rebates in excess of the amounts required by
federal law, and there are federal legislative proposals to expand current
medicaid rebates. we also must give discounts or rebates on purchases or
reimbursements of pharmaceutical products by certain other federal and state
agencies and programs. in 2000 and 2001, the states of vermont and maine
received approval of waivers from the centers for medicare and medicaid
services that would expand medicaid rebates beyond the current medicaid
population. both of these waivers were struck down by federal appeals courts.
separately, in 2000 the state of maine passed legislation requiring
pharmaceutical companies to provide the same price discounts to residents of
the state, regardless of their income, who are not eligible for medicaid as are
provided to medicaid participants. if a pharmaceutical company declines to
provide such discounts to the non-medicaid population, in most cases doctors
will not be allowed to prescribe that companys drugs to medicaid patients
without obtaining prior authorization from the state. the maine program was
upheld by a federal appeals court in 2001. that decision has been appealed to
the u.s. supreme court, and a decision is expected later this year. if the
maine program is upheld on appeal, other states may adopt similar legislation
that would extend medicaid-level discounts beyond the current medicaid
population.
rebates potentially could be viewed as price discounts without
appreciable increases in volume as an offset. see the discussion regarding
rebates on page 32 of our 2002 annual report, which discussion is incorporated
by reference.
we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other
countries. in europe and some other international markets, the government
provides health care at low direct cost to consumers and regulates
pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for the
government-sponsored health care system. this international patchwork of price
regulation has led to different prices and some third-party trade in our
products from markets with lower prices. such trade exploiting price
differences between countries can undermine our sales in markets with higher
prices.
in october 2002, the bush administration announced a regulatory initiative
relating to patent litigation pursuant to the 1984 drug price competition and
patent term restoration act, known as the hatch-waxman act. under the
hatch-waxman act, if a generic drug company files an abbreviated new drug
application (anda)with the fda and a research-based drug company promptly
files a lawsuit alleging that the generic product would infringe one or more of
its patents, approval of the anda by the fda automatically is stayed for a
period of up to 30months. the proposed regulation would permit only one such
30-month stay period to be triggered by a patent-infringement suit between a
research-based firm and an anda applicant. the proposed regulation also would
clarify the type of patents eligible for listing in the fdas orange book. a
final fda regulation is anticipated this year. it also is possible that
legislation amending the hatch-waxman act could be enacted this year. one
possible amendment would codify the bush administrations regulatory initiative
and also require that settlements in patent-challenge cases between
research-based drug companies and generic drug companies be reported to the
federal trade commission. other proposals that would be detrimental to the
innovative pharmaceutical industry already have been introduced and could be
enacted.
in addition to the fda, the u.s. department of agriculture and the u.s.
environmental
table of contents
protection agency, we are subject to the jurisdiction of various other
regulatory and enforcement departments and agencies, such as the department of
health and human services, the federal trade commission and the department of
justice in the u.s. we are, therefore, subject to possible administrative and
legal proceedings and actions by those regulatory bodies (see item3, legal
proceedings, below). such actions may include product recalls, seizures and
other civil and criminal sanctions. in some cases, we have initiated product
recalls voluntarily.
it is difficult to predict the future impact of the broad and expanding
legislative and regulatory requirements affecting us.
environmental law compliance
most of our manufacturing and certain research operations are affected by
federal, state and local environmental laws. we have made, and intend to
continue to make, necessary expenditures for compliance with applicable laws.
we also are cleaning up environmental contamination from past industrial
activity at certain sites (see item3, legal proceedings, below). as a result,
we incurred capital and operational expenditures in 2002 for environmental
protection and clean-up of certain past industrial activity as follows:
environment-related capital expenditures  $47million ($2million of which
related to discontinued operations)
other environment-related expenses  $146million ($3million of which
related to discontinued operations)
while we cannot predict with certainty the future costs of such clean-up
activities, capital expenditures or operating costs for environmental
compliance, we do not believe they will have a material effect on our capital
expenditures, earnings or competitive position.
banking and insurance subsidiaries
we conduct international banking operations through a subsidiary, pfizer
international bank europe (pibe), based in dublin, ireland. pibe, incorporated
under the laws of ireland, operates under a banking license from the central
bank of ireland. it makes loans and accepts deposits in several currencies in
international markets. pibe is an active euromarket lender to financially
strong borrowers through its portfolio of loans and money market instruments.
loans are made primarily on a short- and medium-term basis, typically with
floating interest rates.
we also own an insurance operation, the kodiak company limited, which
reinsures certain assets, inland transport and marine cargo of our
international operations.
financial data for these subsidiaries are set forth in note 5 to our
consolidated financial statements, banking and insurance subsidiaries, on page
51 of our 2002 annual report, and information relating to our banking
operations is set forth under the heading banking operation on pages 38 and 39
of our 2002 annual report. such data and information are incorporated by
reference.
tax matters
the discussion of tax-related matters in note 11 to our consolidated
financial statements, taxes on income, on pages 56 and 57 of our 2002 annual
report is incorporated by reference.
employees
in our innovation-intensive business, our employees are vital to our
success. we believe we have good relationships with our employees. as of
december31, 2002, we employed approximately 98,000 people in our operations
throughout the world.
proposed acquisition of pharmacia corporation
in july 2002, we entered into an agreement to acquire pharmacia
corporation (pharmacia), a global pharmaceutical company. pharmacias human
pharmaceuticals include primary care products (including celebrex and bextra,
which we copromote with pharmacia, and detrol), opthalmology care products
(including xalatan), cancer care products (including camptosar), endocrine
care products (including genotropin) and hospital care products. pharmacia also
table of contents
operates several other businesses, including animal health and consumer
healthcare businesses.
in december 2002, shareholders of both pfizer and pharmacia approved the
proposed acquisition. in february 2003, the european commission approved the
transaction. on march17, 2003, we and pharmacia announced that the companies
have reached agreement with the staff of the federal trade commission (ftc)on
the divestitures that will be required in connection with the proposed
acquisition and that the companies have agreements in place with buyers for all
of the assets to be divested. the products and compounds to be divested are not
material, either individually or in the aggregate, to pfizers business or
operations. on march25, 2003, the companies announced that the
ftc staff has completed its review and that a proposed consent decree
will be forwarded to
the ftc for acceptance and placement on the public record. based on past ftc
practice, pfizer anticipates that this process will result in the closing of
the transaction in april 2003.
the proposed acquisition is a stock-for-stock transaction valued as of the
merger agreement date at approximately $60billion. upon the closing, we will
issue approximately two billion shares of pfizer common stock in exchange for
all of the outstanding common stock of pharmacia. in addition, we will exchange
a newly created class of pfizer convertible perpetual preferred stock
(convertible into approximately 16million shares of pfizer common stock) for a
substantially identical class of pharmacia stock, and we will exchange options
on 1.4 shares of pfizer common stock for each outstanding pharmacia option.
see the information under the heading proposed acquisition of pharmacia
corporation in note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, merger
activities, on page 50 of our 2002 annual report. such information is
incorporated by reference.
cautionary factors that may affect future results
(cautionary statements under the private securities litigation reform act
of 1995)
our disclosure and analysis in this report and in our 2002 annual report
to shareholders contain some forward-looking statements that set forth
anticipated results based on managements plans and assumptions. from time to
time, we also provide forward-looking statements in other materials we release
to the public as well as oral forward-looking statements. such statements give
our current expectations or forecasts of future events; they do not relate
strictly to historical or current facts. we have tried, wherever possible, to
identify such statements by using words such as anticipate, estimate,
expect, project, intend, plan, believe, will and similar
expressions in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial
performance. in particular, these include statements relating to future
actions, prospective products or product approvals, future performance or
results of current and anticipated products, sales efforts, expenses, interest
rates, foreign exchange rates, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal
proceedings, and financial results.
we cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statement will be realized,
although we believe we have been prudent in our plans and assumptions.
achievement of future results is subject to risks, uncertainties and
potentially inaccurate assumptions. should known or unknown risks or
uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove inaccurate,
actual results could vary materially from past results and those anticipated,
estimated or projected. investors should bear this in mind as they consider
forward-looking statements.
we undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements,
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. you are
advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related
subjects in our 10-q and 8-k reports to the sec. also note that we provide the
following cautionary discussion of risks, uncertainties and possibly inaccurate
assumptions relevant to our businesses. these are factors that, individually or
in the aggregate, we think could cause our actual results to differ materially
from expected and historical results. we note these factors for investors as
permitted by the private securities litigation reform act of 1995. you should
understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors.
consequently, you should not consider the following to be a complete discussion
of all potential risks or uncertainties.
table of contents
balancing current growth and investment for the future remains a major
challenge. our ongoing investments in new product introductions and research
and development for future products could exceed corresponding sales growth.
this could produce higher costs without a proportional increase in revenues.
in the u.s., many pharmaceutical products are subject to increasing pricing
pressures, which could be significantly impacted by the outcome of the current
national debate over medicare reform. if the medicare program provided
outpatient pharmaceutical coverage for its beneficiaries, the federal
government, through its enormous purchasing power under the program, could
demand discounts from pharmaceutical companies that may implicitly create price
controls on prescription drugs. on the other hand, a medicare drug
reimbursement provision may increase the volume of pharmaceutical drug
purchases, offsetting at least in part these potential price discounts. in
addition, mcos, medicaid and other government agencies continue to seek price
discounts. government efforts to reduce medicare and medicaid expenses may
continue to increase the use of mcos. this may result in managed cares
influencing prescription decisions for a larger segment of the population. in
addition, certain states have proposed and certain other states have adopted
various programs to control prices for their seniors drug programs, including
price or patient reimbursement constraints, restrictions on access to certain
products, importation from other countries and bulk purchasing of drugs.
we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other
countries. in europe and some other international markets, the government
provides health care at low direct cost to consumers and regulates
pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for the
government-sponsored health care system. this international patchwork of price
regulation has led to different prices and some third-party trade in our
products from markets with lower prices. such trade exploiting price
differences between countries can undermine our sales in markets with higher
prices.
as a result, it is expected that pressures on the pricing component of
operating results will continue.
35.9% of our 2002 revenues arose from international operations, including
6.1% from japan. these international-based revenues as well as our substantial
international assets expose our revenues and earnings to foreign currency
exchange rate changes. in addition, our interest-bearing investments, loans and
borrowings are subject to interest rate change risk. the risks of such changes
and the measures we have taken to help contain those risks are discussed in the
section entitled financial risk management on pages 40 and 41 of our 2002
annual report. for additional details, see note 6-d to our consolidated
financial statements, derivative financial instruments and hedging activities,
on pages 53 and 54 of our 2002 annual report. those sections of our 2002 annual
report are incorporated by reference.
notwithstanding our efforts to foresee and mitigate the effects of changes
in fiscal circumstances, we cannot predict with certainty changes in currency
and interest rates, inflation or other related factors affecting our
businesses.
our international operations also could be affected by changes in
intellectual property legal protections and remedies, trade regulations and
procedures and actions affecting approval, production, pricing, reimbursement
and marketing of products, as well as by unstable governments and legal
systems, intergovernmental disputes and possible nationalization.
competition from manufacturers of generic drugs is a major challenge in the
u.s. and is growing internationally. expiration or loss of patent protection
typically leads to significant loss of sales in the u.s. market. the patents
covering several of the companys medicines are being challenged by generic
drug manufacturers.
risks and uncertainties particularly apply with respect to product-related
forward-looking
statements. the outcome of the lengthy and complex process of identifying new
compounds and developing new products is inherently
table of contents
uncertain. there can be no
assurance as to whether or when we will receive regulatory approval for new
products or for new indications or dosage forms for existing products. there
are also many considerations that can affect marketing of pharmaceutical
products around the world. regulatory delays, the inability to successfully
complete clinical trials, claims and concerns about safety and efficacy, new
discoveries, patent disputes and claims about adverse side effects are a few of
the factors that could adversely affect the realization of research and
development and product-related forward-looking statements.
as discussed above in marketing, decisions about research studies made early
in the development process of a drug candidate can have a substantial impact on
the marketing strategy once the drug receives approval. more detailed studies
may demonstrate additional benefits that can help in the marketing, but they
consume time and resources and can delay submitting the drug candidate for
initial approval. we try to plan clinical trials prudently, but there is no
guarantee that a proper balance of speed and testing will be made in each case.
the quality of our decisions in this area could affect our future results.
difficulties or delays in product manufacturing or marketing, including, but
not limited to, the inability to build up production capacity commensurate with
demand, or the failure to predict market demand for, or to gain market
acceptance of, approved products, could affect future results.
we currently market ten products with annual sales to third parties exceeding
$1billion each: lipitor, norvasc, zoloft, neurontin, viagra, zithromax,
zyrtec, diflucan and our copromoted products celebrex and aricept. those
products accounted for almost three-quarters of our 2002 revenues. if these or
any of our other major products were to become subject to a problem such as
loss of patent protection, unexpected side effects, regulatory proceedings,
publicity affecting doctor or patient confidence or pressure from competitive
products, or if a new, more effective treatment should be introduced, the
impact on our revenues could be significant. the patents covering lipitor,
norvasc, neurontin, diflucan and zoloft are the subject of pending
legal challenges. an action alleging patent infringement with respect
to the sale of celebrex (as well as bextra) was dismissed on
march5, 2003; the plaintiff in that action has appealed the
decision.
we cannot predict with accuracy the timing or impact of the introduction of
competitive products or their possible future effect on our sales. products
that compete with our drugs, including some of our best-selling medicines, are
launched from time to time, and certain potentially competitive products are in
various stages of development, some of which have been filed for approval with
the fda.
growth in costs and expenses, changes in product mix and the impact of
acquisitions, divestitures, restructurings, product withdrawals and other
unusual events that could result from evolving business strategies, evaluation
of asset realization and organizational restructuring could affect future
results. such risks and uncertainties include, in particular, our ability to
obtain the anticipated results and synergies from our proposed acquisition of
pharmacia and the increased uncertainty created by the integration of the two
businesses as well as our ability to divest and the timing of the divestitures
of our remaining discontinued businesses and product lines.
our future results could be affected by changes in laws and regulations,
including changes in accounting standards, taxation requirements (including
tax-rate changes, new tax laws and revised tax law interpretations),
competition laws and environmental laws in the u.s. and other countries.
our future results could be affected by changes in business, political and
economic conditions, including the cost and availability of insurance, due to
the threat of future terrorist activity in the u.s. and other parts of the
world and related u.s. military action overseas.
we and certain of our subsidiaries are involved in various patent, product
liability, consumer, commercial, environmental, and tax litigations and claims;
government investigations; and other legal proceedings that arise from time to
time in the ordinary course of our business. we do not believe any of them will
have a material adverse effect on our financial position. litigation is
inherently unpredictable, and excessive verdicts do occur. although we believe
we have valid defenses in these matters, we could in the future
incur judgments or enter into settlements of claims that could have a material
adverse effect on our results of operations in any particular period.
table of contents
patent claims include challenges to the coverage and/or validity of our
patents on various products or processes. although we believe that we have
valid defenses to these challenges with respect to all our material patents,
there can be no assurance as to the outcome of these matters, and a loss in any
of these cases could result in a loss of patent protection for the drug at
issue, which could lead to a significant loss of sales of that drug and could
materially affect future results of operations.
item 2. properties
our corporate headquarters and the headquarters of our human
pharmaceutical and animal health businesses are located at our world
headquarters, which includes several buildings in new york city. we own two of
the buildings, including our main, 33-story office tower at 235 east
42nd
street, and lease other nearby space. our 33-story office tower is located on a
site we lease under a long-term ground lease.
for our pharmaceutical businesses, we own and lease space around the world
for sales and marketing, administrative support and customer service functions.
our global research and development division is headquartered in new
london, connecticut and has major operations in owned facilities in amboise,
france; ann arbor, michigan; freiburg, germany; fresnes, france; groton,
connecticut; holland, michigan; nagoya, japan; sandwich, england, u.k.; and
terre haute, indiana. we also lease major facilities in la jolla, california
and cambridge, massachusetts for pharmaceutical research and development
operations.
our global manufacturing division operates plants in 54 locations around
the world that manufacture products for our human pharmaceutical, animal health
and consumer healthcare businesses. major facilities are located in brazil,
china, france, germany, ireland, italy, japan, mexico, puerto rico, singapore,
the united kingdom and the united states. in addition, the global manufacturing
division operates numerous distribution facilities in major markets around the
world.
the headquarters and research operations of our consumer healthcare
business are located in morris plains, new jersey, where we own five buildings
and lease a smaller amount of space nearby. chcs sales and marketing offices
are located in leased space, in many cases shared with other businesses.
the capsugel business operates manufacturing and distribution facilities
in ten locations around the world.
the adams confectionery business, which we recently agreed to sell,
operates manufacturing facilities in 24 locations around the world.
the schick-wilkinson sword shaving products business, which we also
recently agreed to sell, operates manufacturing facilities in five locations
around the world.
in general, our properties are well maintained, adequate and suitable to
their purposes. the growth of our businesses has created space pressures for
certain operations, however. we have responded to such challenges with plans
to provide appropriate facilities as needs are demonstrated. note 8 to our
consolidated financial statements, property, plant and equipment, on page 55 of
our 2002 annual report, which discloses amounts invested in land, buildings and
equipment, and the discussion of investing activities under the heading summary
of cash flows on page 37 of our 2002 annual report, which describes our capital
expenditures, are incorporated by reference. see also the discussion under
note 13 to our consolidated financial statements, lease commitments, on page 60
of our 2002 annual report, which also is incorporated by reference.
item 3. legal proceedings
a discussion of the legal proceedings in which we are involved, both in
general and with respect to specific matters and types of matters, is set forth
in note 20 to our consolidated financial statements, legal proceedings and
contingencies, on pages 62-64 of our 2002 annual report. that discussion is
incorporated by reference. the following is limited to a description of certain
recent developments and should be read in conjunction with the discussion
in note 20. unless otherwise indicated, all proceedings discussed in note 20
remain pending.
table of contents
patent matters
neurontin (gabapentin)
as previously reported, in 2000, warner-lambert brought patent
infringement suits against several generic manufacturers that have filed
abbreviated new drug applications with the fda asserting the invalidity and
non-infringement of our gabapentin (neurontin) low-lactam patent. one of those
generic manufacturers recently received tentative approval from the fda to
market a generic version of gabapentin. tentative approval means that this
generic manufacturer can market its product after the expiration of the 180-day
marketing exclusivity period in favor of one of the other generic manufacturers
that has not yet received fda approval to market its generic version of
gabapentin.
lipitor (atorvastatin)
in february 2003, we filed suit in the u.s. district court for the
district of delaware for infringement of our basic product patent for
atorvastatin (lipitor) against a generic manufacturer that has filed an
abbreviated new drug application with the fda and asserted that its product
would not infringe the patent. our basic product patent, including the
additional six-month pediatric exclusivity period, expires in 2010.
subsequently, the generic manufacturer asserted that our patent covering the
active enantiomeric form of the drug is invalid; that patent, including the
six-month pediatric exclusivity period, expires in 2011.
celebrex, bextra (celecoxib, valdecoxib)
in the previously reported patent infringement action brought by the
university of rochester against pfizer and others with respect to celebrex and
bextra, the university recently appealed the courts decision granting our
motions for summary judgment.
other matters
neurontin
as previously reported, the u.s. attorneys office in boston,
massachusetts has been conducting an investigation into warner-lamberts
promotion of neurontin. these allegations are now also the subject of a number
of suits, including purported class actions, filed in various federal and state
courts.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
a special meeting of shareholders was held on december6, 2002 at which
shareholders of the company voted on two proposals.
the proposal to approve the issuance of shares of pfizer common stock in
connection with the merger with pharmacia was approved as follows:
4,169,265,854
votes for the proposal
55,678,222
votes against the proposal
38,645,841
votes abstained
the proposal to amend the pfizer certificate of incorporation to increase
the authorized share capital was approved as follows:
4,058,051,614
votes for the proposal
164,891,876
votes against the proposal
40,646,427
votes abstained
table of contents
executive officers of the company
the executive officers of the company are set forth in this table. each
holds the offices indicated until his or her successor is chosen and qualified
at the regular meeting of the board of directors to be held immediately
following the 2003 annual meeting of shareholders. each of the executive
officers is a member of the pfizer leadership team.
name
age
position
peter b. corr
senior vice president  science and technology
charles l. hardwick
senior vice president  corporate affairs
karen l. katen
executive vice president; president  pfizer
pharmaceuticals group
jeffrey b. kindler
senior vice president and general counsel
henry a. mckinnell
chairman of the board and chief executive officer
john w. mitchell
senior vice president; president  pfizer global
manufacturing
robert w. norton
senior vice president  corporate human resources
david l. shedlarz
executive vice president and chief financial officer
information concerning dr.corr, ms.katen, mr.kindler, dr.mckinnell and mr.
shedlarz is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the headings
directors whose terms expire in 2004 and named executive officers who are not
directors in our proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareholders.
charles l. hardwick
mr.hardwick joined us in 1966. he held a number of positions in government and
public affairs and in marketing before becoming vice president  government and
public affairs in 1997. he was appointed senior vice president  government
relations and public affairs in march 2001. he was elected vice president of
pfizer inc.; senior vice president  corporate affairs in december 2001 and
elected senior vice president  corporate affairs of pfizer inc. effective july
2002.
john w. mitchell
mr.mitchell joined us in the manufacturing division in 1964. he progressed
through various positions of increasing responsibility before becoming vice
president  manufacturing of the pfizer pharmaceuticals group in 1997. he was
appointed senior vice president  pfizer global manufacturing in 1999 and
president  pfizer global manufacturing in 2000. he was elected vice president
of pfizer inc.; president  pfizer global manufacturing in april 2001 and
elected senior vice president of pfizer inc.;
president  pfizer global
manufacturing in february 2003.
robert w. norton
mr.norton joined us in 1969 in the corporate personnel division. he has held a
number of international and domestic positions in human resources, and from
1985 to 1997 he was our senior international human resources executive. in
1997, he was appointed senior vice president, employee resources, pfizer
pharmaceuticals group. in february 2001, he was elected senior vice
president  corporate human resources of pfizer inc.
table of contents
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common equity and related stockholder matters
the principal market for our common stock is the new york stock exchange.
it is also listed on the london, euronext and swiss stock exchanges and is
traded on various united states regional stock exchanges. additional
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the table
captioned quarterly consolidated financial data(unaudited) on pages 67 and 68
of our 2002 annual report.
item 6. selected financial data
historical financial information is incorporated by reference from the
financial summary on page 69 of our 2002 annual report.
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results
of operations
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
financial review on pages 28 through 41 of our 2002 annual report.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
discussion under the heading financial risk management on pages 40 and 41 of
our 2002 annual report.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
independent auditors report on page 43 of our 2002 annual report and from the
consolidated financial statements, related notes and supplementary data on
pages 44 through 68 of our 2002 annual report.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
not applicable.
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
information about our directors is incorporated by reference from the
discussion under item1 of our proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting of
shareholders. information about compliance with section16(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934 is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the
heading section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance in our proxy
statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareholders. information about our
audit committee financial experts is incorporated by reference from the
discussion under the headings audit committee financial experts and the audit
committee in our proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareholders.
information about the code of ethics governing our employees, including our
chief executive officer, chief financial officer and principal accounting
officer, is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
pfizer policies on business ethics and conduct in our proxy statement for the
2003 annual meeting of shareholders. the balance of the information required by
this item is contained in the discussion entitled executive officers of the
company in part i of this 2002 form10-k.
item 11. executive compensation
information about director and executive compensation is incorporated by
reference from the discussion under the headings 2002
table of contents
compensation of non-employee directors, executive compensation, retirement
annuity plan, pension plan table, and employment and severance agreements in
our proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareholders.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
information about security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
securities ownership of officers and directors in our proxy statement for the
2003 annual meeting of shareholders.
table of contents
this table provides certain information as of december31, 2002 with
respect to our equity compensation plans:
equity compensation plan information
(a)
(b)
(c)
number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
number of securities to
weighted-average
equity compensation
be issued upon exercise
exercise price of
plans (excluding
of outstanding options,
outstanding options,
securities reflected in
plan category
warrants and rights
warrants and rights
column (a))
equity compensation
plans approved by
security holders
431,981,121
$
31.45
199,777,303*
equity compensation
plans not approved by
security holders
n/a
total
431,981,121
$
31.45
199,777,303*
*the shares available for future issuance as of december31, 2002 consisted of the following:
178,625,763 shares were available for issuance pursuant to stock option awards that could be granted in the future
under the 2001 stock and incentive plan. a maximum of 2,420,700 of such shares was available, alternatively, for
issuance pursuant to future restricted stock awards; any such restricted stock awards will reduce the number of
shares available for issuance pursuant to future stock option awards.
9,742,900 shares were available for issuance pursuant to performance-contingent share awards that could be granted
in the future under the 2001 performance-contingent share award plan. in addition, 2,757,100 shares and 8,012,400
shares, respectively, were available for issuance pursuant to outstanding performance-contingent share awards that
had been granted under the 2001 performance-contingent share award plan and the previous performance-contingent share
award program but had not been earned as of december31, 2002. the number of shares, if any, to be issued pursuant to
such future awards or outstanding awards will be determined by a non-discretionary formula that measures our
performance, in terms of total shareholder return and diluted earnings-per-share growth, over the applicable
performance period relative to the performance of the industry peer group.
639,140 shares were available for issuance pursuant to the warner-lambert 1996 stock plan in settlement of
warner-lambert directors compensation that had been deferred by certain former warner-lambert directors prior to the
merger of the two companies.
for additional information concerning our equity compensation plans, see
the discussion in note 18 to our consolidated financial statements, stock
option and performance unit awards, on page61 of our 2002 annual report, which
is incorporated by reference.
table of contents
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
information about certain relationships and transactions with related
parties is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
related party transactions in our proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting
of shareholders.
item 14. controls and procedures
within
90days prior to the filing date of this 2002 form10-k, we
carried out an evaluation, under the supervision and with the participation of
our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, of the
effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and
procedures. based on this evaluation, our principal executive officer and
principal financial officer concluded that our disclosure controls and
procedures are effective in alerting them in a timely manner to material
information required to be disclosed in our periodic reports filed with the
sec. it should be noted that the design of any system of controls is based in
part upon certain assumptions about the likelihood of future events, and there
can be no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving its stated goals
under all potential future conditions, regardless of how remote.
in addition, we reviewed our internal controls, and there have been no
significant changes in our internal controls or in other factors that could
significantly affect those controls subsequent to the date of their most recent
evaluation.
item 15. intentionally left blank
[intentionally left blank]
item 16. principal accountant fees and services
information about the fees for 2002 and 2001 for professional services
rendered by our independent auditors is incorporated by reference from the
discussion under the heading audit and non-audit fees in item2 of our proxy
statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareholders. our
audit committees policy on pre-approval of audit and permissible non-audit
services of our independent auditors is incorporated by reference from the
section captioned policy on audit committee pre-approval of audit and
permissible non-audit services of independent auditor in item2 of our proxy
statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareholders.
table of contents
part iv
item 17. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
17(a)(1) financial statements. the following consolidated financial
statements, related notes, independent auditors report and supplementary data
from our 2002 annual report to shareholders are incorporated by reference into
item8 of part ii of this 2002 form10-k:
page(s) in our 2002
annual report
independent auditors report
consolidated statement of income
consolidated balance sheet
consolidated statement of shareholders equity
consolidated statement of cash flows
notes to consolidated financial statements
48-66
quarterly consolidated financial data (unaudited)
67-68
17(a)(2) financial statement schedules. schedules are omitted because they
are not required or the information is given elsewhere in the financial
statements. the financial statements of unconsolidated subsidiaries are omitted
because, considered in the aggregate, they would not constitute a significant
subsidiary.
17(a)(3) exhibits. these exhibits are available upon request. requests
should be directed to margaret m. foran, vice president-corporate governance
and secretary, pfizer inc., 235 east 42nd street, new york, ny 10017-5755. the
exhibit numbers preceded by an asterisk (*) indicate exhibits physically filed
with this 2002 form10-k. all other exhibit numbers indicate exhibits filed by
incorporation by reference. exhibit numbers 10(1) through 10(25) are management
contracts or compensatory plans or arrangements.
agreement and plan of merger dated as of july13, 2002 among pfizer inc., pilsner acquisition sub corp. and
pharmacia corporation is incorporated by reference from amendment no.2 to our registration statement on forms-4
as filed with the sec on october17, 2002. we agree to furnish to the sec, upon request, a copy of each exhibit to
this agreement and plan of merger.
3(1)
our restated certificate of incorporation as of april27, 2000, is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report
for the period ended april2, 2000.
3(2)
our by-laws as amended april27, 2000, are incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended
april2, 2000.
4(1)
our rights agreement dated as of october6, 1997, with chasemellon shareholder services, l.l.c. is incorporated
by reference from our 8-k report dated october6, 1997.
4(2)
indenture, dated as of january30, 2001, between us and the chase manhattan bank is incorporated by reference from
our 8-k report filed on january30, 2001.
table of contents
4(3)
except as set forth in exhibits 4(1) and 4(2) above, the instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term
debt securities of the company and its subsidiaries have been omitted. we agree to furnish to the sec, upon
request, a copy of each instrument with respect to issuances of long-term debt of the company and its subsidiaries.
10(1)
2001 stock and incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the
2001 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(2)
stock and incentive plan as amended through july1, 1999, is incorporated by reference from
our 1999 10-k report.
10(3)
pfizer retirement annuity plan as amended through november6, 1997, is incorporated by
reference from our 1997 10-k report.
10(4)
nonfunded supplemental retirement plan is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
*10(5)
nonfunded deferred compensation and supplemental savings plan as amended and restated as of
february1, 2002.
10(6)
executive annual incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the
1997 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(7)
2001 performance-contingent share award plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy
statement for the 2001 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(8)
performance-contingent share award program is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report
for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(9)
non-employee directors retirement plan (frozen as of october 1996) is incorporated by
reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(10)
annual retainer unit award plan (for non-employee directors) is incorporated by reference
from our 10-q report for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(11)
nonfunded deferred compensation and unit award plan for non-employee directors is
incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(12)
restricted stock plan for non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 1996
10-k report.
10(13)
deferred compensation plan is incorporated by reference from our 1997 10-k report.
10(14)
warner-lambert company 1996 stock plan, as amended, is incorporated by reference from
warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(15)
warner-lambert company incentive compensation plan, as amended, is incorporated by reference
from warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(16)
warner-lambert company supplemental pension income plan, as amended, is incorporated by
reference from warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(17)
warner-lambert company executive severance plan, as amended, is incorporated by reference
from warner-lamberts 10-q report for the quarter ended march31, 1999.
10(18)
summary of annual incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our 2000 10-k report.
10(19)
the form of severance agreement with each of the named executive officers identified in our proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting
of shareholders is incorporated by reference from our 1994 10-k report.
10(20)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of our non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(21)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of the named executive officers identified in our proxy statement for the 2003 annual
meeting of shareholders is incorporated by reference from our 1997 10-k report.
table of contents
10(22)
post-retirement consulting agreement, dated as of april20, 2000, between us and william c. steere, jr., is incorporated by reference
from our 10-q report for the period ended april2, 2000.
10(23)
employment agreement, dated as of january1, 2001, between us and henry a. mckinnell is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report
filed on february2, 2001.
10(24)
severance agreement, dated as of january1, 2002, between us and jeffrey b. kindler is incorporated by reference from our 2001 10-k report.
10(25)
employment agreement, dated as of march1, 2001, between us and peter b. corr is incorporated by reference from our 2000 10-k report.
*12
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
*13
portions of the 2002 annual report to shareholders, which, except for
those sections incorporated by reference, are furnished solely for
the information of the sec and are not to be deemed filed.
*21
subsidiaries of the company.
*23
consent of kpmg llp, independent certified public accountants.
*24
power of attorney (included as part of the signature page).
*99.1
certification by the chief executive officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*99.2
certification by the chief financial officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
17(b) reports on form8-k. we filed a form8-k on december17, 2002, which
attached and incorporated by reference the companys press release dated
december17, 2002 announcing the agreement to sell the adams confectionery
business.
table of contents
signatures
under the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange
act of 1934, this report was signed on behalf of the registrant by the
authorized person named below.
pfizer inc.
dated: march27, 2003
by:
/s/ margaret m. foran
margaret m. foran, vice president-
corporate governance and secretary
we, the undersigned directors and officers of pfizer inc., hereby
severally constitute margaret m. foran and jeffrey b. kindler, and each of them
singly, our true and lawful attorneys with full power to them and each of them
to sign for us, and in our names in the capacities indicated below, any and all
amendments to this annual report on form10-k filed with the securities and
exchange commission.
under the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report
was signed by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the date indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ henry a. mckinnell
(henry a. mckinnell)
chairman of the board and
chief executive officer
and director (principal
executive officer)
march27, 2003
/s/ david l. shedlarz
(david l. shedlarz)
executive vice president
and chief financial
officer (principal
financial officer)
march27, 2003
/s/ loretta v. cangialosi
(loretta v. cangialosi)
vice president
controller (principal
accounting officer)
march27, 2003
/s/ michael s. brown
(michael s. brown)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ m. anthony burns
(m. anthony burns)
director
march27, 2003
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ robert n. burt
(robert n. burt)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ w. don cornwell
(w. don cornwell)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ william h. gray iii
(william h. gray iii)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ constance j. horner
(constance j. horner)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ william r. howell
(william r. howell)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ stanley o. ikenberry
(stanley o. ikenberry)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ harry p. kamen
(harry p. kamen)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ george a. lorch
(george a. lorch)
director
march27, 2003
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ dana g. mead
(dana g. mead)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ franklin d. raines
(franklin d. raines)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ ruth j. simmons
(ruth j. simmons)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ william c. steere, jr.
(william c. steere, jr.)
director
march27, 2003
/s/ jean-paul valls
(jean-paul valls)
director
march27, 2003
certifications pursuant
to
section 302 of
the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
certification by chief executive officer
i, henry a. mckinnell, certify that:
1.
i have reviewed this annual report on form10-k of pfizer inc.;
2.
based on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary
to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which
such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this annual report;
3.
based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this annual report, fairly present in all
material respects the financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in
this annual report;
table of contents
4.
the registrants other certifying officers and i are responsible for
establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in exchange act rules13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and
have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report
is being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure
controls and procedures as of a date within 90days prior to the
filing date of this annual report (the evaluation date); and
c)
presented in this annual report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on our
evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrants other certifying officers and i have disclosed,
based on our most recent evaluation, to the registrants auditors and
the audit committee of registrants board of directors (or persons
performing the equivalent functions):
a)
all significant deficiencies in the design or operation of
internal controls which could adversely affect the registrants
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial data and
have identified for the registrants auditors any material weaknesses
in internal controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or
other employees who have a significant role in the registrants
internal controls; and
6.
the registrants other certifying officers and i have indicated in
this annual report whether or not there were significant changes in
internal controls or in other factors that could significantly affect
internal controls subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation,
including any corrective actions with regard to significant deficiencies
and material weaknesses.
date: march27, 2003
/s/ henry a. mckinnell
henry a. mckinnell
chairman of the board
and chief executive officer
certification by chief financial officer
i, david l. shedlarz, certify that:
1.
i have reviewed this annual report on form10-k of pfizer inc.;
2.
based on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary
to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which
such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this annual report;
3.
based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this annual report, fairly present in all
material respects the financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in
this annual report;
table of contents
4.
the registrants other certifying officers and i are responsible for
establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in exchange act rules13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and
have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report
is being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure
controls and procedures as of a date within 90days prior to the
filing date of this annual report (the evaluation date); and
c)
presented in this annual report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on our
evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrants other certifying officers and i have disclosed,
based on our most recent evaluation, to the registrants auditors and
the audit committee of registrants board of directors (or persons
performing the equivalent functions):
a)
all significant deficiencies in the design or operation of
internal controls which could adversely affect the registrants
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial data and
have identified for the registrants auditors any material weaknesses
in internal controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or
other employees who have a significant role in the registrants
internal controls; and
6.
the registrants other certifying officers and i have indicated in
this annual report whether or not there were significant changes in
internal controls or in other factors that could significantly affect
internal controls subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation,
including any corrective actions with regard to significant deficiencies
and material weaknesses.
date: march27, 2003
/s/ david l. shedlarz
david l. shedlarz
executive vice president and
and chief financial officer
