10-k
y94722e10vk.htm
pfizer, inc.
pfizer, inc.
table of contents
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10 - k
(mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003
o
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from to
commission file number 1-3619
pfizer inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
13-5315170
(i.r.s. employer
identification number)
235 east 42nd street
new york, new york
(address of principal executive offices)
10017-5755
(zip code)
(212)573-2323
(registrants telephone number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange
on which registered
common stock, $.05 par value
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:
none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90days.
yes x
no o
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item
405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to
the best of registrants knowledge, in the definitive proxy or information
statement incorporated by reference in part iii of this form10-k or any
amendment to this form10-k. o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer.
yes x
no o
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of
the registrant, computed by reference to the closing price as of the last
business day of the registrants most recently completed second fiscal quarter,
june27, 2003, was approximately $243billion. the registrant has no non-voting
common stock.
the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrants classes of
common stock as of february27, 2004 was 7,625,056,017 shares of common stock,
all of one class.
documents incorporated by reference
portions of the 2003 annual report to shareholders
parts i, ii and iv
portions of the proxy statement for the 2004 annual meeting of shareholders
parts i and iii
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
general
pfizer website
business segments
pharmaceutical segment
consumer healthcare segment
animal health segment
research and product development
international operations
marketing
patents and intellectual property rights
competition
raw materials
government regulation and price constraints
environmental law compliance
tax matters
employees
cautionary factors that may affect future results
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the company
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a. controls and procedures
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
item 14. principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
signatures
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
portions of the 2003 financial report
subsidiaries of the company
consent of kpmg llp
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
consent of deloitte & touche llp
section 302 certification of the ceo
section 302 certification of the cfo
section 906 certification of the ceo
section 906 certification of the cfo
table of contents
table of contents
page
part i
item 1. business
general
pfizer website
business segments
pharmaceutical segment
consumer healthcare segment
animal health segment
research and product development
international operations
marketing
patents and intellectual property rights
competition
raw materials
government regulation and price constraints
environmental law compliance
tax matters
employees
cautionary factors that may affect future results
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the company
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of
equity securities
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting
and financial disclosure
item 9a. controls and procedures
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
item 14. principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
15(a)(1) financial statements
15(a)(2) financial statement schedules
15(a)(3) exhibits
15(b) reports on form8-k
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
general
pfizer inc. (which may be referred to as pfizer, the company, we, us or
our) is a research-based, global pharmaceutical company. we discover, develop,
manufacture and market leading prescription medicines for humans and animals as
well as many of the worlds best-known consumer healthcare products.
the company was incorporated under the laws of the state of delaware on
june2, 1942.
we acquired warner-lambert company (warner-lambert) on june19, 2000. the
acquisition was accounted for as a pooling of interests. in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles in the u.s. (gaap), we restated all
consolidated financial statements of pfizer for periods prior to the
acquisition to include the results of operations and financial position of
warner-lambert as if we had always been merged.
we acquired pharmacia corporation (pharmacia) on april16, 2003. the
acquisition was accounted for as a purchase. in accordance with gaap, we did
not restate our results of operations and financial position to reflect the
historical results of operations and financial position of pharmacia.
we completed the acquisition of esperion therapeutics, inc. on february
10, 2004, for $1.3billion in cash. the acquisition is being accounted for as a
purchase. esperion is a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of
high density lipoprotein (hdl)-targeted (good cholesterol) therapies for the
treatment of cardiovascular disease.
pfizer website
our annual report on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q, current
reports on form8-k and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant
to section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 are available
on our website (www.pfizer.com under the who we are - for investors - sec
filings by pfizer captions) as soon as reasonably practicable after we
electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the securities and
exchange commission (sec).
throughout this 2003 form10-k, we incorporate by reference certain
information from parts of other documents filed with the sec, including our
annual report to shareholders for 2003 and our proxy statement for the 2004
annual meeting of shareholders. the sec allows us to disclose important
information by referring to it in that manner. please refer to such
information. this year, our annual report to shareholders consists of two
booklets: the 2003 annual review (2003 annual review) and the 2003 financial
report (2003 financial report). portions of our 2003 financial report are filed
as exhibit 13 to this 2003 form10-k. on or about march12, 2004, our 2003
annual review, 2003 financial report and proxy statement for the 2004 annual
meeting of shareholders will be available on our website (www.pfizer.com); the
2003 annual review and 2003 financial report will be set forth under the who
we are - for investors - financial reports captions, and the proxy statement
will be set forth under the who we are - for investors - sec filings by
pfizer captions.
information relating to corporate governance at pfizer, including our
corporate governance principles; director qualification standards; chief
executive officer and chief financial officer certifications; standards of
business ethics and conduct for all of our employees, including our chief
executive officer, chief financial officer and principal accounting officer;
code of business conduct and ethics for our directors; and information
concerning our directors, e-mail communication with our directors, board
committees, including committee charters, and transactions in pfizer securities
by directors and officers, is available on our website at www.pfizer.com under
the who we are - for investors - corporate governance captions. we will
provide any of the foregoing information without charge upon written request to
margaret m. foran, vice president-corporate governance and secretary, pfizer
inc., 235 east 42nd street, new york, ny 10017-5755. information relating to shareholder services,
including our shareholder
table of contents
investment program, book-entry share ownership and
direct deposit of dividends, is available on our website at www.pfizer.com
under the who we are - for investors - shareholder services captions.
business segments
we operate in three business segments: pharmaceutical, consumer healthcare
and animal health. in prior years, we had two business segments:
pharmaceutical, consisting principally of our human pharmaceutical and animal
health businesses, and consumer products. we have restated our segment
information for prior years to conform to the current segment structure.
we also operate several other businesses, including the manufacture of
empty soft-gelatin capsules, contract manufacturing, bulk pharmaceutical
chemicals and diagnostics. due to the size of these businesses, they are
grouped in and their results and assets are included in the corporate/other
category of our segment information. on january19, 2004, we announced that we
have agreed to sell for $575million in cash our in-vitro allergy and
autoimmune diagnostic testing business, which we acquired as part of pharmacia
in april 2003. this sale is subject to regulatory approvals and is expected to
close in the first half of 2004.
comparative segment revenues, profits and related financial information
for 2003, 2002 and 2001 are presented in the table captioned segment in note 21
to our consolidated financial statements, segment, geographic and revenue
information, on page 52 of our 2003 financial report. tables captioned
percentage change in revenues and percentage change in geographic revenues on
page 7 of our 2003 financial report present additional segment information. the
information from those sections of our 2003 financial report is incorporated by
reference in this 2003 form10-k.
our businesses are heavily regulated in most of the countries where we
operate. in the u.s., the principal authority regulating our operations is the
food and drug administration (fda). the fda regulates the safety and efficacy
of the products we offer, our research quality, our manufacturing processes and
our promotion and advertising. similar regulations exist in most other
countries, and in many countries the government also regulates our prices. see
government regulation and price constraints below.
pharmaceutical segment
our pharmaceutical business is the largest in the world. this segment
includes treatments for cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, central nervous
system disorders, arthritis and pain, infectious and respiratory diseases,
urogenital conditions, cancer, eye disease, endocrine disorders and allergies.
in 2003, pharmaceutical revenues increased 40%, to $39.6billion, due in large
part to the inclusion of legacy pharmacia products as well as strong
performances by many legacy pfizer products and the favorable impact of foreign
exchange. revenues from this segment contributed 88% of our total revenues in
2003 and 87% in each of 2002 and 2001. we recorded product sales of more than
$1billion for each of nine pharmaceutical products in 2003. those nine
products - lipitor, norvasc, zoloft, neurontin, zithromax, celebrex, viagra,
zyrtec and diflucan - represented 70% of pharmaceutical revenues in 2003. in
addition, in 2003, xalatan/xalcom became the first ophthalmic medicine to
achieve $1billion in annual sales (including 2003 sales prior to our
acquisition of pharmacia in april). a table captioned revenues - major
pharmaceutical products on page 7 of our 2003 financial report is incorporated
by reference.
our principal pharmaceutical products and certain recently approved
products are as follows:
cardiovascular and metabolic diseases
lipitor, our largest-selling product, is for the
treatment of elevated cholesterol in the bloodstream.
it is the most-prescribed medicine of any kind in the
world.
norvasc is for the treatment of hypertension (high
blood pressure) and angina (heart pain). it is the
worlds most-prescribed branded medicine for the
treatment of hypertension and angina and the fourth-largest selling drug of any kind in the world.
caduet, a dual therapy medicine, was approved by the
fda on january30, 2004. caduet contains lipitor for
the treatment of
table of contents
high cholesterol and norvasc for the
treatment of high blood pressure. we submitted an
application in the european union (eu)for caduet in
december 2003.
accupril/accuretic is an angiotensin converting
enzyme (ace)inhibitor for the treatment of
hypertension and congestive heart failure.
cardura is for the treatment of hypertension and
benign prostatic hyperplasia (enlarged prostate
gland).
glucotrol xl is for the treatment of diabetes. it is
an oral medicine that stimulates the pancreas to
produce more insulin.
inspra, for the treatment of congestive heart failure
in patients who have had a heart attack, was approved
by the fda in october 2003. the product was launched
for this indication in the u.s. in january 2004. a
filing for this indication was submitted in the eu in
july 2003.
central nervous system disorders
zoloft is the most-prescribed selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitor in the u.s. it is for the
treatment of depression, panic disorder,
obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults and children,
post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd), premenstrual
dysphoric disorder (pmdd)and social anxiety disorder
(sad). zoloft is approved for acute and long-term use
in all of these indications except pmdd and is the
only approved drug for the long-term treatment of
ptsd and sad.
neurontin is a leading epilepsy medicine, approved as
an add-on therapy with other anti-epileptic
medications to treat partial seizures in patients
over three years of age. it also is approved in more
than 60 markets for the treatment of a range of
neuropathic pain conditions. in addition, neurontin
is the first oral medication approved in the u.s. for
the treatment of post-herpetic neuralgia, a
persistent, painful condition that afflicts many
people in the aftermath of shingles.
geodon, which is marketed under the trademark zeldox
in many countries outside the u.s., is for the
treatment of symptoms associated with schizophrenia.
it has been approved in 64 countries and launched in
the u.s., germany, spain, brazil and other major
markets. it is the first and only atypical
antipsychotic available in both an oral and a
rapid-acting, intramuscular dosage form.
aricept, discovered and developed by eisai co., ltd.,
is the worlds leading medicine to treat symptoms of
alzheimers disease. we copromote aricept with eisai
in the u.s. and several other countries and have an
exclusive license to sell the drug in certain other
countries.
xanax is for the treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder and panic disorder. xanax xr, an
extended-release formulation of the drug, is a
rapid-acting, once-a-day medication approved for
treating panic disorder. xanax xr was approved by the
fda and launched in the u.s. in 2003.
relpax is an oral treatment for acute migraine
headaches. it has been launched in more than 25
countries, including the u.s., where it was launched
in march 2003, japan and throughout europe.
rebif, discovered and developed by serono s.a., is
for the treatment of relapsing forms of multiple
sclerosis. we copromote rebif with serono in the u.s.
arthritis and pain
celebrex is for the treatment of osteoarthritis,
rheumatoid arthritis, acute pain and menstrual pain.
it also is approved in the u.s. and the eu for the
treatment of familial adenomatous polyposis. celebrex
has the broadest range of approved indications of any
selective cox-2 inhibitor and is the most-prescribed
arthritis brand in the u.s.
bextra is for the treatment of osteoarthritis,
rheumatoid arthritis and menstrual pain. it was
launched in the u.s. in 2002 and in the eu in
2003 and also has been launched in canada and most of latin america.
table of contents
infectious and respiratory diseases
zithromax is the largest-selling antibiotic in the
world. it is the only available single-dose treatment
for middle ear infection in the u.s., and the
zithromax tri-pak dosage form is the first and only
three-day regimen for the treatment of acute
bacterial exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. on january20, 2004, we announced
that the fda has approved zithromax as a once-daily,
three-day treatment for acute bacterial sinusitis.
zithromax is licensed to us exclusively by pliva, a
croatian pharmaceutical company.
diflucan is the worlds leading systemic antifungal.
it is used to treat various fungal infections,
including vaginal infections and certain infections
that afflict hiv/aids and cancer patients with
weakened immune systems. diflucan lost patent
protection in japan and much of europe in 2003, and
the u.s. basic patent for diflucan expired in january
2004. the fda has granted us pediatric exclusivity
with respect to diflucan, which extends our marketing
exclusivity for six months after the patent
expiration date, through july29, 2004. the fdas
grant of pediatric exclusivity is the subject of a
pending legal challenge. see item3, legal
proceedings, below.
viracept is a protease inhibitor, used in combination
with other antiretroviral drugs for the treatment of
hiv/aids infections. we market viracept in the u.s.
and canada.
vfend is a treatment that can be administered orally
or intravenously for certain serious and potentially
fatal fungal infections. vfend was launched in the
u.s. and europe in 2002 and has now been launched in
37 countries. in november 2003, vfend was approved by
the fda for the treatment of esophageal candidiasis,
and, in december 2003, it was approved by the fda in
an oral-suspension formulation suitable for patients
unable to swallow the tablet form.
zyvox is for the treatment of serious gram-positive
infections in adults and children, which increasingly
are caused by drug-resistant bacteria. in july 2003,
the fda approved zyvox for the treatment of diabetic
foot infections. zyvox is available in intravenous,
tablet and oral-suspension formulations.
spiriva is for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (copd), a chronic respiratory
disorder that includes chronic bronchitis and
emphysema. we copromote spiriva with boehringer
ingelheim, which discovered and developed the drug.
spiriva has been launched in more than 40 countries,
including canada and several european countries. on
january30, 2004, the fda approved spiriva
handihaler, an inhaled treatment for the long-term,
once-daily maintenance treatment of bronchospasm
associated with copd.
urogenital conditions
viagra is for the treatment of erectile dysfunction.
it is the most-prescribed medicine in the world for
the treatment of this condition.
detrol is the worlds leading product for the
treatment of overactive bladder. detrol la is an
extended-release formulation of the drug, taken once
a day.
cancer
camptosar is one of the leading treatments for
colorectal cancer.
ellence and aromasin are for the treatment of breast
cancer.
eye disease
xalatan is the most-prescribed glaucoma medicine in
the u.s., europe and japan. it is for the treatment
of open-angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension.
xalcom consists of xalatan with the beta blocker
timolol. in 2003, xalatan/xalcom became the first
ophthalmic medicine to achieve $1billion in annual
sales (including 2003 sales prior to our acquisition
of pharmacia in april).
on july24, 2003, we announced that we are exploring
strategic options for our surgical
ophthalmology business, including its possible sale. we acquired this business
as part of pharmacia in april 2003.
table of contents
endocrine disorders
genotropin is the worlds leading human recombinant
growth hormone. it is for the treatment of various
growth disorders in children and adults. novo nordisk
has granted us a non-exclusive license to sell
genotropin in the u.s.
allergies
zyrtec is for the treatment of year-round indoor and
seasonal outdoor allergies and hives. it is indicated
for use in children as young as six months old.
zyrtec is the leading branded antihistamine in the
u.s. in new prescriptions and the only prescription
antihistamine available in a syrup formulation.
zyrtec-d 12 hour is the only prescription oral
antihistamine/decongestant combination medicine
approved to treat both year-round indoor and outdoor
allergies as well as nasal congestion. zyrtec is
licensed to us by the belgian company ucb s.a. we
copromote zyrtec as a prescription medicine in the
u.s. with a subsidiary of ucb s.a., and we have a
license to sell zyrtec under various trade names as
an over-the-counter (otc)medicine in canada, europe,
australia and south africa.
other disorders
medrol is used to treat hospitalized patients for
chronic inflammation disorders, including arthritis
and asthma.
consumer healthcare segment
our consumer healthcare business is one of the largest in the world. we
market many of the worlds best-known otc medications for oral care, upper
respiratory health, tobacco dependence, gastrointestinal health, skin care, eye
care and hair growth.
in 2003, consumer healthcare revenues increased 20%, to $3billion,
primarily due to the inclusion of legacy pharmacia products as well as the
strong performance of listerine mouthwash and the favorable impact of foreign
exchange. revenues from this segment contributed 7% of our total revenues in
2003 and 8% in each of 2002 and 2001.
consumer healthcares principal products include:
listerine mouthwash
listerine pocketpaks oral care strips
nicorette for tobacco dependence
benadryl antihistamine for allergies
sudafed for sinus congestion
rogaine for hair growth
zantac 75 for prevention and relief of heartburn
rolaids antacid tablets
efferdent denture cleaner
neosporin antibiotic ointment
visine eye drops
bengay topical analgesic
cortizone skin care products
lubriderm moisturizing lotions
unisom sleep aids
desitin ointments for treatment of diaper
rash
ludens throat drops
consumer healthcare can extend the life of some of our prescription
medications by converting them to otc medications. for example, nicorette,
benadryl, sudafed and zantac 75 were all previously prescription products. as
market conditions permit, and when we have necessary approval from drug
regulatory authorities, we plan to pursue similar launches for other products.
animal health segment
our animal health business is the largest in the world. we discover,
develop and sell products for the prevention and treatment of diseases in
livestock and companion animals. in 2003, animal health revenues increased 43%,
to $1.6billion, mainly due to the inclusion of legacy pharmacia products as
well as strong performances by many legacy pfizer products and the favorable
impact of foreign exchange. revenues from this segment contributed 3.5% of our
total revenues in each of 2003, 2002 and 2001.
among the products we market are parasiticides, anti-inflammatories,
vaccines, antibiotics and related medicines, including the products discussed
below.
table of contents
parasiticides constitute the largest segment of the animal health market
for companion animals, consisting mainly of medicines for the control of
parasites such as fleas and heartworm. our product, revolution, is our
largest-selling parasiticide for companion animals.
rimadyl relieves pain and inflammation associated with canine
osteoarthritis and soft tissue orthopedic surgery. rimadyl is the only
arthritis pain medication prescribed by veterinarians available in chewable
tablets and regular caplets and in an injectable formulation.
clavamox/synulox is an antibiotic for dogs and cats.
our vaccine portfolio for livestock is extensive and includes
respisureone/stellamuneone, a single-dose vaccine used to prevent pneumonia in
swine, and bovi-shield gold, a reproductive and respiratory cattle vaccine.
dectomax injectable and pour-on formulations remove and control internal
and external parasites in beef cattle.
naxcel/excenel rtu is an antibiotic used to treat respiratory and internal
infections in cattle and swine.
on december15, 2003, we announced that animal health has agreed to
acquire csl animal health, a division of csl limited of melbourne, australia,
for $126million. this acquisition, which is subject to regulatory approvals
and is expected to close in the first quarter of 2004, will enhance our
presence in australias animal health marketplace.
research and product development
innovation by our research and development operations is very important to
the companys success. our goal is to discover, develop and bring to market
innovative products that address major unmet medical needs. this goal has been
supported by our substantial research and development investments. we spent
$7.1billion in 2003, $5.2billion in 2002 and $4.8billion in 2001 on research
and development.
we conduct research internally and also through contracts with third
parties, through collaborations with universities and biotechnology companies
and in cooperation with other pharmaceutical firms. we also seek out innovative
technologies developed by third parties to incorporate into our discovery or
development processes or projects as well as our product lines through
acquisition or through licensing or other arrangements.
drug discovery and development is time consuming, expensive and
unpredictable. on average, only one out of many thousands of chemical compounds
discovered by researchers proves to be both medically effective and safe enough
to become an approved medicine. the process from early discovery to development
to regulatory approval can take more than ten years. drug candidates can fail
at any stage of the process. candidates may not receive regulatory approval
even after many years of research.
we believe that our investments in research have been rewarded by the
number of pharmaceutical compounds we have in all stages of development. we
currently are working on approximately 225 projects in development, including
approximately 130 new molecular entities and 95 product-line extensions. in
addition, we have more than 400 projects in discovery research. in recent
years, our discovery scientists have delivered dozens of new chemical compounds
to early development. while these new candidates may or may not eventually
receive regulatory approval, new drug candidates entering development are the
foundation for future products.
in addition to discovering and developing new products, our research
operations add value to our existing products by improving their effectiveness
and by discovering new uses for them. in 2003, for example, the fda approved
the additional use of zoloft for the treatment of social anxiety disorder.
information concerning several of our drug candidates in development as
well as supplemental filings for existing products is set forth under the
heading product developments on pages 10
through 12 of our 2003 financial report. that information is incorporated
by reference.
our competitors also devote substantial funds and resources to research
and development. in addition, the consolidation that has occurred in our
industry has created companies with substantial
table of contents
research and development
resources. the extent to which our competitors are successful in their research
could result in erosion of the sales of our products and unanticipated product
obsolescence.
international operations
we have significant operations outside the united states. they are
conducted both through our subsidiaries and through distributors, and involve
the same business segments - pharmaceutical, consumer healthcare and animal
health - as our u.s. operations.
revenues from operations outside the u.s. of $18.3billion accounted for
40.6% of our total revenues in 2003. revenues exceeded $500million in each of
ten countries outside the u.s. in 2003. the u.s. was the only country to
contribute more than 10% of our total revenues. japan is our second-largest
national market, with 5.9% of our revenues in 2003, 6.1% of our revenues in
2002 and 6.2% of our revenues in 2001.
for a geographic breakdown of revenues and changes in revenues, see the
table captioned geographic in note 21 to our consolidated financial statements,
segment, geographic and revenue information, on page 52 of our 2003 financial
report and the table captioned percentage change in geographic revenues on page
7 of our 2003 financial report. those tables are incorporated by reference.
our international businesses are subject, in varying degrees, to a number
of risks inherent in carrying on business in other countries. these include
currency fluctuations; capital and exchange control regulations; expropriation
and nationalization; and other restrictive government actions. our
international businesses are also subject to government-imposed constraints,
including laws on pricing or reimbursement for use of products. see government
regulation and price constraints below for discussion of these matters.
depending on the direction of change relative to the u.s. dollar, foreign
currency values can increase or reduce the reported dollar value of our net
assets and results of operations. in 2003, revenues were favorably impacted by
foreign exchange, as currency movements relative to the u.s. dollar increased
our reported revenues in many countries. while we cannot predict with certainty
future changes in foreign exchange rates or the effect they will have on us, we
attempt to mitigate their impact through operational means and by using various
financial instruments. see the discussion under note 5-d to our consolidated
financial statements, derivative financial instruments and hedging activities,
on pages 35 through 37 of our 2003 financial report. that discussion is
incorporated by reference. related information about valuation and risks
associated with such financial instruments in parts e and f of that same note
is also incorporated by reference.
marketing
in our global pharmaceutical business, we promote our products to health
care providers such as doctors, nurse practitioners, physician assistants,
pharmacists, hospitals, pharmacy benefit managers (pbms), managed care
organizations (mcos) and government agencies. through our marketing
organizations, we explain the approved uses and advantages of our products to
health care providers. we also market directly to consumers in the u.s. through
direct-to-consumer print and television advertising. in addition, we sponsor
general advertising to educate the public about our innovative medical
research.
our operations include several pharmaceutical sales organizations. each
sales organization markets a distinct group of products. our prescription
pharmaceutical products are sold principally to wholesalers, but we also sell
directly to retailers, hospitals, clinics, government agencies and pharmacies.
we seek to gain access to health authority, pbm and mco formularies (lists
of recommended or approved medicines and other products) and reimbursement
lists by demonstrating the qualities
and treatment benefits of our products. we also work with mcos and pbms to
assist them with disease management, patient education and other tools that
help their medical treatment routines. for example, we sponsor a program
offered by the state of florida agency for health care administration that is
designed to help manage chronic diseases among floridas medicaid population.
table of contents
our consumer healthcare business primarily uses its own representatives to
directly promote its products, including marketing certain products directly to
professionals using a professional detail force. we also use print and
television consumer advertising and offer sales incentives such as coupons. our
consumer products are sold through various retailers.
our animal health business also uses its own sales organization to promote
its products. its advertising and promotion are generally targeted to health
professionals, directly and through medical journals. animal health and
nutrition products are sold through veterinarians, drug wholesalers,
distributors and retail outlets as well as directly to users. where
appropriate, these products are also marketed through print and television
advertising.
during 2003, sales to our three largest customers were as follows:
mckesson, inc. - 18.4% of our total revenues;
cardinal health, inc. - 14.1% of our total revenues; and
amerisourcebergen corporation - 12.0% of our total revenues.
sales to these wholesalers were concentrated in the pharmaceutical segment.
apart from these instances, none of our business segments is dependent on any
one customer or group of related customers.
patents and intellectual property rights
our products are sold around the world under brand-name, logo and certain
product design trademarks that we consider in the aggregate to be of material
importance. trademark protection continues in some countries for as long as the
mark is used and, in other countries, for as long as it is registered.
registrations generally are for fixed, but renewable, terms.
we own or license a number of u.s. and foreign patents. these patents
cover pharmaceutical and other products and their uses; pharmaceutical
formulations; product manufacturing processes; and intermediate chemical
compounds used in manufacturing.
patents for individual products extend for varying periods according to
the date of patent filing or grant and the legal term of patents in the various
countries where patent protection is obtained. the actual protection afforded
by a patent, which can vary from country to country, depends upon the type of
patent, the scope of its coverage and the availability of legal remedies in the
country.
in the aggregate, our patent and related rights are of material importance
to our businesses in the u.s. and most other countries. based on current
product sales, and considering the vigorous competition with products sold by
others, the patent rights we consider significant in relation to our business
as a whole, together with the year in which the u.s. basic product patent
expires (including, where applicable, the additional six-month pediatric
exclusivity period), are those for the following drugs:
u.s. basic
product patent
drug
expiration year
zithromax
zoloft
norvasc
zyrtec
aricept
lipitor
xalatan
see below
viagra
detrol
celebrex
bextra
genotropin
neurontin
see below
in some instances, there are later-expiring patents relating to our
products directed to particular forms or compositions of the drug or to methods
of manufacturing or using the drug in the treatment of further diseases or
conditions. such patents may not protect the companys drug from generic drug
competition after the expiration of the basic product patent.
table of contents
while the u.s. basic product patent relating to accupril expired in 2003,
we have patents on particular formulations containing quinapril until 2007. the
u.s. basic product patent relating to diflucan expired in january 2004. the fda
has granted us pediatric exclusivity with respect to diflucan, which extends
our marketing exclusivity for six months after the patent expiration date,
through july29, 2004. the fdas grant of pediatric exclusivity is the subject
of a pending legal challenge. see item3, legal proceedings, below.
zithromax is patented by pliva, a croatian pharmaceutical company. the
drug is licensed exclusively to us by pliva for sales and marketing in major
countries, and we purchase the compound in bulk crude form from pliva.
zyrtec is patented by the belgian company ucb s.a. and is licensed to us
for sales in the u.s., canada, europe, australia and south africa. we copromote
zyrtec as a prescription medicine in the u.s. with a subsidiary of ucb s.a. and
have a license to sell zyrtec under various trade names as an otc medicine in
the other markets.
aricept is patented by eisai co., ltd. we copromote aricept with eisai in
the u.s. and several other countries and have an exclusive license to sell the
drug in certain other countries.
xalatan is not protected by a basic product patent. however, we have
broadly patented ophthalmic formulations containing lantanoprost until 2011.
genotropin is patented by novo nordisk, which has granted us a
non-exclusive license to sell the drug in the u.s.
the u.s. basic product patent relating to neurontin expired in 1994.
however, in april 2000, a u.s. patent was granted relating to stable
pharmaceutical compositions of neurontin containing low levels of lactam
impurity. this patent expires in 2017. see item3, legal proceedings, below,
regarding the approval by the fda of products that we believe infringe this
patent.
other companies have filed applications with the fda seeking approval of
products that we believe infringe our patents covering, among other products,
lipitor, norvasc, celebrex, xalatan and detrol. separately, we are defendants
in an action alleging patent infringement with respect to our sales of celebrex
and bextra. see item3, legal proceedings, below.
we have other patent rights covering additional products that have lesser
revenues.
the expiration of a basic product patent or loss of patent protection
resulting from a legal challenge normally results in significant competition
from generic products against the covered product and can result in a
significant reduction in sales of the pioneer product in a very short period.
in some cases, however, we can continue to obtain commercial benefits from
product manufacturing trade secrets; patents on uses for products; patents on
processes and intermediates for the economical manufacture of the active
ingredients; patents for special formulations of the product or delivery
mechanisms; and conversion of the active ingredient to otc products.
one of the main limitations on our operations in some countries outside
the u.s. is the lack of effective intellectual property protection of our
products. under international agreements in recent years, global protection of
intellectual property rights is improving. the general agreement on tariffs and
trade requires participant countries to amend their intellectual property laws
to provide patent protection for pharmaceutical products by the end of a
ten-year transition period. a number of countries are doing this. we have
experienced significant growth in our businesses in some of those nations, and
our continued business expansion in those countries depends to a large degree
on further patent protection improvement.
competition
competition is intense in all of our businesses and includes many large
and small competitors. the principal means of competition vary among product
categories and business groups. however, efficacy, safety, patients and
customers ease of use and cost effectiveness are important factors for success
in all of our principal businesses.
our human pharmaceutical business is the largest in the world. we compete
with other worldwide research-based drug companies, many smaller research
companies with more limited therapeutic focus and generic drug manufacturers.
table of contents
we focus on unmet medical needs and therapeutic improvements. our emphasis
on innovation has led to our multi-billion-dollar research and development
investments over the past decade.
in recent years, a comparison of the total cost of medical treatments
using pharmaceuticals versus alternative treatments for the same condition has
become an important basis of competition. mcos and pbms look to cost advantages
as well as medical benefits in making their drug formulary decisions.
our pharmaceutical sales and marketing organization is a valuable
competitive asset. our salespeoples ability to reach medical professionals
with information about our products helps us respond to competitive efforts and
launch new products.
our consumer healthcare business is one of the largest in the world.
however, many other companies, large and small, manufacture and sell one or
more products that are similar to our consumer healthcare products. sources of
competitive advantage include product quality and efficacy, brand identity,
advertising and promotion, product innovation, broad distribution capabilities
and price. significant expenditures for advertising, promotion and marketing
are generally required to achieve and maintain both consumer and trade
acceptance of consumer products.
while our animal health business is the largest in the world, many other
companies offer competitive products. altogether, there are hundreds of
producers of animal health products throughout the world. the principal methods
of competition vary somewhat depending on the particular product. they include
product innovation, quality, service, effective promotion to veterinary
professionals and consumers and price. we promote our products directly through
our sales representatives as well as through advertising.
managed care organizations
the growth of mcos in the u.s. has been a major factor in the competitive
make-up of the health care marketplace. a substantial portion of the u.s.
population now participates in some version of managed care. because of the
size of the patient population covered by mcos, marketing of prescription drugs
to them and the pbms that serve many of those organizations has become
important to our business.
mcos can include medical insurance companies, medical plan administrators,
health-maintenance organizations, alliances of hospitals and physicians and
other physician organizations. the purchasing power of mcos has been increasing
in recent years due to their growing numbers of enrolled patients. at the same
time, those organizations have been consolidating into fewer, even larger
entities. this enhances their purchasing strength and importance to us.
the growth of mcos has increased pressure on drug prices. a major
objective of mcos is to contain and, where possible, reduce health care
expenditures. they typically use formularies, volume purchases and long-term
contracts to negotiate discounts from pharmaceutical providers. they use their
purchasing power to bargain for lower supplier prices. they also emphasize
primary and preventive care, out-patient treatment and procedures performed at
doctors offices and clinics. hospitalization and surgery, typically the most
expensive forms of treatment, are carefully managed. since the use of certain
drugs can prevent the need for hospitalization, professional therapy or even
surgery, such drugs can become favored first-line treatments for certain
diseases.
as discussed above in marketing, mcos and pbms typically develop
formularies to reduce their cost for medications. formularies can be based on
the prices and therapeutic benefits of the available products. due to their
generally lower
cost, generic medicines are often favored. the breadth of the products
covered by formularies can vary considerably from one mco to another, and many
formularies include alternative and competitive products for treatment of
particular medical problems. mcos use a variety of means to encourage patients
use of products listed on their formularies.
exclusion of a product from a formulary can lead to its sharply reduced
usage in the mco patient population. consequently, pharmaceutical companies
compete aggressively to have their products included. where possible, companies
table of contents
compete for inclusion based upon unique features of their products, such as
greater efficacy, better patient ease of use or fewer side effects. a lower
overall cost of therapy is also an important factor. products that demonstrate
fewer therapeutic advantages must compete for inclusion based primarily on
price. we have been generally, although not universally, successful in having
our major products included on mco formularies.
the impact of mcos on drug prices and volumes may increase as the result
of their role in negotiating on behalf of medicare beneficiaries in connection
with the recently enacted, limited out-patient drug benefit under medicare, as
discussed below under government regulation and price constraints.
another way we address the interests of mcos is by developing
disease-management programs. these programs can be attractive to mcos by
improving patient communications and compliance with dosage directions, which
are important for effective disease treatment. they can help mcos address
various aspects of disease management, such as prevention, diagnosis and
treatment of certain diseases, including use of pharmaceutical products. this
comprehensive approach can improve the quality of care and lower costly
complications of chronic diseases. as noted above in marketing, one such
program, which is sponsored by us and offered by the state of florida agency
for health care administration, is designed to help manage chronic diseases
among floridas medicaid population.
generic products
one of the biggest competitive challenges that we face in the u.s. and
that is growing internationally is from generic pharmaceutical manufacturers.
upon the expiration or loss of patent protection for a product, we can lose the
major portion of sales of that product in a very short period. generic
competitors operate without our large research and development expenses and our
costs of conveying medical information about the product to the medical
community. in addition, the fda approval process exempts generics from costly
and time-consuming clinical trials to demonstrate their safety and efficacy,
and allows generic manufacturers to rely on the safety and efficacy of the
pioneer product. generic products need only demonstrate a level of availability
in the bloodstream equivalent to that of the pioneer product. this means that,
after we have borne the expenses of discovering, developing and testing a
medicine for safety and efficacy, obtaining regulatory approval and informing
the medical community about its therapeutic benefits, generic competitors can
market a competing version of our product after the expiration or loss of our
patent and charge much less.
as noted above, mcos that focus primarily on the immediate cost of drugs
often favor generics over brand-name drugs. many governments also encourage the
use of generics as alternatives to brand-name drugs in their health care
programs, including medicaid in the u.s. laws in the u.s. generally allow, and
in some cases require, pharmacists to substitute generic drugs that have been
rated under government procedures to be therapeutically equivalent to a
brand-name drug. the substitution must be made unless the prescribing physician
expressly forbids it.
raw materials
raw materials essential to our businesses are purchased worldwide in the
ordinary course of business from numerous suppliers. in general, these
materials are available from multiple sources. no serious shortages or delays
were encountered in 2003, and none are expected in 2004.
government regulation and price constraints
in the united states
general. pharmaceutical companies are subject to extensive regulation by
national, state and local agencies in the countries in which they do business.
of particular importance is the fda in the u.s. it has jurisdiction over our
human pharmaceutical business and administers requirements covering the
testing, safety, effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling, marketing, advertising
and post-marketing surveillance of our pharmaceutical products. the fda also
regulates most of our consumer healthcare products and, along with the u.s.
department of agriculture and
table of contents
the u.s. environmental protection agency, our
animal health products.
in addition, we are subject to the jurisdiction of various other federal
regulatory and enforcement departments and agencies, such as the department of
health and human services, the federal trade commission and the department of
justice. individual states, acting through their attorneys general, have become
active as well, seeking to regulate the marketing of prescription drugs under
state consumer protection and false advertising laws.
we are subject to possible administrative and legal proceedings and
actions by these various regulatory bodies (see item3, legal proceedings,
below). such actions may include product recalls, seizures and other civil and
criminal sanctions.
medicare. in december 2003, the medicare prescription drug improvement and
modernization act of 2003 (the 2003 medicare act) was enacted. under this
legislation, medicare beneficiaries will be eligible to obtain a
medicare-endorsed, drug-discount card from an mco, pbm or other private sector
provider beginning in the spring of 2004 and continuing through 2005. then,
beginning in 2006, medicare beneficiaries will be eligible to purchase
prescription drug coverage with limited benefits from a private sector
provider. at this early stage, it is difficult to predict the impact of the
2003 medicare act on pharmaceutical companies. usage of pharmaceuticals may
increase as the result of the expanded access to medicines afforded by the
partial reimbursement under medicare. such potential sales increases, however,
may be offset by increased pricing pressures due to the enhanced purchasing
power of the private sector providers that will negotiate on behalf of medicare
beneficiaries.
in 2002, we implemented the pfizer for living share card program in order
to help address the issue of affordable access to health care for those most in
need. through this program, low-income medicare recipients without prescription
drug coverage can purchase 30-day prescriptions of any pfizer prescription
medicine and of the copromoted product aricept at many retail pharmacies for
$15. we remain committed to this or similar programs until medicare
beneficiaries are eligible to purchase prescription drug coverage beginning in
2006.
importation
of drugs. there is considerable political pressure to allow
the importation into the u.s. of prescription drugs that are manufactured
outside the u.s. and sold at prices that are regulated by the governments of
various foreign countries. in addition to raising safety concerns, such
importation could impact pharmaceutical prices in the u.s. while the 2003
medicare act maintains the current prohibition on such imports, it would allow
importation from canada if the secretary of health and human services certifies
that such importation is safe and would result in savings to consumers. before
the 2003 medicare act, federal law would have permitted importation of
medicines into the u.s. from a considerably larger group of developed
countries, provided the secretary of health and human services made the same
safety and cost-savings certifications.
medicaid
and related matters. in recent years, various proposals have been
offered at the federal and state levels that would bring about major changes in
the medicaid program. driven by budget concerns, some states have implemented
and other states are considering price controls or patient-access constraints
on medicines under the medicaid program. if changes are implemented under the
medicaid program that restrict the access of a significant population of
patients to our innovative medicines, our business could be materially
affected. in addition, some states are considering price-control regimes that
would apply to all of their residents, regardless of
income, as well as various approaches to controlling pharmaceutical
marketing.
u.s. law requires us to give rebates to state medicaid agencies based on
each states reimbursement of pharmaceutical products under the medicaid
program. some states are seeking rebates in excess of the amounts required by
federal law, and there are federal legislative proposals to expand current
medicaid rebates. we also must give discounts or rebates on purchases or
reimbursements of pharmaceutical products by certain other federal and state
agencies and programs. see the discussion regarding rebates on page 9 of our
2003 financial report, which is incorporated by reference.
table of contents
hatch-waxman
act. under the 1984 drug price competition and patent term
restoration act, known as the hatch-waxman act, if a generic drug company files
an abbreviated new drug application with the fda and a research-based drug
company promptly files a lawsuit alleging that the generic product would
infringe one or more of its patents, approval of the abbreviated new drug
application by the fda automatically is stayed for a period of up to 30months
(but not beyond the expiration date of the patents). the 2003 medicare act
includes an amendment to the hatch-waxman act providing that such 30-month
stays apply only to patents that are submitted to the fda before the submission
of an abbreviated new drug application by a generic company. this provision has
the effect of preventing multiple stays when additional patents are issued
after an abbreviated new drug application has been filed. the amendment also
requires that agreements between research-based companies and generic drug
companies relating to either a brand-name drug or a generic drug be filed with
the department of justice and the federal trade commission.
outside the united states
we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other
countries. in europe and some other international markets, the government
provides health care at low direct cost to consumers and regulates
pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for the
government-sponsored health care system. this international patchwork of price
regulation has led to different prices and some third-party trade in our
products from markets with lower prices. such trade exploiting price
differences between countries can undermine our sales in markets with higher
prices.
since 1998, the approval of new drugs across the eu is possible only using
the european medicines evaluation agencys (emea)mutual recognition or central
approval processes. the use of either of these procedures provides a more rapid
and consistent approval within the member states than was the case when the
approval processes were operating independently within each member state.
further, norway and iceland are full participants in the eu central approval
processes. the addition of ten new member states to the eu in may 2004 will
extend the scope of these approval procedures. since the emea does not have
jurisdiction over patient reimbursement or pricing matters in eu member states,
we will continue to deal with individual countries on such issues across the
enlarged eu.
environmental law compliance
most of our manufacturing and certain of our research operations are
affected by federal, state and local environmental laws. we have made, and
intend to continue to make, necessary expenditures for compliance with
applicable laws. we also are cleaning up environmental contamination from past
industrial activity at certain sites (see item3, legal proceedings, below). as
a result, we incurred capital and operational expenditures in 2003 for the
clean-up of certain past industrial activity and for other environmental
protection purposes as follows:
environment-related capital expenditures - $45million
other environment-related expenses - $209million
while we cannot predict with certainty future capital expenditures or
operating costs for environmental compliance, we do not believe they will have
a material effect on our capital expenditures, earnings or competitive
position.
tax matters
the discussion of tax-related matters in note 10 to our consolidated
financial statements, taxes on income, on pages 39 and 40 of our 2003 financial
report is incorporated by reference.
employees
in our innovation-intensive business, our employees are vital to our
success. we believe we have good relationships with our employees. as of
december31, 2003, we employed approximately 122,000 people in our operations
throughout the world.
table of contents
cautionary factors that may affect future results
(cautionary statements under the private securities litigation reform act
of 1995)
our disclosure and analysis in this 2003 form10-k and in our 2003 annual
report to shareholders contain some forward-looking statements that set forth
anticipated results based on managements plans and assumptions. from time to
time, we also provide forward-looking statements in other materials we release
to the public as well as oral forward-looking statements. such statements give
our current expectations or forecasts of future events; they do not relate
strictly to historical or current facts. we have tried, wherever possible, to
identify such statements by using words such as anticipate, estimate,
expect, project, intend, plan, believe, will and similar
expressions in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial
performance. in particular, these include statements relating to future
actions, prospective products or product approvals, future performance or
results of current and anticipated products, sales efforts, expenses, interest
rates, foreign exchange rates, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal
proceedings, and financial results.
we cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statement will be realized,
although we believe we have been prudent in our plans and assumptions.
achievement of future results is subject to risks, uncertainties and
potentially inaccurate assumptions. should known or unknown risks or
uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove inaccurate,
actual results could differ materially from past results and those anticipated,
estimated or projected. you should bear this in mind as you consider
forward-looking statements.
we undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements,
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. you are
advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related
subjects in our 10-q and 8-k reports to the sec. also note that we provide the
following cautionary discussion of risks, uncertainties and possibly inaccurate
assumptions relevant to our businesses. these are factors that, individually or
in the aggregate, we think could cause our actual results to differ materially
from expected and historical results. we note these factors for investors as
permitted by the private securities litigation reform act of 1995. you should
understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors.
consequently, you should not consider the following to be a complete discussion
of all potential risks or uncertainties.
u.s. and foreign governmental regulations mandating price controls and
patient-access constraints impact our business, and our future results could be
affected by changes in such regulations. in the u.s., many pharmaceutical
products are subject to increasing pricing pressures. such pressures may
increase as the result of the 2003 medicare act. on the other hand, usage of
pharmaceuticals also may increase due to the expanded access to medicines
afforded by the partial reimbursement under the 2003 medicare act. in addition, mcos as well
as medicaid and other government agencies continue to seek price discounts.
government efforts to reduce medicaid expenses may continue to
increase the use of mcos. this may result in managed cares influencing
prescription decisions for a larger segment of the population. in addition,
some states have implemented and other states are considering price controls or
patient-access constraints under the medicaid program, and some states are
considering price-control regimes that
would apply to all of their residents, regardless of income. other matters that
could be the subject of u.s. legislative or regulatory action affecting our
business include the importation of prescription drugs that are manufactured
outside the u.s. and sold at prices that are regulated by the governments of
various foreign countries and the involuntary approval of prescription
medicines for otc use.
we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other
countries. in europe and some other international markets, the government
provides health care at low direct cost to consumers and regulates
pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for the
government-sponsored health care system. this international patchwork of price
regulation has led to different prices and some third-party trade in our
products from markets with lower prices. such trade exploiting price
differences
table of contents
between countries can undermine our sales in markets with higher
prices.
as a result, it is expected that pressures on the pricing component of
operating results will continue.
competition from manufacturers of generic drugs is a major challenge in the
u.s. and is growing internationally. upon the expiration or loss of patent
protection for a product, we can lose the major portion of sales of that
product in a very short period. the u.s. basic product patent covering diflucan
expired in january 2004. the fda has granted us pediatric exclusivity with
respect to diflucan, which extends our marketing exclusivity through july29,
2004, but the grant of pediatric exclusivity is subject to a pending legal
challenge by a generic manufacturer. the patents covering several of our other
medicines, including lipitor, norvasc, neurontin, celebrex, xalatan and detrol,
are being challenged by generic manufacturers.
we cannot predict with accuracy the timing or impact of the introduction of
competitive products or their possible effect on our sales. products that
compete with our drugs, including some of our best-selling medicines, are
launched from time to time. launches of a number of competitive products have
occurred recently, and certain potentially competitive products are in various
stages of development, some of which have been filed for approval with the fda
and with regulatory authorities in other countries.
we recorded product sales of more than $1billion for each of nine
pharmaceutical products in 2003: lipitor, norvasc, zoloft, neurontin,
zithromax, celebrex, viagra, zyrtec and diflucan. those products accounted for
61% of our 2003 revenues. in addition, xalatan/xalcom achieved more than $1
billion in annual sales in 2003 (including 2003 sales prior to our acquisition
of pharmacia in april). if these or any of our other major products were to
become subject to a problem such as loss of patent protection, material product
liability litigation, unexpected side effects, regulatory proceedings,
publicity affecting doctor or patient confidence or pressure from existing
competitive products, or if a new, more effective treatment should be
introduced, the impact on our revenues could be significant. as noted, patents
covering several of our best-selling medicines are the subject of pending legal
challenges.
the discovery and development of new products as well as the development of
additional uses for existing products is very important to the success of the
company. however, balancing current growth and investment for the future
remains a major challenge. our ongoing investments in new product introductions
and in research and development for new products and existing product
extensions could exceed corresponding sales growth. this could produce higher
costs without a proportional increase in revenues.
risks and uncertainties particularly apply with respect to product-related
forward-looking statements. the outcome of the lengthy and complex process of
identifying new compounds and developing new products is inherently uncertain.
there can be no assurance as to whether or when we will receive regulatory
approval for new products or for new indications or dosage forms for existing
products. there also are many considerations that can affect marketing of
pharmaceutical products around the world. regulatory delays, the inability to
successfully complete clinical trials, claims and concerns about safety and
efficacy, new discoveries, patent disputes and claims about adverse side
effects are a few of the factors that could adversely affect the realization of
research and development and product-related forward-looking statements.
decisions about research studies made early in the development process of a
drug candidate can have a substantial impact on the marketing strategy once the
drug receives approval. more detailed studies may demonstrate additional
benefits that can help in the marketing, but they consume time and resources
and can delay submitting the drug candidate for initial approval. we try to
plan clinical trials prudently, but there is no guarantee that a proper balance
of speed and testing will be made in each case. the quality of our decisions in
this area could affect our future results.
40.6% of our 2003 revenues derived from international operations, including
5.9% from japan. these international-based revenues as well as our substantial
international assets expose our revenues and earnings to foreign currency
table of contents
exchange rate changes. in addition, our interest-bearing investments, loans and
borrowings are subject to risk from changes in interest rates. these risks and
the measures we have taken to help contain them are discussed in the section
entitled financial risk management on pages 19 and 20 of our 2003 financial
report. for additional details, see note 5-d to our consolidated financial
statements, derivative financial instruments and hedging activities, on pages
35 through 37 of our 2003 financial report. those sections of our 2003
financial report are incorporated by reference.
notwithstanding our efforts to foresee and mitigate the effects of changes
in fiscal circumstances, we cannot predict with certainty changes in currency
and interest rates, inflation or other related factors affecting our
businesses.
our international operations also could be affected by changes in
intellectual property legal protections and remedies, trade regulations and
procedures and actions affecting approval, production, pricing, reimbursement
and marketing of products, as well as by unstable governments and legal
systems, inter-governmental disputes and possible nationalization.
difficulties or delays in product manufacturing or marketing, including, but
not limited to, the inability to increase production capacity commensurate with
demand, or the failure to predict market demand for, or to gain market
acceptance of, approved products, could affect future results.
growth in costs and expenses, changes in product mix and the impact of
acquisitions, divestitures, restructurings, product withdrawals and other
unusual events that could result from evolving business strategies, evaluation
of asset realization and organizational restructuring could affect future
results. such risks and uncertainties include, in particular, our ability to
integrate and to obtain the anticipated results and synergies from our
acquisition of pharmacia.
our future results could be affected by changes in laws and regulations,
including changes in accounting standards, taxation requirements (including
tax-rate changes, new tax laws and revised tax law interpretations),
competition laws and environmental laws in the u.s. and other countries.
our future results could be affected by changes in business, political and
economic conditions, including the cost and availability of insurance, due to
the threat of future terrorist activity in the u.s. and other parts of the
world and related u.s. military action overseas.
we and certain of our subsidiaries are involved in various patent, product
liability, consumer, commercial, environmental, and tax litigations and claims;
government investigations; and other legal proceedings that arise from time to
time in the ordinary course of our business. we do not believe any of them will
have a material adverse effect on our financial position. litigation is
inherently unpredictable, and excessive verdicts do occur. although we believe
we have valid defenses in these matters, we could in the future incur judgments
or enter into settlements of claims that could have a material adverse effect
on our results of operations in any particular period.
patent claims include challenges to the coverage and/or validity of our
patents on various products or processes. although we believe that we have
valid defenses to these challenges with respect to all our material patents,
there can be no assurance as to the outcome of these matters, and a loss in any
of these cases could result in a loss of patent protection for the drug at
issue, which could lead to a significant loss of sales of that drug and could
materially affect future results of operations.
item 2. properties
our corporate headquarters and the headquarters of our pharmaceutical and
animal health businesses are located at our world headquarters, which includes
several buildings in new york city. we own three of the buildings, including
our main, 33-story office tower at 235 east 42nd street, and lease space in the
other buildings nearby. our 33-story office tower is located on a site we lease
under a long-term ground lease.
for our pharmaceutical businesses, we own and lease space around the world
for sales and marketing, administrative support and customer service functions.
table of contents
our global research and development division is headquartered in new
london, connecticut. we have major pharmaceutical research and development
operations in owned facilities in amboise, france; ann arbor, kalamazoo and
portage, michigan; cambridge, massachusetts; groton, connecticut; nagoya,
japan; st. louis, missouri; and sandwich, england, u.k. we also lease major
facilities in la jolla, california for pharmaceutical research and development
operations. as we announced shortly after the acquisition of pharmacia in april
2003, we have closed or will close a number of other legacy pfizer and legacy
pharmacia pharmaceutical research and development operations in the u.s. and
various other countries.
we have veterinary medicine research and development operations in owned
facilities in henrietta and richland township, michigan; lincoln, nebraska; and
sandwich, england, u.k.
the headquarters and the research and u.s. operations of our consumer
healthcare business are located in morris plains, new jersey, where we own five
buildings and lease a smaller amount of space nearby. consumer healthcares
sales and marketing offices in the u.s. are located in leased facilities. in
most markets outside of the u.s., consumer healthcares sales and marketing
operations as well as administrative support are located in owned or leased
facilities shared with our pharmaceutical and other businesses.
our global manufacturing division operates plants in 86 locations around
the world that manufacture products for our pharmaceutical, consumer healthcare
and animal health businesses. major facilities are located in belgium, brazil,
china, france, germany, ireland, italy, japan, mexico, puerto rico, singapore,
sweden, the united kingdom and the united states. the global manufacturing
division also operates numerous distribution facilities in major markets around
the world.
in general, our properties are well maintained, adequate and suitable to
their purposes. the growth of our businesses, including as a result of the
acquisition of pharmacia in 2003, has created space pressures for certain
operations, however. we have responded to such challenges with plans to provide
appropriate facilities as needs are demonstrated. among other steps, in 2003 we
purchased an additional building in new york city to accommodate the
requirements of our world headquarters. note 7 to our consolidated financial
statements, property, plant and equipment, on page 38 of our 2003 financial
report, which discloses amounts invested in land, buildings and equipment, and
the discussion of investing activities under the heading summary of cash flows
on page 17 of our 2003 financial report, which describes our capital
expenditures, are incorporated by reference. see also the discussion under note
12 to our consolidated financial statements, lease commitments, on page 44 of
our 2003 financial report, which also is incorporated by reference.
item 3. legal proceedings
certain
legal proceedings in which we are involved are discussed in note 20
to our consolidated financial statements, legal proceedings and
contingencies, on pages 47 through 51 of our 2003 financial
report. that discussion is incorporated by reference. the following
discussion is limited to recent developments concerning our legal
proceedings and should be read in conjuction with note 20. unless
otherwise indicated, all proceedings discussed in note 20 remain
pending.
product liability matters
rezulin
a state
court in madison county, illinois has certified a statewide class of
all users of rezulin seeking economic damages. the company has
entered into a contingent agreement to settle this action on behalf
of that class. the agreement is subject to a number of significant
conditions, including notice to the class, a hearing and court
approval.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
not applicable
table of contents
executive officers of the company
the executive officers of the company are set forth in this table. each
holds the offices indicated until his or her successor is chosen and qualified
at the regular meeting of the board of directors to be held immediately
following the 2004 annual meeting of shareholders. each of the executive
officers is a member of the pfizer leadership team.
name
age
position
peter b. corr
senior vice president - science and technology
charles l. hardwick
senior vice president - corporate affairs
yvonne r. jackson
senior vice president - human resources
karen l. katen
executive vice president; president - pfizer global pharmaceuticals
jeffrey b. kindler
senior vice president and general counsel
john l. lamattina
senior vice president; president - pfizer global research and development
henry a. mckinnell
chairman of the board and chief executive officer
john w. mitchell
senior vice president; president - pfizer global manufacturing
david l. shedlarz
executive vice president and chief financial officer
information concerning dr.corr, ms.katen, mr.kindler, dr.mckinnell and mr.
shedlarz is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the headings
nominees for directors and named executive officers who are not directors in
our proxy statement for the 2004 annual meeting of shareholders.
charles l. hardwick
mr.hardwick joined us in 1966. he held a number of positions in government and
public affairs and in marketing before becoming vice president - government and
public affairs in 1997. he was appointed senior vice president - government
relations and public affairs in march 2001. he was elected vice president of
pfizer inc.; senior vice president - corporate affairs in december 2001 and
elected senior vice president - corporate affairs of pfizer inc. effective july
2002.
yvonne r. jackson
ms.jackson joined us in 2002 and was elected senior vice president - human
resources in october 2003. prior to joining us, she served as senior vice
president of human resources, organization and environment at compaq computer
corporation from 1999 to 2002 and as senior vice president of worldwide human
resources at burger king corporation from 1993 until 1999. previously, she
served in various positions of increasing responsibility at avon products, inc.
and at sears, roebuck and co.
john l. lamattina
dr.lamattina joined us in 1977. he held various positions of increasing
responsibility in research and development before becoming senior vice
president of worldwide development in 1999. he was elected vice president of
pfizer inc.; executive vice president - pfizer global research and development;
president - worldwide
research in april 2001. he was elected vice
table of contents
president of pfizer inc.; executive
vice president - pfizer global research and development; president - worldwide
research and technology alliances in may 2002. he was elected senior vice
president of pfizer inc.; president - pfizer global research and development in
october 2003.
john w. mitchell
mr.mitchell joined us in the manufacturing division in 1964. he progressed
through various positions of increasing responsibility before becoming vice
president - manufacturing of the pfizer pharmaceuticals group in 1997. he was
appointed senior vice president - pfizer global manufacturing in 1999 and
president - pfizer global manufacturing in 2000. he was elected vice president
of pfizer inc.; president - pfizer global manufacturing in april 2001 and
elected senior vice president of pfizer inc.; president - pfizer global
manufacturing in february 2003.
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the principal market for our common stock is the new york stock exchange.
it also is listed on the london, euronext and swiss stock exchanges and is
traded on various united states regional stock exchanges. additional
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the table
captioned quarterly consolidated financial data (unaudited) on pages 54 and 55
of our 2003 financial report.
table of contents
this table provides information with respect to purchases by the
company of shares of its common stock during the fiscal fourth quarter of
2003:
issuer purchases of equity securities*
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
approximate
total number of
dollar value of
shares purchased
shares that may
as part of publicly
yet be purchased
total number of
average price
announced plans
under the plans or
period
shares purchased
paid per share
or programs
programs
september 29
through
october31, 2003
73,192,000
**
$
30.8358
**
480,833,984
**
$
870,074,616
**
november 1
through
november30, 2003
27,567,550
**
$
31.5615
**
508,401,534
**
$
1,461
**
december 1
through
december31, 2003
1,075,000
***
$
34.5654
***
1,075,000
***
$
4,962,842,195
***
total
101,834,550
$
31.0716
509,476,534
$
4,962,842,195
***
*on july15, 2002, the company announced that the board of directors had
authorized the purchase of up to $16billion of the companys common stock
(the 2002 program), with such purchases to be completed no later than
june 2004. the company completed its share purchases under this program in
november 2003.
on december15, 2003, the company announced that the board of directors had
authorized the purchase of up to an additional $5billion of the companys
common stock (the 2003 program). such purchases are expected to be completed
by the end of 2004.
**under the 2002 program.
***under the 2003 program.
table of contents
item 6. selected financial data
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
financial summary on page 56 of our 2003 financial report.
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
financial review on pages 2 through 20 of our 2003 financial report.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
discussion under the heading financial risk management on pages 19 and 20 of
our 2003 financial report.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
independent auditors report on page 22 of our 2003 financial report and from
the consolidated financial statements, related notes and supplementary data on
pages 23 through 55 of our 2003 financial report.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item 9a. controls and procedures
as of the end of the period covered by this 2003 form10-k, we carried out
an evaluation, under the supervision and with the participation of our
principal executive officer and principal financial officer, of the
effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and
procedures. based on this evaluation, our principal executive officer and
principal financial officer concluded that our disclosure controls and
procedures are effective in alerting them in a timely manner to material
information required to be disclosed in our periodic reports filed with the
sec.
in addition, we reviewed our internal controls, and there have been no
significant changes in our internal controls or in other factors that could
significantly affect those controls subsequent to the date of their most recent
evaluation.
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
information about our directors is incorporated by reference from the
discussion under item1 of our proxy statement for the 2004 annual meeting of
shareholders. information about compliance with section16(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934 is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the
heading section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance in our proxy
statement for the 2004 annual meeting of shareholders. information about our
audit committee, including the members of the committee, and our audit
committee financial experts is incorporated by reference from the discussion
under the headings the audit committee and audit committee financial experts in
our proxy statement for the 2004 annual meeting of shareholders. information
about the standards of business ethics and conduct governing our employees,
including our chief executive officer, chief financial officer and principal
accounting
table of contents
officer, and the code of business conduct and ethics governing our
directors is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
pfizer policies on business ethics and conduct in our proxy statement for the
2004 annual meeting of shareholders. the balance of the information required by
this item is contained in the discussion entitled executive officers of the
company in part i of this 2003 form 10-k.
item 11. executive compensation
information about director and executive compensation is incorporated by
reference from the discussion under the headings 2003 compensation of
non-employee directors, executive compensation, pfizer inc. retirement annuity
plan, pension plan table, and employment and severance agreements in our proxy
statement for the 2004 annual meeting of shareholders.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the
discussion under the headings securities ownership of officers and directors
and equity compensation plan information in our proxy statement for the 2004
annual meeting of shareholders.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
information about certain relationships and transactions with related
parties is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading
related party transactions in our proxy statement for the 2004 annual meeting
of shareholders.
item 14. principal accountant fees and services
information about the fees for 2003 and 2002 for professional services rendered
by our independent auditors is incorporated by reference from the discussion
under the heading audit and non-audit fees in item2 of our proxy statement for
the 2004 annual meeting of shareholders. our
audit committees policy on pre-approval of audit and permissible non-audit
services of our independent auditors is incorporated by reference from the
section captioned policy on audit committee pre-approval of audit and
permissible non-audit services of independent auditor in item2 of our proxy
statement for the 2004 annual meeting of shareholders.
table of contents
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
15(a)(1) financial statements. the following consolidated financial
statements, related notes, independent auditors report and supplementary data
from our 2003 financial report are incorporated by reference into item8 of
part ii of this 2003 form10-k:
page(s) in our 2003
financial report
independent auditors report
consolidated statement of income
consolidated balance sheet
consolidated statement of shareholders equity
consolidated statement of cash flows
notes to consolidated financial statements
27-53
quarterly consolidated financial data (unaudited)
54-55
15(a)(2) financial statement schedules. schedules are omitted because they
are not required or because the information is provided elsewhere in the
financial statements. the financial statements of unconsolidated subsidiaries
are omitted because, considered in the aggregate, they would not constitute a
significant subsidiary.
15(a)(3) exhibits. these exhibits are available upon request. requests
should be directed to margaret m. foran, vice president-corporate governance
and secretary, pfizer inc., 235 east 42nd street, new york, ny 10017-5755. the
exhibit numbers preceded by an asterisk (*) indicate exhibits physically filed
with this 2003 form10-k. all other exhibit numbers indicate exhibits filed by
incorporation by reference. exhibit numbers 10(1) through 10(26) are management
contracts or compensatory plans or arrangements.
agreement and plan of merger dated as of july13, 2002 among pfizer inc., pilsner acquisition sub corp. and pharmacia
corporation is incorporated by reference from amendment no.2 to our registration statement on forms-4 as filed with
the sec on october17, 2002. we agree to furnish to the sec, upon request, a copy of each exhibit to this agreement and
plan of merger.
3(1)
our restated certificate of incorporation dated april11, 2003, is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for
the period ended march30, 2003.
3(2)
our by-laws as amended april27, 2000, are incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended april2,
2000.
4(1)
indenture, dated as of january30, 2001, between us and the chase manhattan bank is incorporated by reference from our
8-k report filed on january30, 2001.
4(2)
except as set forth in exhibit4(1) above, the instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt securities
of the company and its subsidiaries have been omitted. we agree to furnish to the sec, upon request, a copy of each
instrument with respect to issuances of long-term debt of the company and its subsidiaries.
table of contents
10(1)
2001 stock and incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the
2001 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(2)
stock and incentive plan, as amended through july1, 1999, is incorporated by reference from
our 1999 10-k report.
10(3)
pfizer retirement annuity plan, as amended through november6, 1997, is incorporated by
reference from our 1997 10-k report.
10(4)
nonfunded supplemental retirement plan is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(5)
nonfunded deferred compensation and supplemental savings plan, as amended and restated as of
february1, 2002, is incorporated by reference from our 2002 10-k report.
10(6)
executive annual incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the
1997 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(7)
summary of annual incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our 2000 10-k report.
10(8)
2001 performance-contingent share award plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy
statement for the 2001 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(9)
performance-contingent share award program is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report
for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(10)
deferred compensation plan is incorporated by reference from our 1997 10-k report.
10(11)
non-employee directors retirement plan (frozen as of october 1996) is incorporated by
reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(12)
annual retainer unit award plan (for non-employee directors) is incorporated by reference
from our 10-q report for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(13)
nonfunded deferred compensation and unit award plan for non-employee directors is
incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(14)
restricted stock plan for non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 1996
10-k report.
10(15)
warner-lambert company 1996 stock plan, as amended, is incorporated by reference from
warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(16)
warner-lambert company incentive compensation plan, as amended, is incorporated by reference
from warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(17)
warner-lambert company supplemental pension income plan, as amended, is incorporated by
reference from warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(18)
pharmacia corporation management incentive plan, as amended and restated, is incorporated by
reference from pharmacias 10-q report for the period ended september30, 2000.
10(19)
pharmacia corporation 2001 long-term incentive plan is incorporated by reference from
pharmacias 10-q report for the period ended march31, 2001.
10(20)
pharmacia corporation 1996 long-term incentive plan, as amended and restated, is incorporated
by reference from pharmacias 10-q report for the period ended september30, 2000.
10(21)
the form of severance agreement with each of the named executive officers identified in our proxy statement for the 2004 annual meeting of
shareholders is incorporated by reference from our 1994 10-k report.
10(22)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of our non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(23)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of the named executive officers identified in our proxy statement for the 2004 annual meeting of
shareholders is incorporated by reference from our 1997 10-k report.
table of contents
10(24)
post-retirement consulting agreement, dated as of april20, 2000, between us and william c. steere, jr., is incorporated by reference from our
10-q report for the period ended april2, 2000.
10(25)
employment agreement, dated as of january1, 2001, between us and henry a. mckinnell is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report filed on
february2, 2001.
10(26)
severance agreement, dated as of january1, 2002, between us and jeffrey b. kindler is incorporated by reference from our 2001 10-k report.
*12
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
*13
portions of the 2003 financial report, which, except for those sections incorporated by reference, are furnished solely for the information of the sec and are not to be
deemed filed.
*21
subsidiaries of the company.
*23.1
consent of kpmg llp, independent certified public accountants.
*23.2
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp, independent certified public accountants.
*23.3
consent of deloitte & touche llp, independent certified public accountants.
*24
power of attorney (included as part of the signature page).
*31.1
certification by the chief executive officer pursuant to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*31.2
certification by the chief financial officer pursuant to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*32.1
certification by the chief executive officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*32.2
certification by the chief financial officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
15(b) reports on form8-k. we filed reports on form8-k during the fourth
quarter of 2003 on the following dates for the purposes specified: (i)on
october14, 2003, to file reconciliations of certain non-gaap financial
measures included in pfizers and pharmacias annual reports on form10-k for
2002 to the comparable gaap financial measures, and to file certain historical
financial statements of pharmacia and certain unaudited pro forma financial
information for the six months ended june29, 2003 in connection with our
acquisition of pharmacia; (ii)on october22, 2003, to report our financial
results for the third quarter of 2003; (iii)on november14, 2003, to file
certain unaudited pro forma financial information for the nine months ended
september28, 2003 in connection with our acquisition of pharmacia; (iv)on
december2, 2003, to report an amendment to our rights agreement changing its
expiration date to december31, 2003; and (v)on december23, 2003, to report
our agreement to acquire esperion therapeutics, inc.
table of contents
signatures
under the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange
act of 1934, this report was signed on behalf of the registrant by the
authorized person named below.
pfizer inc.
dated: march10, 2004
by:
/s/ margaret m. foran
margaret m. foran, vice president -
corporate governance and secretary
we, the undersigned directors and officers of pfizer inc., hereby
severally constitute margaret m. foran and jeffrey b. kindler, and each of them
singly, our true and lawful attorneys with full power to them and each of them
to sign for us, in our names in the capacities indicated below, any and all
amendments to this annual report on form10-k filed with the securities and
exchange commission.
under the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report
was signed by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the date indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ henry a. mckinnell
(henry a. mckinnell)
chairman of the board and chief
executive officer and director
(principal executive officer)
march 10, 2004
/s/ david l. shedlarz
(david l. shedlarz)
executive vice president and chief
financial officer (principal
financial officer)
march 10, 2004
/s/ loretta v. cangialosi
(loretta v. cangialosi)
vice president - controller
(principal accounting officer)
march 10, 2004
/s/ michael s. brown
(michael s. brown)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ m. anthony burns
(m. anthony burns)
director
march 10, 2004
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ robert n. burt
(robert n. burt)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ w. don cornwell
(w. don cornwell)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ william h. gray iii
(william h. gray iii)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ constance j. horner
(constance j. horner)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ william r. howell
(william r. howell)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ stanley o. ikenberry
(stanley o. ikenberry)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ george a. lorch
(george a. lorch)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ dana g. mead
(dana g. mead)
director
march 10, 2004
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ franklin d. raines
(franklin d. raines)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ ruth j. simmons
(ruth j. simmons)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ william c. steere, jr.
(william c. steere, jr.)
director
march 10, 2004
/s/ jean-paul valls
(jean-paul valls)
director
march 10, 2004
