10-k
y06124e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
table of contents
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10 - k
(mark one)
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2004
o
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period fromto
commission file number 1-3619
pfizer inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-5315170
(state or other jurisdiction of
(i.r.s. employer
incorporation or organization)
identification number)
235 east 42nd street
10017-5755
new york, new york
(zip code)
(address of principal executive offices)
(212)573-2323
(registrants telephone number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
name of each exchange
title of each class
on which registered
common stock, $.05 par value
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:
none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be
filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months
(or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has
been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.
yes   no o
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of
regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants
knowledge, in the definitive proxy or information statement incorporated by reference in partiii
of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer.
yes   no o
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant,
computed by reference to the closing price as of the last business day of the registrants most
recently completed second fiscal quarter, june25, 2004, was approximately $ 218billion.
the registrant has no non-voting common stock.
the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrants classes of common stock as of
february22, 2005 was 7,458,873,726shares of common stock, all of one class.
documents incorporated by reference
portions of the 2004 annual report to shareholders
parts i, ii and iv
portions of the proxy statement for the 2005 annual meeting of shareholders
parts i and iii
table of contents
table of contents
page
part i
item 1. business
general
pfizer website
business segments
human health segment
consumer healthcare segment
animal health segment
research and product development
international operations
marketing
patents and intellectual property rights
competition
raw materials
government regulation and price constraints
environmental law compliance
tax matters
employees
cautionary factors that may affect future results
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the company
part ii
item
5. market for the companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a. controls and procedures
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
item 14. principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 15. exhibits and financial statement schedules
15(a)(1) financial statements
15(a)(2) financial statement schedules
15(a)(3) exhibits
ex-3.2: by-laws
ex-12: computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
ex-13: portions of the 2004 financial report
ex-21: subsidiaries of the company
ex-23: consent of kpmg llp
ex-31.1: certification
ex-31.2: certification
ex-32.1: certification
ex-32.2: certification
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
general
pfizer inc. (which may be referred to as pfizer, the company, we, us or our) is a
research-based, global pharmaceutical company. we discover, develop, manufacture and market leading
prescription medicines for humans and animals as well as many of the worlds best-known consumer
healthcare products.
the company was incorporated under the laws of the state of delaware on june2, 1942.
we acquired warner-lambert company (warner-lambert) on june19, 2000. the acquisition was
accounted for as a pooling of interests. in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles in the u.s. (gaap), we restated all consolidated financial statements of pfizer for
periods prior to the acquisition to include the results of operations and financial position of
warner-lambert as if we had always been merged.
we acquired pharmacia corporation (pharmacia) on april16, 2003. the acquisition was accounted
for as a purchase. in accordance with gaap, we did not restate our results of operations and
financial position to reflect the historical results of operations and financial position of
pharmacia.
we completed the acquisition of esperion therapeutics, inc. on february10, 2004, for $1.3
billion in cash. the acquisition was accounted for as a purchase. esperion is a biopharmaceutical
company focused on the development of high density lipoprotein (hdl)-targeted (good cholesterol)
therapies for the treatment of cardiovascular disease.
pfizer website
our annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form
8-k and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to section 13(a) or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 are available on our website (www.pfizer.com) under the who we are
for investors  sec filings by pfizer captions as soon as reasonably practicable after we
electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the securities and exchange commission
(sec).
throughout this 2004 form 10-k, we incorporate by reference certain information from parts
of other documents filed with the sec, including our annual report to shareholders for 2004 and our
proxy statement for the 2005 annual meeting of shareholders (2005 proxy statement). the sec allows
us to disclose important information by referring to it in that manner. please refer to such
information. this year, our annual report to shareholders is in two parts: the 2004 annual review
(2004 annual review); and the 2004 financial report (2004 financial report), which is contained in
appendixa to our 2005 proxy statement. portions of our 2004 financial report are filed as exhibit
13 to this 2004 form 10-k. on or about march10, 2005, our 2004
annual review, our 2004 financial
report and our 2005 proxy statement
will be available on our website (www.pfizer.com); the 2004 annual review and 2004 financial report
will be set forth under the who we are  for investors  financial reports captions, and the 2005
proxy statement will be set forth under the who we are  for investors  sec filings by pfizer
captions.
information relating to corporate governance at pfizer, including our corporate governance
principles; director qualification standards; chief executive officer and chief financial officer
certifications; pfizer policies on business conduct (for all of our employees, including our chief
executive officer, chief financial officer and principal accounting officer); code of business
conduct and ethics for our directors; as well as information concerning our directors; e-mail
communication with our directors; board committees, including committee charters; and transactions
in pfizer securities by directors and officers, is available on our website (www.pfizer.com) under
the who we are  for investors  corporate governance captions. we
will provide any of the foregoing information without charge upon written request to margaret
table of contents
m. foran, vice president-corporate governance and secretary, pfizer inc., 235 east 42nd
street, new york, ny 10017-5755. information relating to shareholder services, including our
shareholder investment program, book-entry share ownership and direct deposit of dividends, is
available on our website (www.pfizer.com) under the who we are  for investors  shareholder
services captions.
business segments
we operate in three business segments: human health (previously named pharmaceutical),
consumer healthcare and animal health.
we also operate several other businesses, including the manufacture of empty soft-gelatin
capsules, contract manufacturing and bulk pharmaceutical chemicals. due to the size of these
businesses, they are grouped in and their results and assets are included in the corporate/other
category of our segment information.
comparative segment revenues and related financial information for 2004, 2003 and 2002 are
presented in the table captioned segment in note 18 to our consolidated financial statements,
segment, geographic and revenue information, in our 2004 financial report and the section headed
revenues in our 2004 financial report. the information from those sections of our 2004 financial
report is incorporated by reference in this 2004 form 10-k.
our businesses are heavily regulated in most of the countries where we operate. in the u.s.,
the principal authority regulating our operations is the food and drug administration (fda). the
fda regulates the safety and efficacy of the products we offer and our research quality,
manufacturing processes, product promotion, advertising and product labeling. similar regulations
exist in most other countries, and in many countries the government also regulates our prices. see
government regulation and price constraints below.
human health segment
our human health business is the largest pharmaceutical business in the world. this
segment includes treatments for cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, central nervous system
disorders, arthritis and pain, infectious and respiratory diseases, urogenital conditions, cancer,
eye disease, endocrine disorders and allergies. in 2004, human health revenues increased 17%, to
$46.1billion, due to strong performances across a broad range of products, the inclusion of a full
year of pharmacia product sales and the favorable impact of foreign exchange. revenues from this
segment contributed 88% of our total revenues in each of 2004, 2003 and 2002. we recorded product
sales of more than $1billion for each of ten pharmaceutical products in 2004. those ten products -
lipitor, norvasc, zoloft, celebrex, neurontin, zithromax, viagra, zyrtec, bextra and xalatan -
represented 69% of human health revenues in 2004. a table captioned revenues - major human health
products in our 2004 financial report is incorporated by reference.
our principal pharmaceutical products and certain recently approved products are as follows:
cardiovascular and metabolic diseases
lipitor, our largest-selling product, is for the
treatment of elevated cholesterol in the
bloodstream. it is the most-prescribed medicine of
any kind in the world and the industrys first $10
billion product. it has also been approved for
prevention of cardio-vascular disease in patients
with multiple risk factors and in august2004, was
approved by the fda for the prevention of
cardiovascular disease in people with normal to
mildly elevated cholesterol levels.
norvasc is for the treatment of hypertension (high
blood pressure) and angina (heart pain). it is the
worlds most-prescribed branded medicine for the
treatment of hypertension and angina. in august
2004, we filed with the fda for approval of norvasc
for reduction of cardiovascular risk. norvasc
experienced patent expirations in several european
union (e.u.) member countries and other european
countries in 2003 and 2004.
caduet, a single-pill dual therapy medicine,
contains lipitor for the treatment of high
cholesterol and norvasc for the treatment of high
blood pressure. caduet was approved and launched in
the u.s. in early 2004. an
table of contents
application for the
approval of caduet in the e.u. was filed in november
2003.
accupril/accuretic is an angiotensin converting
enzyme (ace)inhibitor for the treatment of
hypertension and congestive heart failure. accupril
began to face generic competition in the latter part
of 2004 due to the launch of generic quinapril by
certain generic drug manufacturers. subsequently, we
launched our own generic version of accupril in the
u.s. through our greenstone ltd. generic
pharmaceutical subsidiary.
cardura is for the treatment of hypertension and
benign prostatic hyperplasia (enlarged prostate
gland).
inspra is for the treatment of hypertension and
congestive heart failure in patients who have had a
heart attack. inspra was launched in the u.s. in
early 2004. it was approved for the treatment of
congestive heart failure in the e.u. in august2004
and launched in several e.u. member countries.
central nervous system disorders
zoloft is the most-prescribed anti-depressant in the
u.s. it is for the treatment of depression, panic
disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults
and children and acute use for premenstrual
dysphoric disorder (pmdd). it is also for acute and
long-term use for both post-traumatic stress
disorder (ptsd)and social anxiety disorder (sad)
and is the only approved drug for the long-term
treatment of these two disorders. for additional
information relating to zoloft, see discussion of
fda labeling recommendations under the headings selected product
descriptions, zoloft, in the financial review
section of our 2004 financial report.
neurontin is a leading epilepsy medicine, approved
as an add-on therapy with other anti-epileptic
medications to treat partial seizures in patients
over three years of age. it also is approved in more
than 60 markets for the treatment of a range of
neuropathic pain conditions. in addition, neurontin
is the first oral medication approved in the u.s.
for the treatment of post-herpetic neuralgia.
neurontin began to face competition from generics in
the u.s. in the latter half of 2004, even while
legal action was pending challenging the generic
products. subsequently, we launched our own generic
version of neurontin in the u.s. through our
greenstone ltd. generic pharmaceutical subsidiary.
see further details and discussion of related patent
infringement actions by pfizer in the patents and
intellectual property section below, under the headings selected
product descriptions, neurontin, in the
financial review section of our 2004 financial
report and in note 17 to the consolidated financial
statements  legal proceedings and contingencies
in our 2004 financial report, which are incorporated
by reference.
geodon, which is marketed under the trademark zeldox
in many countries outside the u.s., is for the
treatment of symptoms associated with schizophrenia.
it has been approved in 73 countries and launched in
the u.s., germany, spain, brazil and other major
markets. it is the first and only atypical
antipsychotic available in both an oral and a
rapid-acting, intramuscular dosage form. in august
2004, geodon received fda approval for the treatment
of acute mania in bipolar disorder, including manic
and mixed episodes. in december2004, an application
was filed for this indication in the e.u.
aricept, discovered and developed by eisai co.,
ltd., is the worlds leading medicine to treat
symptoms of alzheimers disease. we copromote
aricept with eisai in the u.s. and several other
countries and have an exclusive license to sell the
drug in certain other countries.
xanax is for the treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder and panic disorder. xanax xr, an
extended-release formulation of the drug, is a
rapid-acting, once-a-day medication approved for
treating panic disorder.
relpax is an oral treatment for acute migraine
headaches. it has been launched in more than 28
countries, including the u.s., canada, japan and
throughout europe.
rebif, discovered and developed by serono s.a., is
for the treatment of relapsing forms of multiple
sclerosis. we copromote rebif with serono in the
u.s.
table of contents
lyrica was launched in the u.k. and germany for
certain types of neuropathic pain and as an add-on
therapy for uncontrolled partial epilepsy. lyrica
was approved by the fda as a treatment for certain
types of neuropathic pain in december2004.
arthritis and pain
celebrex is for the treatment of osteoarthritis,
adult rheumatoid arthritis, acute pain and menstrual
pain. it also is approved in the u.s. for the
treatment of familial adenomatous polyposis.
celebrex has the broadest range of approved
indications of any cox-2-specific inhibitor and is
the most-prescribed arthritis brand in the u.s.
bextra is for the treatment of osteoarthritis, adult
rheumatoid arthritis and menstrual pain. see
the discussion of safety issues and reviews by the fda,
the european medicines evaluation agency (emea)and
regulatory authorities in certain other countries of
the cox-2-specific class of drugs under the headings selected
product descriptions, celebrex and bextra, in the financial
review section of our 2004 financial report, which
is incorporated by reference.
infectious and respiratory diseases
zithromax is for the treatment of certain types of
bronchitis and pneumonia, for sinusitis and for ear
infection. it is the largest-selling antibiotic in
the world. it is the only available single-dose
treatment for middle ear infection in the u.s., and
the zithromax tri-pak dosage form is the first and
only three-day regimen for the treatment of acute
bacterial exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. zithromax has also been approved
as a once-daily, three-day treatment for acute
bacterial sinusitis. in may2004, zithromax received
approval in japan for treatment of sexually
transmitted disease. zithromax is licensed to us
exclusively by pliva, a croatian pharmaceutical
company. although zithromax has experienced patent
expirations in certain countries, it retains basic
patent protection in the u.s. until november2005.
diflucan is a systemic antifungal. it is used to
treat various fungal infections, including vaginal
infections and certain infections that afflict
hiv/aids and cancer patients with weakened immune
systems. diflucan lost patent protection in japan
and much of europe in march2003, and lost marketing
exclusivity in the u.s. in july2004. subsequently,
we launched our own generic version of diflucan in
the u.s. through our greenstone ltd. generic
pharmaceutical subsidiary.
vfend is a treatment that can be administered orally
or intravenously for certain serious and potentially
fatal fungal infections and for the treatment of
esophageal candidiasis. it is also available in an
oral-suspension formulation suitable for patients
unable to swallow the tablet form. in the first
quarter of 2004, we filed regulatory submissions in
the u.s. and e.u. for the use of vfend in the
treatment of candidemia. in december2004, vfend was
approved by the fda for the treatment of certain
blood stream infections in non-neutropenic patients
(those without low white blood cell counts).
zyvox is for the treatment of serious gram-positive
infections in adults and children, which
increasingly are caused by drug-resistant bacteria,
and the treatment of diabetic foot infections. zyvox
is available in intravenous, tablet and
oral-suspension formulations. in june2004, zyvox
was approved by the fda for certain drug-resistant
pneumonia infections.
spiriva is for the treatment of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (copd), a respiratory disorder
that includes bronchitis and emphysema. we copromote
spiriva with boehringer ingelheim, which discovered
and developed the drug. spiriva handihaler, approved
by the fda in january2004 and launched in the u.s.
in june2004, is an inhaled treatment for the
long-term, once-daily maintenance treatment of
bronchospasm associated with copd. spiriva has also
been launched in more than 44 countries, including
canada and several european countries.
urogenital conditions
viagra is for the treatment of erectile dysfunction.
it is the most-prescribed
table of contents
medicine in the world for
the treatment of this condition.
detrol is the worlds leading product for the
treatment of overactive bladder. detrol la is an
extended-release formulation of the drug, taken once
a day.
cancer
camptosar, which is marketed under the name campto
in many countries outside the u.s., is one of the
leading treatments for colorectal cancer. in
addition to our u.s. rights, in october2004, we
acquired rights to this medicine for europe and asia
(except japan).
ellence and aromasin are for the treatment of breast
cancer. in december2004, we filed supplemental
submissions for aromasin in the u.s. and e.u. for
early breast cancer treatment.
eye disease
xalatan/xalcom is the most-prescribed branded
glaucoma medicine in the u.s., europe and japan. it
is for the treatment of open-angle glaucoma and
ocular hypertension. xalcom consists of xalatan with
the beta blocker timolol.
macugen, which is for the treatment of age-related
macular degeneration, was approved by the fda in
december2004. pfizer will jointly market macugen
with eyetech pharmaceuticals, inc., its discoverer.
regulatory approval for macugen has been applied for
in the e.u., canada, australia, new zealand,
switzerland, brazil and turkey.
endocrine disorders
genotropin is the worlds leading human recombinant
growth hormone. it is for the treatment of various
growth disorders in children and adults. novo
nordisk has granted us a non-exclusive license to
sell genotropin in the u.s. in july2004, an
application was filed in japan for genotropin for
the treatment of growth disorders.
allergies
zyrtec is for the treatment of year-round indoor and
seasonal outdoor allergies and hives. it is
indicated for use in children as young as six months
old. zyrtec is the leading branded antihistamine in
the u.s. in new prescriptions and the only
prescription antihistamine available in a syrup
formulation. zyrtec-d 12 hour is the only
prescription oral antihistamine/decongestant
combination medicine approved to treat both
year-round indoor and outdoor allergies as well as
nasal congestion. zyrtec is licensed to us by the
belgian company ucb s.a. we copromote zyrtec as a
prescription medicine in the u.s. with a subsidiary
of ucb s.a. and we have a license to sell zyrtec
under various trade names as an otc
(over-the-counter) medicine in canada, europe,
australia and south africa.
consumer healthcare segment
our consumer healthcare business is one of the largest in the world. we market many of
the worlds best-known otc medications for oral care, upper respiratory health, tobacco dependence,
gastrointestinal health, skin care, eye care and hair growth.
in 2004, consumer healthcare revenues increased 19%, to $3.5billion, due to the strong
performance of listerine mouthwash, which benefited from the u.s. launch of natural citrus flavor
listerine in september2003 and the launch of listerine advanced in september2004, the favorable
impact of foreign exchange and the inclusion of pharmacia product revenues for a full year.
revenues from this segment contributed 7% of our total revenues in both 2004 and 2003 and 8% in
2002.
consumer healthcares principal products include:
listerine mouthwash
listerine pocketpaks oral care strips
nicorette for tobacco dependence
benadryl antihistamine for allergies
sudafed for sinus congestion
rogaine for hair growth
table of contents
zantac 75 for prevention and relief of heartburn
rolaids antacid tablets
efferdent denture cleaner
neosporin antibiotic ointment
visine eye drops
bengay topical analgesic
cortizone skin care products
lubriderm moisturizing lotions
unisom sleep aids
desitin ointments for treatment of diaper rash
ludens throat drops
purell instant hand sanitizer
consumer healthcare can extend the life of some of our prescription medications by converting
them to otc medications. for example, nicorette, benadryl, sudafed and zantac 75 were all
previously prescription products and zantac 150 was launched as an otc medicine in january2005. as
market conditions permit, and when we have necessary approval from drug regulatory authorities, we
plan to pursue similar launches for other products.
animal health segment
our animal health business is the largest in the world. we discover, develop and sell
products for the prevention and treatment of diseases in livestock and companion animals. in 2004,
animal health revenues increased 22%, to $2.0billion, due to strong performances by key in-line
brands, significant product launches including draxxin and excede for respiratory disease in cattle
and swine, strong growth in sales of rimadyl, revolution and clavamox for companion animals, the
favorable impact of foreign exchange and the inclusion of pharmacia product revenues for a full
year. revenues from this segment contributed 3.7% of our total revenues in 2004, 3.6% of total
revenues in 2003 and 3.5% of total revenues in 2002.
among the products we market are parasiticides, anti-inflammatories, vaccines, antibiotics and
related medicines, including the products discussed below.
parasiticides constitute the largest segment of the animal health market for companion
animals, consisting mainly of medicines for the control of parasites such as fleas and heartworm.
our product, revolution, is our largest-selling parasiticide for companion animals.
rimadyl relieves pain and inflammation associated with canine osteoarthritis and soft tissue
orthopedic surgery. rimadyl is the only arthritis pain medication prescribed by veterinarians
available in chewable tablets, regular caplets and in an injectable formulation.
clavamox/synulox is an antibiotic for skin and soft tissue infections in dogs and cats.
our vaccine portfolio for livestock is extensive and includes respisureone/
stellamuneone, a single-dose vaccine used to prevent pneumonia in swine, and bovi-shield gold,
a cattle vaccine for reproductive and respiratory protection.
dectomax injectable and pour-on formulations remove and control internal and external
parasites in beef cattle.
naxcel/excenel rtu is an antibiotic used to treat respiratory and internal infections in
cattle and swine.
research and product development
innovation by our research and development operations is very important to the companys
success. our goal is to discover, develop and bring to market innovative products that address
major unmet medical needs. this goal has been supported by our substantial research and development
investments. we spent $7.7billion in 2004, $7.5billion in 2003 and $5.2billion in 2002 on
research and development.
we conduct research internally and also through contracts with third parties, through
collaborations with universities and biotechnology companies and in cooperation with other
pharmaceutical firms. we also seek out innovative technologies developed by third parties to
incorporate into our discovery or development processes or projects, as well as our product lines,
through acquisition, licensing or other arrangements.
drug discovery and development is time consuming, expensive and unpredictable. on average,
only one out of many thousands of chemical compounds discovered by researchers
table of contents
proves to be both
medically effective and safe enough to become an approved medicine. the process from early
discovery to development to regulatory approval can take more than ten years. drug candidates can
fail at any stage of the process. candidates may not receive regulatory approval even after many
years of research.
we believe that our investments in research have been rewarded by the number of pharmaceutical
compounds we have in all stages of development. we currently are
working on approximately 225
projects in development, including approximately 145 new molecular
entities and 80 product-line
extensions. in addition, we have more than 400 projects in discovery research. in recent years, our
discovery scientists have delivered dozens of new chemical compounds to early development. while
these new candidates may or may not eventually receive regulatory approval, new drug candidates
entering development are the foundation for future products.
in addition to discovering and developing new products, our research operations add value to
our existing products by improving their effectiveness and by discovering new uses for them. in
2004, for example, the fda approved the additional use of geodon for the treatment of acute mania
in bipolar disorder.
information concerning several of our drug candidates in development as well as supplemental
filings for existing products is set forth under the heading product developments in our 2004
financial report. that information is incorporated by reference.
our competitors also devote substantial funds and resources to research and development. in
addition, the consolidation that has occurred in our industry has created companies with
substantial research and development resources. we also compete against numerous small
biotechnology companies in developing potential drug candidates. the extent to which our
competitors are successful in their research could result in erosion of the sales of our products
and unanticipated product obsolescence.
international operations
we have significant operations outside the united states. they are managed through the
same business segments as our u.s. operations  human health, consumer healthcare and animal
health.
revenues from operations outside the u.s. of $23billion accounted for 44% of our total
revenues in 2004. revenues exceeded $500million in each of ten countries outside the u.s. in 2004.
the u.s. was the only country to contribute more than 10% of our total revenues, comprising 56% of
revenues in 2004, 60% of our revenues in 2003 and 64% of our revenues in 2002. japan is our
second-largest national market, with 6% of our revenues in each of 2004, 2003 and 2002.
for a geographic breakdown of revenues and changes in revenues, see the table captioned
geographic in note 18 to our consolidated financial statements, segment, geographic and revenue
information, in our 2004 financial report and the table captioned change in geographic revenues in
our 2004 financial report. those tables are incorporated by reference.
our international businesses are subject, in varying degrees, to a number of risks inherent in
carrying on business in other countries. these include currency fluctuations, capital and exchange
control regulations, expropriation and other restrictive government actions. our international
businesses are also subject to government-imposed constraints, including laws on pricing or
reimbursement for use of products. see government regulation and price constraints below for
discussion of these matters.
depending on the direction of change relative to the u.s. dollar, foreign currency values can
increase or decrease the reported dollar value of our net assets and results of operations. in
2004, revenues were favorably impacted by foreign exchange, as foreign currency movements relative
to the u.s. dollar increased our reported revenues in many countries. while we cannot predict
with certainty future changes in foreign exchange rates or the effect they will have on us, we
attempt to mitigate their impact through operational means and by using various financial
instruments. see the discussion under note 8-d to our consolidated
table of contents
financial statements, financial
instruments: derivative financial instruments and hedging activities in our 2004 financial report.
that discussion is incorporated by reference. related information about valuation and risks
associated with such financial instruments in parts e and f of that same note is also incorporated
by reference.
marketing
in our global human health business, we promote our products to health care providers
such as doctors, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, pharmacists, hospitals, pharmacy
benefit managers (pbms), managed care organizations (mcos) and government agencies. through our
marketing organizations, we explain the approved uses and advantages of our products to healthcare
providers. we also market directly to consumers in the u.s. through direct-to-consumer print and
television advertising. in addition, we sponsor general advertising to educate the public about our
innovative medical research.
our operations include several pharmaceutical sales organizations. each sales organization
markets a distinct group of products. our prescription pharmaceutical products are sold principally
to wholesalers, but we also sell directly to retailers, hospitals, clinics, government agencies and
pharmacies.
we seek to gain access to health authority, pbm and mco formularies (lists of recommended or
approved medicines and other products) and reimbursement lists by demonstrating the qualities and
treatment benefits of our products. we also work with mcos and pbms and other appropriate
healthcare providers to assist them with disease management, patient education and other tools that
help their medical treatment routines. for example, we sponsor a program offered by the state of
florida agency for health care administration that is designed to help manage chronic diseases
among floridas medicaid population.
our consumer healthcare business primarily uses its own representatives to directly promote
its products, including marketing certain products directly to professionals using a professional
detail force. we also use print and television consumer advertising and offer sales incentives such
as coupons. our consumer products are sold through various retailers.
our animal health business also uses its own sales organization to promote its products. its
advertising and promotion are generally targeted to health professionals, directly and through
veterinary journals. animal health and nutrition products are sold through veterinarians, drug
wholesalers, distributors and retail outlets as well as directly to users. where appropriate, these
products are also marketed through print and television advertising.
during 2004, sales to our three largest customers were as follows:
mckesson, inc.  18.2% of our total revenues;
cardinal health, inc.  13.8% of our total revenues; and
amerisourcebergen corporation  12.6% of our total revenues.
sales to these wholesalers were concentrated in the human health segment. apart from these
instances, none of our business segments is dependent on any one customer or group of related
customers.
patents and intellectual property rights
our products are sold around the world under brand-name, logo and certain product design
trademarks that we consider in the aggregate to be of material importance. trademark protection
continues in some countries for as long as the mark is used and, in other countries, for as long as
it is registered. registrations generally are for fixed, but renewable, terms.
we own or license a number of u.s. and foreign patents. these patents cover pharmaceutical and
other products and their uses; pharmaceutical formulations; product manufacturing processes; and
intermediate chemical compounds used in manufacturing.
patents for individual products extend for varying periods according to the date of patent
filing or grant and the legal term of patents in the various countries where patent protection is
obtained. the actual protection afforded by a patent, which can vary from country to country,
depends upon the type of patent, the scope of its
table of contents
coverage and the availability of legal remedies
in the country.
in the aggregate, our patent and related rights are of material importance to our businesses
in the u.s. and most other countries. based on current product sales, and considering the vigorous
competition with products sold by others, the patent rights we consider significant in relation to
our business as a whole, together with the year in which the u.s. basic product patent expires
(including, where applicable, the additional six-month pediatric exclusivity period), are those for
the following drugs:
u.s. basic product patent
drug
expiration year
zithromax
zoloft
norvasc
zyrtec
aricept
lipitor
xalatan
see below
viagra
detrol
celebrex
bextra
genotropin
neurontin
see below
in some instances, there are later-expiring patents relating to our products directed to
particular forms or compositions of the drug or to methods of
manufacturing or using the drug in
the treatment of further diseases or conditions. however, such patents may not protect the
companys drug from generic drug competition after the expiration of the basic product patent.
zithromax is patented by pliva, a croatian pharmaceutical company. the drug is licensed
exclusively to us by pliva for sales and marketing in major countries, and we purchase the compound
in bulk crude form from pliva. although zithromax has experienced patent expirations in certain
countries, it retains basic patent protection in the u.s. until november2005.
zyrtec is patented by the belgian company ucb s.a. and is licensed to us for sales in the
u.s., canada, europe, australia and south africa. we copromote zyrtec as a prescription medicine in
the u.s. with a subsidiary of ucb s.a. and have a license to sell zyrtec under various trade names
as an otc medicine in the other markets.
aricept is patented by eisai co., ltd. we copromote aricept with eisai in the u.s. and several
other countries and have an exclusive license to sell the drug in certain other countries.
xalatan is not protected by a basic product patent. however, we have broadly patented
ophthalmic formulations containing lantanoprost until 2011.
genotropin is patented by novo nordisk, which has granted us a non-exclusive license to sell
the drug in the u.s.
the u.s. basic product patent relating to neurontin expired in 1994. however, in april2000, a
u.s. patent was granted relating to stable pharmaceutical compositions of neurontin containing low
levels of lactam impurity. this patent expires in 2017. however, neurontin now faces competition
from generic versions of the product launched at-risk (before the final resolution of legal
proceedings challenging the generic versions) by generic drug manufacturers during the latter half
of 2004. the patent infringement litigations related to this product continue. following the
launches of these generic versions, in october, we launched our own generic version of the product
through our greenstone ltd. subsidiary.
other companies have filed applications with the fda seeking approval of products that we also
believe infringe our patents covering, among other products, lipitor, norvasc, celebrex, xalatan
and detrol.
we also have other patent rights covering additional products that have lesser revenues.
the expiration of a basic product patent or loss of patent protection resulting from a legal
challenge normally results in significant competition from generic products against the originally
patented product and can result in a
significant reduction in sales of that product in a very short period. in some cases, however,
we can continue to obtain commercial benefits from product manufacturing trade secrets; patents on
uses for products; patents on processes and intermediates for the economical manufacture of the
active ingredients; patents for special
table of contents
formulations of the product or delivery mechanisms; and
conversion of the active ingredient to otc products.
one of the main limitations on our operations in some countries outside the u.s. is the lack
of effective intellectual property protection of our products. under international agreements in
recent years, global protection of intellectual property rights is improving. the general agreement
on tariffs and trade requires participant countries to amend their intellectual property laws to
provide patent protection for pharmaceutical products by the end of a ten-year transition period. a
number of countries are doing this. we have experienced significant growth in our businesses in
some of those nations, and our continued business expansion in those countries depends to a large
degree on further patent protection improvement.
competition
competition is intense in all of our businesses and includes many large and small
competitors. the principal means of competition vary among product categories and business groups.
however, the efficacy, safety, patients and customers ease of use and cost effectiveness of our
products are important factors for success in all of our principal businesses.
our human pharmaceutical business is the largest in the world. we compete with other worldwide
research-based drug companies, many smaller research companies with more limited therapeutic focus
and generic drug manufacturers. other companies manufacture and sell products that treat similar
diseases or indications as our major products.
we focus on unmet medical needs and therapeutic improvements. our emphasis on innovation has
led to our multi-billion-dollar research and development investments over the past decade.
in recent years, a comparison of the total cost of medical treatments using pharmaceuticals
versus alternative treatments for the same condition has become an important basis of competition.
mcos and pbms look to cost advantages as well as medical benefits in making their drug formulary
decisions.
our pharmaceutical sales and marketing organization is a valuable competitive asset. our
salespeoples ability to reach medical professionals with information about our products helps us
respond to competitive efforts and launch new products.
our consumer healthcare business is one of the largest in the world. however, many other
companies, large and small, manufacture and sell one or more products that are similar to our
consumer healthcare products, including major retail customers that sell private label or house
brands. sources of competitive advantage include product quality and
efficacy, including differentiated
claims, brand identity, advertising and promotion, product innovation, broad distribution
capabilities and price. significant expenditures for advertising, promotion and marketing are
generally required to achieve and maintain both consumer and trade acceptance of consumer products.
while our animal health business is the largest in the world, many other companies offer
competitive products. altogether, there are hundreds of producers of animal health products
throughout the world. the principal methods of competition vary somewhat depending on the
particular product. they include product innovation, quality, service, effective promotion to
veterinary professionals and consumers and price.
managed care organizations
the growth of mcos in the u.s. has been a major factor in the competitive make-up of the
health care marketplace. a substantial portion of the u.s. population now participates in some
version of managed care. because of the size of the patient population covered by mcos, marketing
of prescription drugs to them and the pbms that serve many of those organizations has become
important to our business.
mcos can include medical insurance companies, medical plan administrators, health-
maintenance organizations, alliances of hospitals and physicians and other physician
organizations. the purchasing power of mcos has been increasing in recent years due to their
growing numbers of enrolled patients. at the same time, those organizations have been consolidating
into fewer, even larger entities. this enhances their purchasing strength and importance to us.
table of contents
the growth of mcos has increased pressure on drug prices. a major objective of mcos is to
contain and, where possible, reduce health care expenditures. they typically use formularies,
volume purchases and long-term contracts to negotiate discounts from pharmaceutical providers. they
use their purchasing power to bargain for lower supplier prices. they also emphasize primary and
preventive care, out-patient treatment and procedures performed at doctors offices and clinics.
hospitalization and surgery, typically the most expensive forms of treatment, are carefully
managed. since the use of certain drugs can prevent the need for hospitalization, professional
therapy or even surgery, such drugs can become favored first-line treatments for certain diseases.
as discussed above in marketing, mcos and pbms typically develop formularies to reduce their
cost for medications. formularies can be based on the prices and therapeutic benefits of the
available products. due to their generally lower cost, generic medicines are often favored. the
breadth of the products covered by formularies can vary considerably from one mco to another and
many formularies include alternative and competitive products for treatment of particular medical
problems. mcos use a variety of means to encourage patients use of products listed on their
formularies.
exclusion of a product from a formulary can lead to its sharply reduced usage in the mco
patient population. consequently, pharmaceutical companies compete aggressively to have their
products included. where possible, companies compete for inclusion based upon unique features of
their products, such as greater efficacy, better patient ease of use or fewer side effects. a lower
overall cost of therapy is also an important factor. products that demonstrate fewer therapeutic
advantages must compete for inclusion based primarily on price. we have been generally, although
not universally, successful in having our major products included on mco formularies.
the impact of mcos on drug prices and volumes may increase as the result of their role in
negotiating on behalf of medicare beneficiaries in connection with the limited out-patient drug
benefit under medicare, as discussed below under government regulation and price constraints.
another way we address the interests of mcos is by developing disease-management programs.
these programs can be attractive to mcos by improving patient communications and compliance with
dosage directions, which are important for effective disease treatment. they can help mcos address
various aspects of disease management, such as prevention, diagnosis and treatment of certain
diseases, including use of pharmaceutical products. this comprehensive approach can improve the
quality of care and lower costly complications of chronic diseases. as noted above in marketing,
one such program, which is sponsored by us and offered by the state of florida agency for health
care administration, is designed to help manage chronic diseases among floridas medicaid
population.
generic products
one of the biggest competitive challenges that we face in the u.s. and that is growing
internationally is from generic pharmaceutical manufacturers. upon the expiration or loss of patent
protection for a product, we can lose the major portion of sales of that product in a very short
period. generic competitors operate without our large research and development expenses and our
costs of conveying medical information about the product to the medical community. in addition, the
fda approval process exempts generics from costly and time-consuming clinical trials to demonstrate
their safety and efficacy, and allows generic manufacturers to rely on the safety and efficacy of
the pioneer product. generic products need only demonstrate a level of availability in the
bloodstream equivalent to that of the pioneer product. this means that, after we have borne the
expenses of discovering, developing and testing a medicine for safety and efficacy, obtaining
regulatory approval and informing the medical community about its therapeutic benefits, generic
competitors can market a competing version of our
product after the expiration or loss of our patent and charge much less.
as noted above, mcos that focus primarily on the immediate cost of drugs often favor generics
over brand-name drugs. many governments also encourage the use of generics as alternatives to
brand-name drugs in their health care programs, including medicaid in the u.s. laws in the u.s.
generally allow, and in some cases require,
table of contents
pharmacists to substitute generic drugs that have been
rated under government procedures to be therapeutically equivalent to brand-name drugs. the
substitution must be made unless the prescribing physician expressly forbids it. as and when
appropriate, we will employ our greenstone ltd. subsidiary to launch our own generic versions of
products after we lose market exclusivity.
raw materials
raw materials essential to our businesses are purchased worldwide in the ordinary course
of business from numerous suppliers. in general, these materials are available from multiple
sources. no serious shortages or delays were encountered in 2004, and none are expected in 2005.
government regulation and price constraints
in the united states
general. pharmaceutical companies are subject to extensive regulation by
national, state and local agencies in the countries in which they do business. of particular
importance is the fda in the u.s. it has jurisdiction over our human pharmaceutical business and
administers requirements covering the testing, safety, effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling,
marketing, advertising and post-marketing surveillance of our pharmaceutical products. the fda also
regulates most of our consumer healthcare products and, along with the u.s. department of
agriculture and the u.s. environmental protection agency, our animal health products.
in addition, many of our activities are subject to the jurisdiction of various other federal
regulatory and enforcement departments and agencies, such as the department of health and human
services, the federal trade commission and the department of justice. individual states, acting
through their attorneys general, have become active as well, seeking to regulate the marketing of
prescription drugs under state consumer protection and false advertising laws.
we are subject to possible administrative and legal proceedings and actions by these various
regulatory bodies (see note 17 to our consolidated financial statements, legal proceedings and
contingencies, in our 2004 financial report). such actions may include product recalls, seizures
and other civil and criminal sanctions.
medicare. in december2003, the medicare prescription drug improvement and
modernization act of 2003 (the 2003 medicare act) was enacted. under this legislation, medicare
beneficiaries are eligible to obtain a medicare-endorsed, drug-discount card from an mco, pbm or
other private sector provider through the end of 2005. beginning in 2006, medicare beneficiaries
will be eligible to obtain subsidized prescription drug coverage from a private sector provider. it
remains difficult to predict the impact of the 2003 medicare act on pharmaceutical companies. usage
of pharmaceuticals may increase as the result of the expanded access to medicines afforded by the
partial reimbursement under medicare. such potential sales increases, however, may be offset by
increased pricing pressures due to the enhanced purchasing power of the private sector providers
that will negotiate on behalf of medicare beneficiaries.
pfizer is committed to helping those without coverage access pfizer products. to that end, in
2004, we implemented our helpful answers program, an umbrella program that includes existing pfizer
patient assistance programs, as well as pfizer pfriends, a new prescription discount card offering
savings on pfizer prescription medicines to all uninsured americans, regardless of age or income.
in addition, through many medicare-approved drug discount cards, including the u-share card on
which pfizer partners with united healthcare, qualified low-income medicare beneficiaries have
access to up to a thirty day supply of many pfizer medicines for a flat fee of
$15 per prescription after they have exhausted the governments $600 annual credit. to date,
approximately 18 cards offer such a discount. in january2005, we also joined together rx access
with nine other pharmaceutical companies to offer savings on over 275 medicines to
medicare-ineligible, uninsured individuals under 65 who fall below certain income thresholds.
importation of drugs. there is considerable political pressure to allow the
importation into the u.s. of prescription drugs that are marketed outside the u.s. and sold at
prices that are
table of contents
regulated by the governments of various foreign countries. in addition to raising
safety concerns, such importation could impact pharmaceutical prices in the u.s. while the 2003
medicare act maintains the current prohibition on such imports, it would allow importation from
canada if the secretary of health and human services certifies that such importation is safe and
would result in savings to consumers. before the 2003 medicare act, federal law would have
permitted importation of medicines into the u.s. from a considerably larger group of developed
countries, provided the secretary of health and human services made the same safety and
cost-savings certifications. on december21, 2004, the department of health and human services
(hhs)and the department of commerce issued their reports on drug importation and foreign price
controls. the hhs report noted that it would be extraordinarily difficult to ensure that drugs
personally imported by individual consumers could meet the standards of safety that would support
certifying as safe such importation. while the report also concluded that the u.s. could establish
a feasible basis for commercial drug importation, such a change in the law would require new legal
authorities, substantial additional resources and significant restrictions on the types of drugs
that could be imported. the report also noted that the total savings to be expected from such a
commercial importation regime would be relatively small1% or 2% of total drug spending in the u.s.
the commerce department report confirmed that the lower prices in many countries result from
governmental price controls, and these price controls adversely affect the amount of funding that
is available for the discovery of new drugs.
medicaid and related matters. in recent years, various proposals have been offered at
the federal and state levels that would bring about major changes in the medicaid program. driven
by budget concerns, some states have implemented and other states are considering importation
programs, price controls or patient-access constraints on medicines under the medicaid program. if
changes are implemented under the medicaid program that restrict the access of a significant
population of patients to our innovative medicines, our business could be materially affected. in
addition, some states are considering price-control regimes that
would apply to broader segments of their populations that are not
medicaid eligible, as well as various approaches to controlling pharmaceutical
marketing.
u.s. law requires us to give rebates to state medicaid agencies based on each states
reimbursement of pharmaceutical products under the medicaid program. some states and multi-state
pools are seeking rebates in excess of the amounts required by federal law, and there are federal
legislative proposals to expand current medicaid rebates. we also must give discounts or rebates on
purchases or reimbursements of pharmaceutical products by certain other federal and state agencies
and programs. see the discussion regarding rebates in the revenues
section of our 2004 financial
report, and in note 1-g to our consolidated financial statements, significant accounting policies,
revenues, in our 2004 financial report, which discussions are incorporated by reference.
outside the united states
we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other countries. in europe
and some other international markets, the government provides health care at low direct cost to
consumers and regulates pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for
the government-sponsored health care system. this international patchwork of price regulation has
led to different prices and some third-party trade in our products from markets with lower prices.
such trade exploiting price differences between countries can undermine our sales in markets with
higher prices.
since 1998, the approval of new drugs across the e.u. is possible only using the mutual
recognition procedure or emeas central approval
process. the use of either of these procedures provides a more rapid and consistent approval
within the member states than was the case when the approval processes were operating independently
within each member state. further, norway and iceland are full participants in these approval
processes. the addition of ten new member states to the e.u. in may2004 has extended the scope of
these approval procedures. since the e.u. does not have jurisdiction over patient reimbursement or
pricing matters in its member states, we will continue to deal with
table of contents
individual countries on such
issues across the enlarged e.u.
during 2004, a comprehensive package of reforms was adopted, amending e.u. law on the
regulation of medicinal products in many areas, including approval procedures and safety reporting.
of particular note, the data exclusivity periods during which innovative companies regulatory data
are protected will be harmonized in all member states, and the approval and launch of generic
medicines will be facilitated in several respects. the new law, due to take effect by november
2005, will also shorten certain approval timelines and introduce fast-track and conditional
centralized authorizations.
environmental law compliance
most of our operations are affected by federal, state and/or local environmental laws. we
have made, and intend to continue to make, necessary expenditures for compliance with applicable
laws. we also are cleaning up environmental contamination from past industrial activity at certain
sites (see note 17 to our consolidated financial statements, legal proceedings and contingencies,
in our 2004 financial report). as a result, we incurred capital and operational expenditures in
2004 for the clean-up of certain past industrial activity and for other environmental compliance
purposes as follows:
environment-related capital expenditures  $68million
other environment-related expenses  $274million
while we cannot predict with certainty future capital expenditures or operating costs for
environmental compliance, we do not believe they will have a material effect on our capital
expenditures, earnings or competitive position.
tax matters
the discussion of tax-related matters in note 5 to our consolidated financial statements,
taxes on income, in our 2004 financial report, is incorporated by reference.
employees
in our innovation-intensive business, our employees are vital to our success. we believe
we have good relationships with our employees. as of december31, 2004, we employed approximately
115,000 people in our operations throughout the world.
cautionary factors that may affect future results
(cautionary statements under the private securities litigation reform act of 1995)
our disclosure and analysis in this 2004 form 10-k and in our 2004 annual report to
shareholders contain some forward-looking statements that set forth anticipated results based on
managements plans and assumptions. from time to time, we also provide forward-looking statements
in other materials we release to the public as well as oral forward-looking statements. such
statements give our current expectations or forecasts of future events; they do not relate strictly
to historical or current facts. we have tried, wherever possible, to identify such statements by
using words such as anticipate, estimate, expect, project, intend, plan, believe,
will and similar expressions in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial
performance. in particular, these include statements relating to future actions, prospective
products or product approvals, future performance or results of current and anticipated products,
sales efforts, expenses, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, the outcome of
contingencies, such as legal proceedings, and financial results.
we cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statement will be realized, although we believe
we have been prudent in our plans and assumptions. achievement of future results is subject to
risks, uncertainties and potentially inaccurate assumptions. should known or unknown risks or
uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove inaccurate, actual results could
differ materially from past results and those anticipated, estimated or projected. you should bear
this in mind as you consider forward-looking statements.
we undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result
of new information, future events or otherwise. you
table of contents
are advised, however, to consult any further
disclosures we make on related subjects in our 10-q and 8-k reports to the sec. also note that we
provide the following cautionary discussion of risks, uncertainties and possibly inaccurate
assumptions relevant to our businesses. these are factors that, individually or in the aggregate,
we think could cause our actual results to differ materially from expected and historical results.
we note these factors for investors as permitted by the private securities litigation reform act of
1995. you should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors.
consequently, you should not consider the following to be a complete discussion of all potential
risks or uncertainties.
u.s. and foreign governmental regulations mandating price controls and patient-access
constraints impact our business, and our future results could be affected by changes in such
regulations. in the u.s., many pharmaceutical products are subject to increasing pricing pressures.
such pressures may increase as the result of the 2003 medicare act. on the other hand, usage of
pharmaceuticals also may increase due to the expanded access to medicines afforded by the partial
reimbursement under the 2003 medicare act. in addition, mcos as well as medicaid and other
government agencies continue to seek price discounts. government efforts to reduce medicaid
expenses may continue to increase the use of mcos. this may result in managed cares influencing
prescription decisions for a larger segment of the population. in addition, some states have
implemented and other states are considering price controls or patient-access constraints under the
medicaid program and some states are considering price-control regimes that would apply to
broader segments of their populations that are not medicaid eligible. other matters that could be the subject of u.s. federal or state legislative or
regulatory action affecting our business include the importation of prescription drugs that are
marketed outside the u.s. and sold at prices that are regulated by the governments of various
foreign countries and the involuntary approval of prescription medicines for otc use.
we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other countries. in europe and
some other international markets, the government provides health care at low direct cost to
consumers and regulates pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for
the government-sponsored health care system. this international patchwork of price regulation has
led to different prices and some third-party trade in our products from markets with lower prices.
such trade exploiting price differences between countries can undermine our sales in markets with
higher prices.
as a result, it is expected that pressures on the pricing component of operating results will
continue.
competition from manufacturers of generic drugs is a major challenge in the u.s. and is
growing internationally. upon the expiration or loss of patent protection for a product, or upon
the at-risk launch (while patent infringement litigation against the generic product is pending) by
a generic manufacturer of a generic version of a product, we can lose the major portion of sales of
that product in a very short period. the patents covering several of our most important medicines,
including lipitor, norvasc, neurontin, celebrex, xalatan and detrol, are being challenged by
generic manufacturers.
we cannot predict with accuracy the timing or impact of the introduction of competitive
products or their possible effect on our sales. products that compete with our drugs, including
some of our best-selling medicines, are launched from time to time. launches of a number of
competitive products have occurred recently, and certain potentially competitive products are in
various stages of development, some of which have been
filed for approval with the fda and with regulatory authorities in other countries.
we recorded product sales of more than $1billion for each of ten pharmaceutical
products in 2004: lipitor, norvasc, zoloft, celebrex, neurontin, zithromax, viagra, zyrtec, bextra
and xalatan. those products accounted for 61% of our total 2004 revenues. if these or any of our other
major products were to become subject to a problem such as loss of patent protection, material
product liability litigation, unexpected side effects, regulatory proceedings, publicity affecting
doctor or patient confidence or pressure from existing competitive products, or if a new, more
effective treatment should be introduced, the impact on our revenues could be significant. as
noted, patents
table of contents
covering several of our best-selling medicines are the subject of pending legal
challenges.
final actions relating to celebrex and/or bextra that may be taken by the fda and/or
the emea in connection with their respective reviews of the benefits and risks of cox-2-specific
inhibitor medicines and related agents could result in a significant loss of sales of one or both
of those drugs, which would have a material adverse impact on our results of operations.
the discovery and development of new products as well as the development of additional
uses for existing products is very important to the success of the company. however, balancing
current growth and investment for the future remains a major challenge. our ongoing investments in
new product introductions and in research and development for new products and existing product
extensions could exceed corresponding sales growth. this could produce higher costs without a
proportional increase in revenues.
risks and uncertainties particularly apply with respect to product-related,
forward-looking statements. the outcome of the lengthy and complex process of identifying new
compounds and developing new products is inherently uncertain. there can be no assurance as to
whether or when we will receive regulatory approval for new products or for new indications or
dosage forms for existing products. decisions by regulatory authorities regarding labeling and
other matters could affect the commercial potential of our products. there also are many
considerations that can affect marketing of pharmaceutical products around the world. regulatory
delays, the inability to successfully complete clinical trials, claims and concerns about safety
and efficacy, new discoveries, patent disputes and claims about adverse side effects are a few of
the factors that could adversely affect the realization of research and development and
product-related, forward-looking statements.
decisions about research studies made early in the development process of a drug
candidate can have a substantial impact on the marketing strategy once the drug receives approval.
more detailed studies may demonstrate additional benefits that can help in the marketing, but they
consume time and resources and can delay submitting the drug candidate for initial approval. we try
to plan clinical trials prudently, but there is no guarantee that a proper balance of speed and
testing will be made in each case. the quality of our decisions in this area could affect our
future results.
44% of our 2004 revenues were derived from international operations, including 6% from
japan. these international-based revenues as well as our substantial international assets expose
our revenues and earnings to foreign currency exchange rate changes. in addition, our
interest-bearing investments, loans and borrowings are subject to risk from changes in interest
rates. these risks and the measures we have taken to help contain them are discussed in the section
entitled financial risk management in our 2004 financial report. for additional details, see note
8-d to our consolidated financial statements, financial instruments: derivative financial
instruments and hedging activities, in our 2004 financial report. those sections of our 2004
financial report are incorporated by reference.
notwithstanding our efforts to foresee and mitigate the effects of changes in fiscal
circumstances, we cannot predict with certainty changes in currency and interest rates, inflation
or other related factors affecting our businesses.
our international operations also could be affected by changes in intellectual property
legal protections and remedies, trade regulations and procedures and actions affecting approval,
production, pricing, reimbursement and marketing
of products, as well as by unstable governments and legal systems and inter-governmental disputes.
difficulties or delays in product manufacturing or marketing, including, but not
limited to, the inability to increase production capacity commensurate with demand, or the failure
to predict market demand for, or to gain market acceptance of, approved products, could affect
future results.
growth in costs and expenses, changes in product mix and the impact of acquisitions,
divestitures, restructurings, product withdrawals and other unusual events that could result from
evolving business strategies, evaluation of asset realization and organizational restructuring
could affect future results. such risks and uncertainties
table of contents
include, in particular, our ability to
integrate and to obtain the anticipated results and synergies from our acquisition of pharmacia.
our future results could be affected by changes in laws and regulations, including
changes in accounting standards, taxation requirements (including tax-rate changes, new tax laws
and revised tax law interpretations), competition laws and environmental laws in the u.s. and other
countries.
our future results could be affected by changes in business, political and economic
conditions, including the cost and availability of insurance, due to the threat of future terrorist
activity in the u.s. and other parts of the world and related u.s. military action overseas.
we and certain of our subsidiaries are involved in various patent, product liability,
consumer, commercial, securities, environmental and tax litigations and claims; government
investigations; and other legal proceedings that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of
our business. we do not believe any of them will have a material adverse effect on our financial
position. litigation is inherently unpredictable, and excessive verdicts do occur. although we
believe we have substantial defenses in these matters, we could in the future incur judgments or
enter into settlements of claims that could have a material adverse effect on our results of
operations in any particular period.
patent claims include challenges to the coverage and/or validity of our patents on various
products or processes. although we believe we have substantial defenses to these challenges with
respect to all our material patents, there can be no assurance as to the outcome of these matters,
and a loss in any of these cases could result in a loss of patent protection for the drug at issue,
which could lead to a significant loss of sales of that drug and could materially affect future
results of operations.
item 2. properties
our corporate headquarters and the headquarters of our human health and animal health
businesses are located at our world headquarters, which includes several buildings in new york
city. we own three of the buildings, including our main, 33-story office tower at 235 east
42nd street, and lease space in the other buildings nearby. our 33-story office tower is
located on a site we lease under a long-term ground lease.
for our human health business, we own and lease space around the world for sales and
marketing, administrative support and customer service functions.
our global research and development division is headquartered in owned facilities in new
london, connecticut. we have major pharmaceutical research and development operations in owned
facilities in ann arbor, kalamazoo and portage, michigan; cambridge, massachusetts; la jolla,
california; groton, connecticut; st. louis, missouri; sandwich, england, u.k.; amboise, france; and
nagoya, japan.
we have veterinary medicine research and development operations in owned facilities in
henrietta and richland township, michigan; lincoln, nebraska; and sandwich, england, u.k., and in
leased facilities in melbourne, australia.
the headquarters and the research and u.s. operations of our consumer healthcare business are
located in morris plains, new jersey, where we own five buildings and lease a smaller amount of
space nearby. consumer healthcares sales and marketing offices in the u.s. are located in leased
facilities. in most markets outside of the u.s., consumer healthcares sales and marketing
operations as well as administrative support are
located in owned or leased facilities shared with our human health and other businesses.
our global manufacturing division maintains space in peapack, n.j. and operates plants in 79
locations around the world that manufacture products for our human health, consumer healthcare and
animal health businesses. major facilities are located in belgium, brazil, china, france, germany,
ireland, italy, japan, mexico, puerto rico, singapore, sweden, the united kingdom and the united
states. the global manufacturing division also operates numerous distribution facilities in major
markets around the world.
as we announced shortly after the acquisition of pharmacia in april2003, we have reduced and
will continue to reduce the number of legacy
table of contents
pfizer and legacy pharmacia manufacturing and research
and development sites in the u.s. and various other countries.
in general, our properties are well maintained, adequate and suitable to their purposes. note
10 to our consolidated financial statements, property, plant and equipment, in our 2004 financial
report, which discloses amounts invested in land, buildings and equipment, is incorporated by
reference. see also the discussion under note 15 to our consolidated financial statements, lease
commitments, in our 2004 financial report, which also is incorporated by reference.
item 3. legal proceedings
certain legal proceedings in which we are involved are discussed in note 17 to our
consolidated financial statements, legal proceedings and contingencies, in our 2004 financial
report, which is incorporated by reference.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
not applicable.
table of contents
executive officers of the company
the executive officers of the company are set forth in this table. each holds the offices
indicated until his or her successor is chosen and qualified at the regular meeting of the board of
directors to be held immediately following the 2005 annual meeting of shareholders. each of the
executive officers is a member of the pfizer leadership team.
name
age
position
peter b. corr
senior vice president  science and technology
charles l. hardwick
senior vice president  corporate affairs
yvonne r. jackson
senior vice president  human resources
karen l. katen
executive vice president; president  pfizer global
pharmaceuticals
jeffrey b. kindler
executive vice president and general counsel
john l. lamattina
senior vice president; president  pfizer global research
and development
henry a. mckinnell
chairman of the board and chief executive officer
natale s. ricciardi
senior vice president; president  pfizer global
manufacturing
david l. shedlarz
executive vice president and chief financial officer
information concerning ms.katen, mr.kindler, dr.lamattina, dr.mckinnell and mr.
shedlarz is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the headings nominees for directors
and named executive officers who are not directors in our 2005 proxy statement.
charles l. hardwick
mr.hardwick joined us in 1966. he held a number of positions in government and public affairs and
in marketing before becoming vice president  government and public affairs in 1997. he was
appointed senior vice president  government relations and public affairs in march2001. he was
elected vice president of pfizer inc.; senior vice president  corporate affairs in december2001
and elected senior vice president  corporate affairs of pfizer inc. effective july2002.
yvonne r. jackson
ms.jackson joined us in 2002 and was elected senior vice president  human resources in october
2003. prior to joining us, she served as senior vice president of human resources, organization and
environment at compaq computer corporation from 1999 to 2002.
peter b. corr
dr.corr joined us in june2000, upon the merger with warner-lambert company, where he was vice
president, warner-lambert and president, warner-lambert/parke-davis pharmaceutical research and
development from 1998 to june2000. from june2000 to july2002, dr.corr was senior vice
president, pfizer inc.; executive vice president, pfizer global research and development; and
president, worldwide development. dr.corr was named senior vice president  science and
technology, in july2002.
table of contents
natale s. ricciardi
mr.ricciardi joined us in 1972. he held a number of positions of increasing responsibility in
manufacturing before being named u.s. area vice president/team leader for pfizer global
manufacturing in 1999. he was elected senior vice president of pfizer inc.; president  pfizer
global manufacturing in october2004.
part ii
item
5. market for the companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of
equity securities
the principal market for our common stock is the new york stock exchange. our stock is
also is listed on the london, euronext and swiss stock exchanges and is traded on various united
states regional stock exchanges. additional information required by this item is incorporated by
reference from the table captioned quarterly consolidated financial data (unaudited) in our 2004
financial report.
table of contents
this table provides certain information with respect to our purchases of shares of the
companys common stock during the fiscal fourth quarter of 2004:
issuer purchases of equity securities*
approximate dollar
total number of
value of shares that
average price
shares purchased as
may yet be purchased
total number of
paid per
part of publicly
under the 2004
period
shares purchased**
share**
announced plan*
program*
september27, 2004
through october31,
2004***
5,892,660
$
29.87
5,880,116
$
5,000,000,000
november1, 2004 through
november30, 2004****
21,941,379
$
28.22
21,938,600
$
4,380,886,870
december1, 2004 through
december31, 2004****
41,437,249
$
26.04
41,381,500
$
3,303,547,576
total
69,271,288
$
27.05
69,200,216
*
on december15, 2003, the company announced that the board of directors had authorized the purchase of
up to $5billion of the companys common stock (the 2003 program). the company completed its share
purchases under the 2003 program in october2004. on october28, 2004, the company announced that the
board of directors had authorized the purchase of up to an additional $5billion of the companys
common stock (the 2004 program). such purchases are expected to be completed by the end of 2005.
**
in addition to purchases under the 2003 and 2004 programs, this column reflects the following
transactions during the fiscal fourth quarter of 2004: (i)the deemed surrender to the company of
20,040 shares of common stock to pay the exercise price and to satisfy tax withholding obligations in
connection with the exercise of employee stock options, (ii)the open-market purchase by the trustee of
50,171 shares of common stock in connection with the reinvestment of dividends paid on common stock
held in trust for employees who were granted performance-contingent share awards and who deferred
receipt of such awards and (iii)the surrender to the company of 861 shares of common stock to satisfy
tax withholding obligations in connection with the vesting of restricted stock issued to employees.
***
purchases were made under the 2003 program.
****
purchases were made under the 2004 program.
table of contents
item 6. selected financial data
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the financial summary
in our 2004 financial report.
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the financial review
section of our 2004 financial report.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the discussion under
the heading financial risk management in our 2004 financial report.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the report of
independent registered public accounting firm on the consolidated financial statements in our 2004
financial report and from the consolidated financial statements, related notes and supplementary
data in our 2004 financial report.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item 9a. controls and procedures
disclosure controls
as of the end of the period covered by this 2004 form 10-k, we carried out an evaluation,
under the supervision and with the participation of our principal executive officer and principal
financial officer, of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and
procedures (as such term is defined in rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the securities exchange
act of 1934 (the exchange act)). based on this evaluation, our principal executive officer and
principal financial officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures are effective in
alerting them in a timely manner to material information required to be disclosed in our periodic
reports filed with the sec.
internal control over financial reporting
managements report on the companys internal control over financial reporting (as such term
is defined in rules13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the exchange
act), and the related report of our independent public accounting
firm, are included in our 2004 financial report under the
headings managements report on internal control over
financial reporting and report of independent accounting firm
on internal control over financial reporting, respectively, and are incorporated by reference.
changes in internal controls
during our most recent fiscal quarter, there has not occurred any change in our internal
control
over financial reporting (as such term is defined in rules13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the
exchange act) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our
internal control over financial reporting.
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
information about our directors is incorporated by reference from the discussion under
item1 of our 2005 proxy statement. information about compliance with section 16(a) of the exchange
act is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading section16(a) beneficial
ownership reporting compliance in our 2005 proxy statement.
table of contents
information about our audit committee,
including the members of the committee, and our audit committee financial experts, is incorporated
by reference from the discussion under the headings the audit committee and audit committee
financial experts in our 2005 proxy statement. information about the pfizer policies on business
conduct governing our employees, including our chief executive officer, chief financial officer and
principal accounting officer, and the code of business conduct and ethics governing our directors,
is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading pfizer policies on business
ethics and conduct in our 2005 proxy statement. the balance of the information required by this
item is contained in the discussion entitled executive officers of the company in parti of this
2004 form 10-k.
item 11. executive compensation
information about director and executive compensation is incorporated by reference from
the discussion under the headings 2004 compensation of non-employee directors, executive
compensation, pfizer inc. retirement annuity plan, pension plan table, and employment agreement for
chief executive officer and severance agreements in our 2005 proxy statement.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the discussion under
the headings securities ownership of officers and directors and equity compensation plan
information in our 2005 proxy statement.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
information about certain relationships and transactions with related parties is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading related party transactions in our
2005 proxy statement.
item 14. principal accountant fees and services
information about the fees for 2004 and 2003 for professional services rendered by our
independent auditors is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading audit and
non-audit fees in item2 of our 2005 proxy statement. our audit committees policy on pre-approval
of audit and permissible non-audit services of our independent auditors is incorporated by
reference from the section
captioned policy on audit committee pre-approval of audit and permissible non-audit services
of independent auditor in item2 of our 2005 proxy statement.
table of contents
part iv
item 15. exhibits and financial statement schedules
15(a)(1) financial statements. the following consolidated financial statements, related
notes, independent auditors report and supplementary data from our 2004 financial report are
incorporated by reference into item8 of partii of this 2004 form 10-k:
report of independent registered public accounting firm on the consolidated financial statements
consolidated statement of income
consolidated balance sheet
consolidated statement of shareholders equity
consolidated statement of cash flows
notes to consolidated financial statements
quarterly consolidated financial data (unaudited)
15(a)(2) financial statement schedules. schedules are omitted because they are not required or
because the information is provided elsewhere in the financial statements. the financial statements
of unconsolidated subsidiaries are omitted because, considered in the aggregate, they would not
constitute a significant subsidiary.
15(a)(3) exhibits. these exhibits are available upon request. requests should be directed to
margaret m. foran, vice president-corporate governance and secretary, pfizer inc., 235 east 42nd
street, new york, ny 10017-5755. the exhibit numbers preceded by an asterisk (*) indicate exhibits
physically filed with this 2004 form 10-k. all other exhibit numbers indicate exhibits filed by
incorporation by reference. exhibit numbers 10(1) through 10(27) are management contracts or
compensatory plans or arrangements.
agreement and plan of merger dated as of july13, 2002 among
pfizer inc., pilsner acquisition sub corp. and pharmacia
corporation is incorporated by reference from amendment no.2 to
our registration statement on forms-4 as filed with the sec on
october17, 2002.1
3(1)
our restated certificate of incorporation dated april11, 2003,
is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period
ended march30, 2003.
*3(2)
our by-laws as amended february24, 2005.
we agree to furnish to the sec, upon request,
a copy of each exhibit to this agreement and plan of merger.
table of contents
4(1)
indenture, dated as of january30, 2001, between us and the chase manhattan bank, is incorporated by reference from our
8-k report filed on january30, 2001.
4(2)
except as set forth in exhibit4(1) above, the instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt securities
of the company and its subsidiaries have been omitted.2.
10(1)
2001 stock and incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the
2001 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(2)
pfizer inc. 2004 stock plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the
2004 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(3)
form of stock option grant notice and summary of key terms is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended september26, 2004.
10(4)
form of restricted stock grant notice is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended september26, 2004.
10(5)
form of performance-contingent share award grant notice is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended september26, 2004.
10(6)
stock and incentive plan, as amended through july1, 1999, is incorporated by reference from
our 1999 10-k report.
10(7)
pfizer retirement annuity plan, as amended through november6, 1997, is incorporated by
reference from our 1997 10-k report.
10(8)
nonfunded supplemental retirement plan is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(9)
nonfunded deferred compensation and supplemental savings plan, as amended and restated as of
february1, 2002, is incorporated by reference from our 2002 10-k report.
10(10)
executive annual incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the
1997 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(11)
summary of annual incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our 2000 10-k report.
10(12)
2001 performance-contingent share award plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy
statement for the 2001 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(13)
performance-contingent share award program is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report
for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(14)
deferred compensation plan is incorporated by reference from our 1997 10-k report.
10(15)
non-employee directors retirement plan (frozen as of october1996) is incorporated by
reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(16)
annual retainer unit award plan (for non-employee directors) is incorporated by reference
from our 10-q report for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(17)
nonfunded deferred compensation and unit award plan for non-employee directors is
incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended september29, 1996.
10(18)
restricted stock plan for non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 1996
10-k report.
10(19)
warner-lambert company 1996 stock plan, as amended, is incorporated by reference from
warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(20)
warner-lambert company incentive compensation plan, as amended, is incorporated by reference
from warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
we agree to furnish to the sec, upon request,
a copy of each instrument with respect to issuances of long-term debt of the
company and its subsidiaries.
table of contents
10(21)
warner-lambert company supplemental pension income plan, as amended, is incorporated by
reference from warner-lamberts 1999 10-k report.
10(22)
pharmacia corporation 2001 long-term incentive plan is incorporated by reference from
pharmacias 10-q report for the period ended march31, 2001.
10(23)
the form of change-of-control/severance agreement with each of the named executive officers identified in our 2005 proxy statement is incorporated
by reference from our 1994 10-k report.
10(24)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of our non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(25)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of the named executive officers identified in our 2005 proxy statement is incorporated by reference
from our 1997 10-k report.
10(26)
post-retirement consulting agreement, dated as of april20, 2000, between us and william c. steere, jr., is incorporated by reference from our 10-q
report for the period ended april2, 2000.
10(27)
employment agreement, dated as of january1, 2001, between us and henry a. mckinnell is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report filed on
february2, 2001.
*12
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
*13
portions of the 2004 financial report, which, except for those sections incorporated by reference, are furnished solely for the information of the
sec and are not to be deemed filed.
*21
subsidiaries of the company.
*23
consent of kpmg llp, independent certified public accountants.
*24
power of attorney (included as part of signature page).
*31.1
certification by the chief executive officer pursuant to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*31.2
certification by the chief financial officer pursuant to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*32.1
certification by the chief executive officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
2002.
*32.2
certification by the chief financial officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
2002.
table of contents
signatures
under the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934,
this report was signed on behalf of the registrant by the authorized person named below.
pfizer inc.
dated: february 28, 2005
by:
/s/ margaret m. foran
margaret m. foran, vice president -
corporate governance and secretary
we, the undersigned directors and officers of pfizer inc., hereby severally constitute
margaret m. foran and jeffrey b. kindler, and each of them singly, our true and lawful attorneys
with full power to them and each of them to sign for us, in our names in the capacities indicated
below, any and all amendments to this annual report on form 10-k filed with the securities and
exchange commission.
under the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report was signed by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the date indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ henry a. mckinnell
henry a. mckinnell
chairman of the board and chief
executive officer and director
(principal executive officer)
february28, 2005
/s/ david l. shedlarz
david l. shedlarz
executive vice president and chief
financial officer (principal
financial officer)
february28, 2005
/s/ loretta v. cangialosi
loretta v. cangialosi
vice president  controller
(principal accounting officer)
february28, 2005
/s/ michael s. brown
michael s. brown
director
february28, 2005
/s/ m. anthony burns
m. anthony burns
director
february28, 2005
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ robert n. burt
robert n. burt
director
february28, 2005
/s/ w. don cornwell
w. don cornwell
director
february28, 2005
/s/ william h. gray iii
william h. gray iii
director
february28, 2005
/s/ constance j. horner
constance j. horner
director
february28, 2005
/s/ william r. howell
william r. howell
director
february28, 2005
/s/ stanley o. ikenberry
stanley o. ikenberry
director
february28, 2005
/s/ george a. lorch
george a. lorch
director
february28, 2005
/s/ dana g. mead
dana g. mead
director
february28, 2005
/s/ franklin d. raines
franklin d. raines
director
february28, 2005
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ ruth j. simmons
ruth j. simmons
director
february28, 2005
/s/ william c. steere, jr.
william c. steere, jr.
director
february28, 2005
/s/ jean-paul valls
jean-paul valls
director
february28, 2005
