10-k
d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchangeact of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2010
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file number 1-3619
pfizer inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-5315170
(state or other jurisdiction of
(i.r.s. employer
incorporation or organization)
identification number)
235 east 42nd street
10017-5755
new york, new york
(zip code)
(address of principal executive offices)
(212) 733-2323  (registrants telephone number, including area code)
securities
registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
nameofeachexchange
on which registered
common stock, $.05 par value
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:
none
indicate by
check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act.yesxno  indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant
to section13 or section15(d) of the act.yesnox
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90
days.yesxno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate website, if any, every interactive
data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t (232-405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such
files.)yesxno
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will
not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.  indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller reporting company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.
largeacceleratedfilerx
accelerated filer
non-acceleratedfiler
smallerreportingcompany
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesnox
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant, computed by reference to the closing price as of
the last business day of the registrants most recently completed second fiscal quarter, july4, 2010, was approximately $114 billion. the registrant has no non-voting common stock.
the number of shares outstanding of the registrants common stock as of february 22, 2011 was 7,995,220,402 shares of common stock,
all of one class.  documents incorporated by reference
portions of the 2010 annual report to shareholders
partsi,iiandiv
portions of the proxy statement for the 2011 annual meeting of shareholders
parts i and iii
table of contents
table of contents
page
part i
item1. business
general
pfizer website
business segments
biopharmaceutical
diversified
research and development
international operations
marketing
patents and intellectual property rights
competition
raw materials
government regulation and price constraints
environmental law compliance
tax matters
employees
item1a. risk factors
item1b. unresolved staff comments
item2. properties
item3. legal proceedings
item4. reserved
executive officers of the company
part ii
item
5. market for the companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6. selected financial data
item7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8. financial statements and supplementary data
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item9a. controls and procedures
item9b. other information
part iii
item10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item11. executive compensation
item
12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director
independence
item14. principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item15. exhibits, financial statement schedules
15(a)(1) financial statements
15(a)(2) financial statement schedules
15(a)(3) exhibits
table of contents
part i
item1.
business
general  pfizer inc. (which may be referred to as pfizer, the company, we, us or our) is a research-based, global biopharmaceutical company. we apply science and our global resources to improve health and
well-being at every stage of life.we strive to set the standard for quality, safety and value in the discovery, development and manufacture of medicines for people and animals.our diversified global healthcare portfolio includes human
and animal biologic and small molecule medicines and vaccines, as well as nutritional products and many of the worlds best-known consumer healthcare products.every day, we work across developed and emerging markets to advance wellness,
prevention, treatments and cures that challenge the most feared diseases of our time. consistent with our responsibility as the worlds leading biopharmaceutical company, we also collaborate with other biopharmaceutical companies, healthcare
providers, governments and local communities to support and expand access to reliable, affordable healthcare around the world.
the company was incorporated under the laws of the state of delaware on june2, 1942.
on october15, 2009, we completed our acquisition of wyeth. the acquisition was a cash-and-stock transaction valued, based on the
closing market price of pfizers common stock on the acquisition date, at $50.40 per share of wyeth common stock, or a total of approximately $68 billion.  on october12, 2010, we and king pharmaceuticals, inc. (king) announced that we had entered into a definitive merger agreement under the terms of which we will acquire king, a diversified specialty
pharmaceutical discovery and clinical development company, for $3.6 billion in cash or $14.25 per king share. on january31, 2011, we acquired approximately 92.5% of kings outstanding common stock through the completion of a tender offer.
we intend to complete the acquisition of king through a short-form merger under tennessee law on or about february28, 2011, without a vote of the remaining shareholders of king. as a result of the merger, each remaining share of king common
stock
will be converted into the right to receive $14.25 per share, net in cash, without interest and less any required withholding taxes and king will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of pfizer.
pfizer website  our annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form8-k and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to section13(a) or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (exchange act), are available on our website (www.pfizer.com), in text format and in interactive data file format, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material
with, or furnish it to, the securities and exchange commission (sec).  throughout this 2010 form 10-k, we incorporate by
reference certain information from parts of other documents filed or to be filed with the sec, including our proxy statement for the 2011 annual meeting of shareholders (2011 proxy statement) and the 2010 financial report, which will be
contained in appendix a to our 2011 proxy statement. the sec allows us to disclose important information by referring to it in that manner. please refer to such information. our 2010 annual report to shareholders consists of the 2010 financial
report and the corporate and shareholder information attached to the 2011 proxy statement. portions of our 2010 financial report are filed as exhibit 13 to this 2010 form 10-k. our 2010 financial report will be available on our website
(www.pfizer.com) on or about february28, 2011. our 2011 proxy statement will be available on our website on or about march22, 2011.  information relating to corporate governance at pfizer, including our corporate governance principles; director qualification standards; chief executive officer and chief financial officer certifications;
pfizer policies on business conduct (for all of our employees, including our chief executive officer, chief financial officer and principal accounting officer); code of business conduct and ethics for our directors; information concerning our
directors; ways to communicate by e-mail with our directors; board committees; committee charters; and transactions in pfizer securities by directors and officers, is available on our website (www.pfizer.com). we will provide any
table of contents
of the foregoing information without charge upon written request to matthew lepore, vice president and corporate secretary, chief counsel-corporate governance, pfizer inc., 235 east 42nd street,
new york, ny 10017-5755. information relating to shareholder services, including our shareholder investment program, book-entry share ownership and direct deposit of dividends, is also available on our website (www.pfizer.com).
business segments  we operate two distinct commercial organizations which constitute our two business segments: biopharmaceutical and diversified. biopharmaceutical includes the primary care, specialty care, established
products, emerging markets and oncology customer-focused units, which, in 2010, included products that prevent and treat cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, central nervous system disorders, arthritis and pain, infectious and respiratory
diseases, urogenital conditions, cancer, eye disease and endocrine disorders, among others. diversified includes animal health products that prevent and treat diseases in livestock and companion animals; consumer healthcare products that include
over-the-counter healthcare products such as pain management therapies, cough/cold/allergy remedies, dietary supplements, hemorrhoidal care and other personal care items; nutrition products such as infant and toddler formula products; and
capsugel, which represents our hard capsules business.  comparative segment information for 2010, 2009 and 2008 is
presented in the tables captioned segment revenues and profit: segment assets, property, plant and equipment additions, and depreciation and amortization; geographic; and revenues by product in note 20 to our consolidated financial
statements, segment, geographic and revenue information, in our 2010 financial report. the information from those tables in our 2010 financial report is incorporated by reference in this 2010 form10-k.
our businesses are heavily regulated in most of the countries in which we operate. in the u.s., the principal authority regulating our
operations is the food and drug administration (fda). the fda regulates the safety and efficacy of the products we offer and our research quality, manufacturing processes, product promotion, advertising and
product labeling. similar regulations exist in most other countries, and in many countries the government also regulates our prices. see government regulation and price constraints below.
biopharmaceutical  revenues from the biopharmaceutical segment contributed approximately 86% of our total revenues in 2010 and 91% of our total revenues in both 2009 and 2008.
we recorded direct product sales of more than $1 billion for each of 15 biopharmaceutical products in 2010, and for each of nine legacy
pfizer biopharmaceutical products in 2009 and 2008. these products represented 60% of our biopharmaceutical revenues in 2010, 56% of our biopharmaceutical revenues in 2009 and 60% of our biopharmaceutical revenues in 2008.
worldwide biopharmaceutical revenues in 2010 were $58.5 billion, an increase of 29% compared to 2009, primarily due to the inclusion of
operational revenues from legacy wyeth products of approximately $13.7 billion, which favorably impacted biopharmaceutical revenues by 30%, the weakening of the u.s. dollar relative to other currencies, primarily the canadian dollar, australian
dollar, japanese yen and brazilian real, which favorably impacted biopharmaceutical revenues by approximately $900 million, or 2%, partially offset by the decrease in operational revenues of approximately $1.5 billion, or 3%, from legacy pfizer
products overall, including norvasc, camptosar, lipitor and detrol/detrol la in 2010.
geographically, in the u.s., biopharmaceutical revenues increased 30% in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to the inclusion of revenues
from legacy wyeth products of $6.6 billion, which had a favorable impact of 33%, partially offset by lower overall revenues from legacy pfizer products, including lipitor, detrol/detrol la, celebrex, lyrica, chantix and
caduet, and the impact of increased rebates in 2010 as a result of the impact of the u.s. healthcare legislation enacted in march 2010, all of which had an unfavorable impact of $664 million, or 3%.
table of contents
in our international markets, biopharmaceutical revenues increased 28% in 2010 compared to
2009 reflecting the inclusion of operational revenues from legacy wyeth products of $7.1 billion, which had a favorable impact of 28%, and the favorable impact of foreign exchange on international biopharmaceutical revenues of approximately $900
million, or 3%, partially offset by lower operational revenues from legacy pfizer products of $819 million, or 3%. the decrease in operational revenues of legacy pfizer products was due to lower operational revenues from, among other products,
lipitor, norvasc and camptosar, all of which were impacted by the loss of exclusivity in certain international markets.
biopharmaceuticalselected product descriptions:
lipitor, for the treatment of elevated ldl-cholesterol levels in the blood, is the most widely-used branded prescription treatment for lowering
cholesterol and the best-selling prescription pharmaceutical product of any kind in the world. see patents and intellectual property rights for further information on lipitor.
enbrel is our treatment for rheumatoid arthritis, polyarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, plaque psoriasis and
ankylosing spondylitis, a type of arthritis affecting the spine. the approval of a number of competing products for the treatment of psoriasis is expected to increase competition with respect to enbrel in 2011. under our agreement with amgen
inc. (amgen), we and amgen co-promote enbrel in the u.s. and canada and share in the profits from enbrel sales in those countries. our co-promotion agreement with amgen expires in 2013, and we are entitled to a royalty stream for 36
months thereafter, which is significantly less than our current share of enbrel profits from u.s. and canadian sales. our exclusive rights to enbrel outside the u.s. and canada will not be affected by the expiration of the co-promotion
agreement.
lyrica is indicated for the management of post-herpetic neuralgia (phn), diabetic peripheral neuropathy (dpn), fibromyalgia, and as adjunctive
therapy for adult patients with partial onset seizures in the u.s., and for neuropathic pain, adjunctive treatment of epilepsy and general anxiety disorder (gad) in certain countries outside the u.s.
prevnar/prevenar 13, launched in germany in late 2009 and in the u.s. in early 2010, with launches in other markets in 2010, is our
13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine for preventing invasive pneumococcal disease in infants and young children. to date, prevnar/prevenar 13 has been approved in over 80 countries and launched in over 55 of those countries.
celebrex is for the treatment of the signs and symptoms of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis and acute pain in adults. celebrex is
supported by continued educational and promotional efforts highlighting its efficacy and safety profile for appropriate patients.
viagra remains the leading treatment for erectile dysfunction and one of the worlds most recognized pharmaceutical brands after more than
a decade. viagra began facing generic competition in spain and finland in december 2009.
xalabrands consists of xalatan, a prostaglandin, the worlds leading branded agent to reduce elevated eye pressure in patients with
open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension and xalacom, a fixed combination prostaglandin (xalatan) and beta blocker (timolol), available outside the u.s. we expect to lose exclusivity for xalatan in the u.s. in march
2011 and for xalatan and xalacom in the majority of major european markets in july 2011. we are, however, pursuing a pediatric extension in europe. if successful, exclusivity in the majority of major european markets will be extended
by six months to january 2012.
effexor xr (extended release capsules) is our antidepressant for treating adult patients with major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety
disorder, social anxiety disorder and panic disorder. effexor xr faces generic competition outside the u.s. and has faced generic competition in the u.s. since july1, 2010. this generic competition had in 2010, and will continue to have
a significant adverse impact on our revenues for effexor xr.
norvasc, for treating hypertension, lost exclusivity in the u.s. in march 2007 and has also experienced patent expirations in other major
markets, including canada, in july 2009.
table of contents
prevnar/prevenar (7-valent) is our 7-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine for preventing invasive pneumococcal disease in infants and
young children. certain markets have transitioned from the use of prevnar/prevenar (7-valent) to prevnar/prevenar 13 (see discussion above) resulting in lower revenues for prevnar/prevenar (7-valent). we expect this trend to
continue.
zyvox is the worlds best-selling branded agent for the treatment of certain serious gram-positive pathogens, including
methicillin-resistant staphylococcus-aureus in complicated skin structure infections and nosocomial pneumonia.
our premarin family of products remains the leading therapy to help women address moderate to severe menopausal symptoms.
sutent is for the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma, including metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mrcc), and gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (gist) after disease progression on, or intolerance to, imatinib mesylate. we continue to drive total revenue and prescription growth, supported by cost-effectiveness data and efficacy data in first-line mrccincluding two-year survival
data, which represents the first time overall survival of two years has been seen in the treatment of advanced kidney cancer, as well as through access and healthcare coverage. as of december31, 2010, sutent was the best-selling
medicine in the world for the treatment of first-line mrcc. on july1, 2010, the fda approved revised labeling for sutent, which includes a boxed warning concerning hepatotoxicity and related changes to the warnings and precautions
section. over 91,000 patients worldwide have been treated with sutent. the risk-benefit profile of sutent in both mrcc and second-line gist has been well established through large, randomized clinical trials evaluating its safety and
efficacy. sutent remains an important treatment option for these two difficult-to-treat cancers.
geodon/zeldox, an atypical antipsychotic, is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia, as monotherapy for the acute treatment of bipolar
manic or mixed episodes, and as an adjunct to lithium or valproate for the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder.
detrol/detrol la, a muscarinic receptor antagonist, is the most prescribed branded medicine worldwide for overactive bladder. detrol la
is an extended-release formulation taken once a day.
zosyn/tazocin our broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotic, faces generic competition in the u.s. and certain other markets.
genotropin, the worlds leading human growth hormone, is used in children for the treatment of short stature with growth hormone
deficiency, prader-willi syndrome, turner syndrome, small for gestational age syndrome, idiopathic short stature (in the u.s. only) and chronic renal insufficiency (outside the u.s. only), as well as in adults with growth hormone deficiency.
genotropin is supported by a broad platform of innovative injection-delivery devices.
vfend, as the only branded agent available in intravenous and oral forms, continued to build on its position as the best-selling systemic,
antifungal agent worldwide in 2010. vfends overall global sales continued to be driven in 2010 by its acceptance as an excellent broad-spectrum agent for treating yeast and molds. in october 2009, we settled a challenge by mylan, inc.
(mylan) and its subsidiary, matrix laboratories limited (matrix), to four of our patents relating to vfend by entering into an agreement granting matrix and another subsidiary of mylan the right to market voriconazole (generic vfend)
tablets in the u.s. pursuant to that settlement agreement, matrix and the other mylan subsidiary launched their generic voriconazole tablet in the u.s. in february 2011. in addition, the basic patent for vfend tablets in brazil expired in
january 2011.
protonix (pantoprazole sodium) is our proton pump inhibitor for gastroesophageal reflux disease. we have an exclusive license from nycomed gmbh
to sell protonix in the u.s., where it faces generic competition as the result of at-risk launches by certain manufacturers that began in 2007 and the expiration of the basic u.s. patent (including the six-month pediatric exclusivity period)
in january 2011.
table of contents
chantix/champix, the first new prescription treatment to aid smoking cessation in nearly a decade, has been launched in all major markets. we
are continuing our educational and promotional efforts, which are focused on the chantix benefit-risk proposition, the significant health consequences of smoking and the importance of the physician-patient dialogue in helping patients quit
smoking.
benefix, refacto af, xyntha are hemophilia products that assist patients with lifelong bleeding disorder. benefix is the only available
recombinant factor ix product for the treatment of hemophilia b, while refacto af/xyntha are recombinant factor viii products for the treatment of hemophilia a. both products are indicated for the control and prevention of bleeding in
patients with these disorders and in some countries also are indicated for prophylaxis in certain situations, such as surgery.
caduet is a single pill therapy combining lipitor and norvasc for the prevention of cardiovascular events. we expect that
caduet will lose exclusivity in the u.s. in november 2011.
revatio is for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension.
pristiq was approved for the treatment of major depressive disorder (mdd) in the u.s. in february 2008 and subsequently was approved for that
indication in 28 other countries. pristiq has also been approved for treatment of moderate-to-severe vasomotor symptoms (vms) associated with menopause in thailand, mexico and the philippines.
aricept, discovered and developed by eisai co., ltd., is the worlds leading medicine to treat symptoms of alzheimers disease. we
co-promote aricept with eisai in the u.s. and several other countries and have an exclusive license to sell this medicine in certain other countries. we lost exclusivity for aricept 5 mg. and 10 mg. tablets in the u.s. in november
2010. we expect that the aricept 23mg. tablet will have exclusivity in the u.s. until july 2013.
spiriva is our inhaled maintenance prescription treatment for breathing problems associated
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), a lung condition that includes chronic bronchitis, emphysema, or both. we co-promote spiriva in the u.s. with boehringer ingelheim
pharmaceuticals, inc.  diversified
worldwide diversified revenues increased 114% in 2010 compared to 2009 due to the inclusion of operational revenues from legacy wyeth
products of approximately $4.4 billion in 2010, which favorably impacted diversified revenues by 106%. the increase was primarily due to the addition of the legacy wyeth consumer healthcare and nutrition operations. in addition, worldwide
diversified revenues were favorably impacted by the operational revenue increase in legacy pfizer diversified businesses of 3% in 2010, and the favorable impact of foreign exchange of 5%.  animal health  our animal health unit is one of the largest in the world. we
discover, develop and sell products for the prevention and treatment of diseases in livestock and companion animals. revenues from animal health products increased by 29% in 2010 compared to 2009, reflecting the inclusion of operational revenues
from legacy wyeth animal health products of 22%, higher operational revenues from legacy pfizer animal health products of 4% due primarily to growth in the companion animal and livestock business and the favorable impact of foreign exchange of 3%.
the following factors impacted 2010 results:
the first full year of sales associated with the acquisition of fort dodge animal health from wyeth; and
improving economic conditions.  among the products we market are vaccines, anti-infectives, anti-inflammatories, antiemetics and parasiticides, including the following products:
startect is a new product combining two anthelmintics to deliver a broad spectrum control of parasitic worm infestation in sheep.
improvac is a novel gonadotropin releasing factor (gnrf) vaccine for swine that prevents boar taint.
table of contents
palladia is a treatment of mast cell tumors, a common form of cancer that affects dogs; it works by killing tumor cells and by cutting off the
blood supply to the tumor.
convenia is an anti-infective for dogs and cats that delivers an assured full course of therapy from a single injection.
cerenia is a selective nk-1 receptor antagonist for the treatment and prevention of vomiting in dogs and for the prevention of motion sickness.
revolution/stronghold is a topically administered parasiticide for dogs and cats that controls a number of different parasites such as fleas and
heartworm.
rimadyl relieves pain and inflammation associated with canine osteoarthritis and soft tissue orthopedic surgery.
draxxin is an effective and convenient single dose anti-infective used to treat infections in cattle and swine.
excede is an effective and convenient single-dose anti-infective used to treat infections in dairy cows, beef cattle and swine.
zulvac provides a highly effective vaccination program for cattle against the viral disease, bluetongue.
consumer healthcare  consumer
healthcare is the fifth-largest over-the-counter healthcare products company in the world and sells two of the ten largest selling over-the-counter brands (centrum and advil) in the world. consumer healthcare revenues totaled $2.8 billion for
2010. the consumer healthcare unit holds strong positions in various geographic markets with its highest revenue volume in the u.s., canada, the peoples republic of china, italy, germany, brazil and australia. major categories and product
lines include:
dietary supplements:centrum brands (including centrum, centrum silver, centrum mens and womens,
centrum performance, centrum cardio and centrum kids), caltrate;
pain management:advil brands (including advil, advil pm, advil liqui-gels, childrens advil, infants advil, advil
migraine), thermacare;
respiratory:robitussin, advil cold& sinus, advil congestion relief, dimetapp;
personal care:chapstick, preparation h.  nutrition  pfizer nutrition is a leader in infant nutritionals in the markets in
which we operate. we have a focused presence in key markets throughout asia, the middle east, europe and latin america with china, the philippines, the u.k., mexico and australia being among our top markets. as part of pfizer, nutrition continues to
have enhanced opportunities to grow in new and existing markets, as well as to leverage the companys strengths in order to accelerate innovation and develop new products. nutritions revenues totaled $1.9 billion in 2010.
nutrition products include our s26 preterm feeding system, specialty formulas such as s26 pe gold, s26 ha gold and a range
of age-specific products that include s26 pe gold, progress, promil and promise.   capsugel
capsugel has a diverse product line that includes not only hard gelatin capsules, but also liquid, softgel, non-animal, and fish gelatin
capsules, all for use in pharmaceutical and dietary supplement dosage delivery. revenues of $752 million for 2010 represent an increase of $12 million versus 2009, with no meaningful impact from foreign exchange. revenue in the 2009 period prior to
the acquisition of wyeth includes $5 million of capsugel sales to wyeth. post-acquisition, these sales are considered intercompany and eliminated from consolidated pfizer results. we are currently reviewing strategic alternatives for capsugel, which
may include divestiture.  research and development
innovation by our research and development operations is very important to the companys success. our goal is to discover, develop
and bring to market innovative products that address major unmet medical needs. we spent $9.4 billion in 2010, $7.8 billion in 2009 and $7.9 billion in 2008 on research and development.
table of contents
we conduct research internally and also through contracts with third parties, through
collaborations with universities and biotechnology companies and in cooperation with other pharmaceutical firms. we also seek out promising compounds and innovative technologies developed by third parties to incorporate into our discovery or
development processes or projects, as well as our product lines, through acquisition, licensing or other arrangements.  drug
discovery and development is time-consuming, expensive and unpredictable. according to the pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america (phrma), out of 5,000-10,000 screened compounds, only 250 enter preclinical testing, five enter human
clinical trials and one is approved by the fda. the process from early discovery or design to development to regulatory approval can take more than ten years. drug candidates can fail at any stage of the process. candidates may not receive
regulatory approval even after many years of research.  as of year-end 2010, we had about 374 projects in research and
development, ranging from discovery through registration, of which 116 programs are in phase 1 through registration. at year-end 2010, our phase iii portfolio contained 24 programs. while these new candidates may or may not eventually receive
regulatory approval, new drug candidates entering clinical development phases are the foundation for future products.  in
addition to discovering and developing new products, our research operations seek to add value to our existing products by improving their effectiveness and by discovering new uses for them.
information concerning several of our drug candidates in development, as well as supplemental filings for existing products, is set forth
under the heading product developments in our 2010 financial report. that information is incorporated by reference.
our competitors also devote substantial funds and resources to research and development. we also compete against numerous small
biotechnology companies in developing potential drug candidates. the extent to which our competitors are successful in their research could result in erosion of the sales of our products and unanticipated product obsolescence.
on february1, 2011, we announced a focus on disease areas where we believe we can
deliver the greatest medical and commercial success. our high-priority therapeutic areas are immunology and inflammation, oncology, cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, neuroscience and pain, and vaccines. key steps in this process include the
planned reduction in the number of disease areas we will focus on as well as a realigned research and development footprint. as a result, we expect significant reductions in our annual research and development expenses.
international operations  we have significant operations outside the united states. they are managed through the same segments as our u.s. operationsbiopharmaceutical and diversified.
revenues from operations outside the u.s. of $38.8 billion accounted for 57% of our total revenues in 2010. revenues exceeded $500
million in each of 18 countries outside the u.s. in 2010. the u.s. was the only country to contribute more than 10% of our total revenues, comprising 43% of total revenues in both 2010 and 2009 and 42.3% of total revenues in 2008. japan is our
second-largest national market, with 7.5% of total revenues in 2010, 8.5% of total revenues in 2009 and 7.7% of total revenues in 2008.  for a geographic breakdown of revenues and changes in revenues, see the table captioned geographic in note 20 to our consolidated financial statements, segment, geographic and revenue
information, in our 2010 financial report and the table captioned revenues by segment and geographic area in our 2010 financial report. those tables are incorporated by reference.
our international businesses are subject, in varying degrees, to a number of risks inherent in carrying on business in other countries.
these include currency fluctuations, capital and exchange control regulations, expropriation and other restrictive government actions. our international businesses are also subject to government-imposed constraints, including laws and regulations on
pricing, reimbursement and access to our products. see government regulation and price constraints below for a discussion of these matters.
table of contents
depending on the direction of change relative to the u.s. dollar, foreign currency values
can increase or decrease the reported dollar value of our net assets and results of operations. in 2010, both revenues and net income were favorably impacted by foreign exchange in general, as foreign currency movements relative to the u.s. dollar
increased our revenues and net income in many countries. while we cannot predict with certainty future changes in foreign exchange rates or the effect they will have on us, we attempt to mitigate their impact through operational means and by using
various financial instruments. see the discussion under note 9-e to our consolidated financial statements, financial instruments: derivative financial instruments and hedging activities in our 2010 financial report. that discussion is
incorporated by reference. related information about valuation and risks associated with such financial instruments in part f of that note is also incorporated by reference.  marketing  in our global biopharmaceutical
segment, we promote our products to healthcare providers and patients. through our marketing organizations, we explain the approved uses, benefits and risks of our products to healthcare providers, such as doctors, nurse practitioners, physician
assistants, pharmacists, hospitals, pharmacy benefit managers (pbms), managed care organizations (mcos), employers and government agencies. we also market directly to consumers in the u.s. through direct-to-consumer advertising that communicates the
approved uses, benefits and risks of our products while continuing to motivate people to have meaningful conversations with their doctors. in addition, we sponsor general advertising to educate the public on disease awareness, prevention and
wellness, important public health issues, and our patient assistance programs.  in january 2009, we announced the creation of
customer-focused units within our biopharmaceutical segment to better meet the diverse needs of physicians, patients and our customers while maximizing value for our company and our shareholders.
the biopharmaceutical segment includes five human health, customer-focused units: primary care, specialty care, oncology, established
products and emerging markets. upon the closing of the wyeth
acquisition on october15, 2009, our specialty care customer-focused unit expanded to include vaccines.  in april 2009 in the u.s., we also restructured into regional units in order to create a more flexible organization empowered to identify and address local market dynamics and customer needs. our
structure aligns the sales, marketing, and medical functions to work closely to meet the needs of key customer segments while ensuring common coordination, focus and accountability across the organizations.
our prescription pharmaceutical products are sold principally to wholesalers, but we also sell directly to retailers, hospitals, clinics,
government agencies and pharmacies. we seek to gain access to healthcare authority, pbm and mco formularies (lists of recommended, approved, and/or reimbursed medicines and other products). we also work with mcos, pbms, employers and other
appropriate healthcare providers to assist them with disease management, patient education and other tools that help their medical treatment routines.  during 2010, pfizer revenues generated from our three largest biopharmaceutical wholesalers were as follows:
mckesson, inc.14% of our total revenues;
cardinal health, inc.10% of our total revenues; and
amerisourcebergen corporation9% of our total revenues.
sales to these wholesalers were concentrated in the biopharmaceutical segment. apart from these instances, neither of our business
segments is dependent on any one customer or group of related customers.  our global diversified segment consists of four
global units: animal health, consumer healthcare, nutrition and capsugel. each unit utilizes its own sales and marketing organization to promote its products, and each occasionally uses distributors in smaller markets.
our animal health units advertising and promotions are generally targeted to healthcare professionals. animal health products are
sold through veterinarians, distributors and retail outlets as well as directly to users.
table of contents
our consumer healthcare units advertising and promotions are generally targeted to
consumers through television, print and other media advertising, as well as through in-store promotion. consumer healthcare products are sold through a wide variety of channels, including distributors, pharmacies, retail chains and grocery and
convenience stores.  our nutrition unit supports and adheres to the world health organization code and national codes on the
marketing of breast milk substitutes. nutrition encourages breastfeeding as the best nutrition for infants, andprovides important products for infants who are not exclusively breastfed.advertisingand promotion of our nutrition
products for older children and adults generally target consumers and healthcare professionals through print and media advertising and television.our nutrition products are sold through a wide variety of channels, including distributors,
pharmacies, hospitalsand modern and traditional retailers.  patents and intellectual property rights
our products are sold around the world under brand-name, logo and certain product design trademarks that we consider in
the aggregate to be of material importance. trademark protection continues in some countries for as long as the mark is used and, in other countries, for as long as it is registered. registrations generally are for fixed, but renewable, terms.
we own or license a number of u.s. and foreign patents. these patents cover pharmaceutical and other products and their uses,
pharmaceutical formulations, product manufacturing processes and intermediate chemical compounds used in manufacturing.
patents for individual products extend for varying periods according to the date of patent filing or grant and the legal term of patents
in the various countries where patent protection is obtained. the actual protection afforded by a patent, which can vary from country to country, depends upon the type of patent, the scope of its coverage and the availability of legal remedies in
the country.  in the aggregate, our patent and related rights are of material importance to our businesses in the u.s. and
most other countries. based on current
product sales, and considering the vigorous competition with products sold by others, the patent rights we consider most significant in relation to our business as a whole, together with the year
in which the u.s. basic product patent expires (including, where applicable, the additional six-month pediatric exclusivity period), are those for the drugs set forth in the table below.
drug
u.s.basicproduct patent expiration
year
effexor/effexor xr
2008(see below)
aricept
lipitor
benefix
xalatan
geodon
viagra
detrol
celebrex
prempro
zyvox
lyrica
chantix
sutent
in some instances, there are later-expiring patents relating to our products directed to particular forms or compositions of the drug or
to methods of manufacturing or using the drug in the treatment of particular diseases or conditions. however, in some cases, such patents may not protect the companys drug from generic competition after the expiration of the basic patent.
aricept is patented by eisai co., ltd (eisai). we co-promote aricept with eisai in the u.s. and several other
countries and have an exclusive license to sell the drug in certain other countries. we lost exclusivity for aricept 5 mg. and 10 mg. tablets in the u.s. in november 2010. we expect that the aricept 23mg. tablet will have exclusivity
in the u.s. until july 2013.  we have exclusive rights to enbrel outside the u.s. and canada and we co-promote
enbrel with amgen in the u.s. and canada.  in addition to our u.s. basic product patent for lipitor, which
(including the pediatric exclusivity
table of contents
period) expired in march 2010, we have a patent covering specifically the enantiomeric form of the drug, which (including the pediatric exclusivity period) expires in june 2011. we have granted
watson laboratories, inc. (watson) the exclusive right to sell the authorized generic version of lipitor in the u.s. for a period of five years, which is expected to commence in november 2011. as watsons exclusive supplier, we will
manufacture and sell generic atorvastatin tablets to watson. in markets outside the u.s., lipitor has lost exclusivity in certain countries and will lose exclusivity at various times in other countries. the lipitor compound patent will
expire in november 2011; however, we are pursuing a pediatric extension in the european union (eu). if successful, this exclusivity in the majority of major european markets will be extended by six months to may 2012. see note 19 to our consolidated
financial statements, legal proceedings and contingencies, in our 2010 financial report regarding pending legal challenges to our lipitor patents in the u.s.  norvasc, effexor/effexor xr, vfend tablets, zosyn/tazocin and protonix face generic competition in the u.s.
companies have filed applications with the fda seeking approval of products that we believe infringe our patents covering, among other
products, lipitor, caduet, viagra, detrol/detrol la, lyrica, tygacil, sutent, rapamune, relpax and zyvox. wyeth and a subsidiary of wyeth are defendants in a lawsuit alleging that their refacto and
xyntha products infringe the patents of another company.  we also have other patent rights covering additional products
that have lesser revenues than most of the products set forth in the table above. of these, we expect to lose exclusivity in the u.s. for caduet and aromasin in 2011.
the expiration of a basic product patent or loss of patent protection resulting from a legal challenge normally results in significant
competition from generic products against the originally patented product and can result in a significant reduction in sales of that product in a very short period. in some cases, however, we can continue to obtain commercial benefits from product
manufacturing trade secrets; patents on uses for products; patents on processes and intermediates for the economical
manufacture of the active ingredients; patents for special formulations of the product or delivery mechanisms; and conversion of the active ingredient to over-the-counter products.
our biotechnology products, including enbrel and the prevnar family, may face competition from biosimilars (also
referred to as follow-on biologics). such biosimilars would reference biotechnology products already approved under the u.s. public health service act. abbreviated legal pathways for the approval of biosimilars exist in certain
international markets and now, with the passage of legislation in 2010, a framework for such approval exists in the u.s. see government regulation and price constraints below.
in europe, the european commission has granted marketing authorizations for several biosimilars pursuant to a set of general and product
class-specific guidelines for biosimilar approvals issued over the past few years. if competitors are able to obtain marketing approval for biosimilars referencing our biotechnology products, our biotechnology products may become subject to
competition from biosimilars, with the attendant competitive pressure. expiration or successful challenge of applicable patent rights could generally trigger this competition, assuming any relevant exclusivity period has expired.
we expect that we may face more litigation with respect to the validity and/or scope of patents relating to our biotechnology products
with substantial revenue.  one of the main limitations on our operations in some countries outside the u.s. is the lack of
effective intellectual property protection for our products. under international and u.s. free trade agreements in recent years, global protection of intellectual property rights has been improving. the world trade organization agreement on trade
related aspects of intellectual property (wto-trips) required participant countries to amend their intellectual property laws to provide patent protection for pharmaceutical products by 2005 with an extension until 2016 for least-developed nations.
a number of countries have made improvements. we have experienced significant growth in our businesses in some of those nations, and our continued business expansion in other participant countries depends to a large degree on further patent
protection improvement.
table of contents
competition
our businesses are conducted in intensely competitive and often highly regulated markets. many of our human prescription pharmaceutical
products face competition in the form of branded drugs or generic drugs that treat similar diseases or indications. the principal forms of competition include efficacy, safety, ease of use, and cost effectiveness. though the means of competition
vary among product categories and business groups, demonstrating the value of our products is a critical factor for success in all of our principal businesses.  our acquisition of wyeth in october 2009 created a broader, more diverse portfolio and pipeline with industry-leading positions in potential high-growth areas, further strengthened by new capabilities in
biotechnology and vaccines. the addition of wyeth not only strengthens our presence in the united states and europe, but also enhances our abilities to provide emerging markets in china, latin america, africa, and the middle east with high-quality,
innovative medicines.  our competitors include other worldwide research-based drug companies, smaller research companies with
more limited therapeutic focus, and generic drug and consumer healthcare manufacturers. we compete with other companies that manufacture and sell products that treat similar diseases or indications as our major products.
such competition affects our core product business, which is focused on applying innovative science to discover and market products that
satisfy unmet medical needs and provide therapeutic improvements. our emphasis on innovation is underscored by our multi-billion-dollar investment in research and development, as well as our emphasis on business development over the past decade, all
resulting in a strong product pipeline. our investment in research does not stop with drug approval; we continue to invest in further understanding the value of our products for the conditions they treat as well as potential new applications. we
seek to protect the health and well-being of patients by ensuring that medically sound knowledge of the benefits and risks of our medicines is understood and communicated to patients, physicians and global health authorities. wealso continue
to enhance the organizational effectiveness of all of our biopharmaceutical
functions, including coordinating support for our salespersons efforts to accurately and ethically launch and promote our products to our customers.
operating conditions have become more challenging under the mounting global pressures of competition, industry regulation and cost
containment. we continue to take measures to evaluate, adapt and improve our organization and business practices to better meet customer and public needs. for instance, we restructured into regional units in order to create a more flexible
organization empowered to identify and address local market dynamics and customer needs. we have taken an industry-leading role in evolving our approaches to u.s. direct-to-consumer advertising, interactions with, and payments to, healthcare
professionals and medical education grants. we also continue to sponsor programs to address patient affordability and access barriers, as we strive to advance fundamental health system change through support for better healthcare solutions.
while our animal health unit is one of the largest in the world, many other companies offer competing products. altogether,
there are hundreds of producers of animal health products throughout the world. the principal methods of competition vary somewhat depending on the particular product. they include product innovation, quality, price, service and effective promotion
to veterinary professionals and consumers.  our consumer healthcare unit faces competition from over-the-counter business
units in other major pharmaceutical and consumer packaged goods companies as well as retailers who carry their own private label brands. our competitive position is affected by several factors, including the amount and effectiveness of our and our
competitors promotional resources; customer acceptance; product quality; our and our competitors introduction of new products, ingredients, claims, dosage forms, or other forms of innovation; pricing and regulatory and legislative
matters (e.g., product labeling, patient access, prescription to over-the-counter switches, etc.).  our nutrition unit has
many competitors, including several multinational companies, as well as numerous local, privately-owned brands. our competitive position is affected by several factors, including the amount of resources deployed by
table of contents
competitors to develop, enhance and promote products; the increasing pace of product and packaging innovation in the category; the effectiveness of our promotional efforts; customer acceptance;
product quality; new product launches; development of alternative products by competitors; growth of lower-cost private label brands; regulatory and legislative issues; and scientific and technological advances.
managed care organizations  the growth of mcos in the u.s. has been a major factor in the competitive makeup of the healthcare marketplace. approximately 250million people in the u.s. now participate in some version of managed
care. because of the size of the patient population covered by mcos, the marketing of prescription drugs to them and the pbms that serve many of those organizations continues to grow in importance.
mcos can include medical insurance companies, medical plan administrators, health maintenance organizations, alliances of hospitals and
physicians and other physician organizations. the purchasing power of mcos has increased in recent years due to the growing numbers of patients enrolled in mcos. at the same time, those organizations have been consolidating into fewer, even larger
entities. this consolidation enhances their purchasing strength and importance to us.  the growth of mcos has increased
pressure on drug prices. one objective of mcos is to contain and, where possible, reduce healthcare expenditures. they typically use formularies, volume purchases and long-term contracts to negotiate discounts from pharmaceutical providers. mcos use
their purchasing power to bargain for lower supplier prices. they also emphasize primary and preventive care, out-patient treatment and procedures performed at doctors offices and clinics. hospitalization and surgery, typically the most
expensive forms of treatment, are carefully managed. since the use of certain drugs can prevent the need for hospitalization, professional therapy or even surgery, such drugs can become favored first-line treatments for certain diseases.
as discussed above in marketing, mcos and pbms typically develop formularies. formularies can be based on the prices and
therapeutic benefits of the
available products. due to their generally lower cost, generic medicines are often favored. the breadth of the products covered by formularies can vary considerably from one mco to another and
many formularies include alternative and competitive products for treatment of particular medical problems. mcos use a variety of means to encourage patients use of products listed on their formularies.
exclusion of a product from a formulary or other restrictions, such as requiring prior authorizations, can lead to its sharply reduced
usage in the mco patient population. consequently, pharmaceutical companies compete aggressively to have their products included. where possible, companies compete for inclusion based upon unique features of their products, such as greater efficacy,
better patient ease of use or fewer side effects. a lower overall cost of therapy is also an important factor. products that demonstrate fewer therapeutic advantages must compete for inclusion based primarily on price. we have been generally,
although not universally, successful in having our major products included on most mco formularies.  the impact of mcos on
drug prices and volumes has increased as the result of their role in negotiating on behalf of medicare beneficiaries in connection with the medicare out-patient prescription drug benefit, medicare part d, that took effect january1, 2006. mcos
and pbms negotiate on behalf of the federal government as prescription drug plans (pdps). we have been generally, although not universally, successful in having our major products that are used by the senior population included on the formularies of
the medicare pdps in 2010.  generic products  one of the biggest competitive challenges that we face is from generic pharmaceutical manufacturers. upon the expiration or loss of patent protection for a product, especially a small molecule product, we
can lose the major portion of sales of that product in a very short period. several such competitors make a regular practice of challenging our product patents before their expiry. generic competitors operate without our large research and
development expenses and our costs of conveying medical information about our products to the medical community. in addition, the fda approval
table of contents
process exempts generics from costly and time-consuming clinical trials to demonstrate their safety and efficacy, allowing generic manufacturers to rely on the safety and efficacy data of the
innovator product. generic products need only demonstrate a level of availability in the bloodstream equivalent to that of the innovator product. this means that generic competitors can market a competing version of our product after the expiration
or loss of our patent and charge much less.  in addition, our patent-protected products can face competition in the form of
generic versions of branded products of competitors that lose their market exclusivity.  as noted above, mcos that focus
primarily on the immediate cost of drugs often favor generics over brand-name drugs. many governments also encourage the use of generics as alternatives to brand-name drugs in their healthcare programs, including medicaid in the u.s. laws in the
u.s. generally allow, and in some cases require, pharmacists to substitute generic drugs that have been rated under government procedures to be therapeutically equivalent to brand-name drugs. the substitution must be made unless the prescribing
physician expressly forbids it. in the u.s., pfizers greenstone subsidiary sells generic versions of pfizers as well as certain of our competitors pharmaceutical products upon loss of exclusivity, as appropriate.
raw materials  raw materials essential to our businesses are purchased worldwide in the ordinary course of business from numerous suppliers. in general, these materials are available from multiple sources. no serious
shortages or delays were encountered in 2010, and none are expected in 2011. however, select agricultural-based materials have from time to time increased in price due to short-term imbalances between supply and demand. we have successfully secured
these materials to meet our requirements in these circumstances but generally at higher prices than those historically paid.
government regulation and price constraints
in the united states
general. pharmaceutical companies are subject to extensive regulation by national, state and local agencies in the countries in
which they do business. of particular importance is the fda in the u.s. it has jurisdiction over our biopharmaceutical products and administers requirements covering the testing, safety, effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling, marketing, advertising
and post-marketing surveillance of these products. the fda also regulates our consumer healthcare, nutrition and capsugel products as well as our animal health products. the u.s. department of agriculture and the u.s. environmental protection agency
also regulate some of our products.  in addition, many of our activities are subject to the jurisdiction of various other
federal regulatory and enforcement departments and agencies, such as the department of health and human services (hhs), the federal trade commission (which also has the authority to regulate the advertising of consumer healthcare products including
over-the-counter drugs and dietary supplements) and the department of justice. individual states, acting through their attorneys general, have become active as well, seeking to regulate the marketing of prescription drugs under state consumer
protection and false advertising laws.  we are subject to possible administrative and legal proceedings and actions by these
various regulatory bodies. see note 19 to our consolidated financial statements, legal proceedings and contingencies, in our 2010 financial report. such actions may involve product recalls, seizures and other civil and criminal sanctions.
healthcare reform. in march 2010, the patient protection and affordable care act, as amended by the health care and
education reconciliation act (commonly referred to as the affordable care act (aca)), was enacted in the u.s. the provisions of the aca are effective on various dates over the next several years. the principal provisions affecting the
biopharmaceutical industry include:
an increase in the minimum medicaid rebate on prescription drugs from 15.1% to 23.1%, (effective january1, 2010) and the extension of rebates to
medicaid managed care organizations (effective march23, 2010);
table of contents
discounts of 50% on branded pharmaceutical sales to medicare part d beneficiaries in the medicare coverage gap, known as the doughnut hole
(effective january1, 2011); and
a non-deductible annual fee payable to the federal government based on a companys prior calendar year share of branded prescription drug sales to
specified government programs (effective january1, 2011 through 2018).  the aca is estimated to result
in the coverage of 32million uninsured individuals. approximately half of this will occur through an expansion of the medicaid program. effective in 2014, individuals with incomes below 133% of the federal poverty level (fpl) will be eligible
for medicaid. the remainder will be covered with private sector coverage either through their employer or the new state-based health insurance exchanges. with limited exceptions, individuals who fail to purchase health insurance will pay a penalty.
individuals with incomes between 100%400% of fpl will be eligible for subsidies to help pay for coverage.  expanding
insurance coverage and other costs are expected to represent a relatively modest gain to overall pharmaceutical sales as the newly insured are principally young and relatively healthy. at the same time, the rebates, discounts, taxes and other costs
associated with the aca are a significant cost to the industry.  the aca created the independent payment advisory board
(ipab), a 15-member panel appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate. the ipab is charged with developing proposals to reduce the per capita rate of growth in medicare spending in the event that the actual
medicare per capita growth rate exceeds a specified target. unless congress acts to alter the proposals, they will be automatically implemented. the ipab cannot directly ration care, raise premiums, increase cost sharing, or otherwise restrict
benefits or modify eligibility. if it fails to act, the secretary of hhs is directed to prepare a proposal. the ipab is prohibited by statute from making payment reductions to certain sectors such as hospitals and home health agencies, which
increases the risk that the ipab will propose to limit access to pharmaceutical treatments or mandate price controls for our products.
the aca also establishes a patient centered outcomes research institute (pcori), a private,
non-profit corporation empowered to fund and disseminate comparative effectiveness research (cer) and build infrastructure for improved outcomes analysis. pcori will have no ability to impose formulary changes directly in government-funded health
programs. we expect that due to the pcori as well as the underlying market demand for data-driven differentiation, cer studies will have growing influence on access. overseeing and managing the pcori is an advisory board drawn from multiple and
varied stakeholder organizations, including the pharmaceutical industry. pfizers chief medical officer currently serves as the industry representative on the advisory board.
the aca defines a set of essential benefits that must be covered for health benefits to qualify to meet the requirements of the aca
mandates. prescription drugs are defined as an essential benefit in the legislation. regulation may offer additional specificity on what exactly should be covered (for example, that branded drugs and generics should be covered). essential benefits
are defined to be comparable to current employer plans.  changes in the enforcement environment. the aca expands the
governments investigative and enforcement authority and increases the penalties for fraud and abuse, including amendments to both the false claims act and the anti-kickback statute to make it easier to bring suit under these statutes. the aca
also allocates additional resources and tools for the government to police healthcare fraud, with expanded subpoena power for hhs, additional funding to investigate fraud and abuse, and expanded use of recovery audit contractors for
enforcement. starting in 2012, pharmaceutical manufacturers will be required to record any transfers of value made to doctors
and teaching hospitals and to disclose such data to hhs, with the initial disclosure to hhs due in 2013. in addition to civil penalties for failure to report transfers of value to physicians or teaching hospitals, there will be criminal penalties if
a manufacturer intentionally makes false statements in such reports.further, the increased access to such data by fraud and abuse investigators could potentially raise the risk of liability for improper payments under the false claims act.
table of contents
medicare. medicare part d went into effect on january1, 2006. elderly and
disabled beneficiaries have access to the medicare drug benefit through private plans approved by the federal government. beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets are eligible for assistance with part d plan premiums and cost sharing.
nationally, the share of such beneficiaries with comprehensive drug coverage increased from 59% in 2005 to over 90% in 2010. also in 2010, 17.7million people were enrolled in stand-alone prescription drug plans, while 9.6million were
enrolled in medicare advantage plans or in other types of health plans with prescription drug coverage. medicare beneficiaries report high levels of satisfaction with an overwhelming majority saying the program works well. in addition, the program
costs less than originally expected. according to the 2010 medicare trustees report, total part d costs have declined 41%, or $261 billion, compared to the initial 10-year cost estimate for 2004-2013.
the aca made some important changes to the drug benefitin particular, phasing out the coverage gap by 2020. prior to reform,
beneficiaries who reached a certain level of spending on prescription medications (the part d coverage gap or doughnut hole) had to pay 100% of the cost of their drugs until personal out-of-pocket spending reached a level qualifying them
for catastrophic coverage. the medicare part d coverage gap discount program uses public and private funding to relieve the financial burden facing beneficiaries who fall into the coverage gap. for 2011, branded pharmaceutical companies will pay 50%
of the cost of the branded drugs in the gap and the government will pay 7% of the cost for generic drugs in the gap. as a result, rather than paying 100% of the total cost of their drugs when they reach the coverage gap, enrollees will pay 50% of
the total cost of branded drugs and 93% of the total cost of generic drugs. by 2020 enrollees will pay only 25% of the cost of their branded and generic drugs in the gap as the share covered by the government will increase.
biosimilars. the aca also created a framework for the approval of follow-on biologics, or biosimilars, following the expiration of
12 years of exclusivity for the innovator biologic with a potential six month pediatric extension. the fda is responsible for implementation of the legislation, which will require the fda to address such key
topics as the type and extent of data needed to establish biosimilarity; the data required to achieve interchangeability compared to biosimilarity; the naming of biosimilars; the implications of
having or not having unique names; the tracking and tracing of adverse events; and the acceptability of data from an ex-u.s. licensed reference product comparator to demonstrate biosimilarity and/or interchangeability.
medicaid and related matters. federal law requires branded pharmaceutical companies to provide rebates to state medicaid agencies.
the aca has brought about major changes in the medicaid program. collectively, the measures (i)increased federal rebates paid by manufacturers on branded drugs within the traditional medicaid program from 15.1% to 23.1%, and for generic drugs
from 11% to 13% of average manufacturer price (amp) in 2010; (ii)expanded medicaid drug rebates to cover drugs provided through managed medicaid plans beginning in 2010; and (iii)expanded medicaid drug rebates to cover new
formulations of brand-name drugs, beginning in 2010. the law also creates a federal upper limit under the medicaid program for generic drugs at 175% of amp. in addition, the law expands the types of entities eligible for the section 340b
discounts for outpatient drugs provided in 2010.  the majority of states use preferred drug lists to restrict access to
certain medicines to medicaid beneficiaries. restrictions exist for some pfizer products in certain states. access in the medicaid managed care program is typically determined by the health plans providing coverage for medicaid recipients
contracting for the provision of services in the state. given states current and likely ongoing fiscal crises, a growing number of states are considering a variety of cost-control strategies, including capitated managed care plans which
typically contain cost by restricting access to certain treatments.  the aca expands medicaid coverage in 2014. it is expected
that 16million additional people will be enrolled in medicaid by 2019.  we also must give discounts or rebates on
purchases or reimbursements of pharmaceutical products by certain other federal and state agencies and programs. see the discussion regarding rebates in the revenues section of our 2010 financial report and in note 1-h to our consolidated
financial
table of contents
statements, significant accounting policies, revenues, in our 2010 financial report, which discussions are incorporated by reference.
marketing restrictions. federal healthcare professional payment disclosure provisions enacted under the aca require
biopharmaceutical and medical device companies to report payments made to physicians and teaching hospitals to the secretary of hhs beginning in 2013 for 2012 transactions. hhs is required to post these payments publicly on a website. this national
payment transparency effort and industry commitment to uphold voluntary codes of conduct (the updated phrma code on interactions with healthcare professionals, phrma guiding principles direct to consumer advertisements about prescription
medicines, etc.) will complement existing laws and regulations to help ensure ethical collaboration and truthful product communications. these efforts are in place to help ensure responsible marketing approaches and to address concerns.
importation of drugs. there continue to be legislative proposals to amend u.s. law to allow the importation into the
u.s. of prescription drugs from outside the u.s., which can be sold at prices that are regulated by the governments of various foreign countries. in addition to well-documented safety concerns, such importation could impact pharmaceutical prices in
the u.s. while the 2003 medicare modernization act maintains a prohibition on such imports, it would allow importation from canada if the secretary of hhs certifies that such importation is safe and would result in savings to consumers. before the
2003 medicare modernization act, federal law would have permitted importation of medicines into the u.s. from a considerably larger group of developed countries, provided the secretary of hhs made the same safety and cost-savings certifications. as
part of the debate on the aca, two senate proposals that would have restored the broader number of countries from which importation would be permissible were introduced but were ultimately defeated.
the secretaries of hhs in the clinton, george w. bush, and obama administrations have all declined to certify that importation of
medicines is safe and saves money. if the secretary of hhs changes its position, an increase in cross-border trade in medicines subject to foreign price controls in other countries could occur.
in december 2004, hhs and the department of commerce issued reports on drug importation and
foreign price controls. the hhs report noted that it would be extraordinarily difficult to ensure that drugs personally imported by individual consumers could meet the standards of safety that would support certifying such importation as
safe. while the report also concluded that the u.s. could establish a feasible basis for commercial drug importation, such a change in the law would require new legal authorities, substantial additional resources and significant restrictions
on the types of drugs that could be imported. the report also noted that the total savings to be expected from such a commercial importation regime would be relatively small1% or 2% of total drug spending in the u.s.
outside the united states
we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other countries. in europe, canada and some other international markets,
the government provides healthcare at low direct cost to consumers and regulates pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for the government-sponsored healthcare system. this international patchwork of price regulation
has led to different prices and some third-party trade in our products between countries.  europe. the approval of new
drugs across the eu may be achieved using the mutual recognition procedure/decentralized procedure or eu commission/european medicines agency (ema) centralized procedure. these procedures apply in the eu member states, plus the european economic
area countries, norway and iceland. the use of these procedures generally provides a more rapid and consistent approval process across the member states than was the case when the approval processes were operating independently within each country.
since the eu does not have jurisdiction over patient reimbursement or pricing matters in its member states, we continue to
work with individual countries on such matters across the region.  the world economy in 2010 was recovering from the recent
financial crisis and recession. one of the consequences of the recession for almost all world economies has been an increased proportion of gross domestic product (gdp) arising from
table of contents
government spending and reduced tax receipts. for many developed economies, particularly in europe, this exacerbated existing fiscal imbalances and increased net government debts. under these
macroeconomic conditions, pfizer faced widespreadincremental pressures on international pricing and reimbursement, particularly in developed european markets with a high government share of pharmaceutical spending. specific pricing pressures
included increased mandatory rebates in germany and significant price cuts in greece, portugal, and spain.  formal processes
of international reference pricing between eu countries add to the regional impact of price cuts in individual countries. price variations have also arisen from exchange rate fluctuations between the euro and other european currencies, and these are
also factored into international reference pricing systems.  during 2004, a comprehensive package of reforms was adopted
amending eu law on the regulation of medicinal products (pharmaceutical legislation) in many areas, including approval procedures and safety reporting. many of these changes were aimed at facilitating the approval and launch of generic medicines and
at streamlining regulatory procedures ahead of the accession of new member states to the eu. these reforms included the introduction of a clear legal basis for the approval of biosimilar products in the eu. following the effectiveness of these new
regulations (in november 2005), the first such products, including a biosimilar version of genotropin, were approved in the eu in 2006. the new regulations also shortened certain approval timelines and introduced fast-track and conditional
centralized authorizations. pfizers sutent was the first product to be conditionally approved under the new law in 2006 (although its status subsequently was converted to full authorization). in addition, the data exclusivity periods
during which innovative companies regulatory data are protected were required to be harmonized in all member states and for all routes of regulatory approval.  on january26, 2007, the new eu regulation on medicines for pediatric use became effective. this introduced new obligations on pharmaceutical companies to conduct research on their medicines for
children and, subject to various conditions, offered the possibility of incentives for so doing, including exclusivity extensions. the aim of this regulation is
to improve the health of children in the eu through high quality research, stimulating the development of new medicines, creating infrastructure to enable authorized use and improving the
information on medicines for children. a pediatric committee (pdco) was created within the ema to provide scientific opinions and input on development plans for medicines for use with children. in line with this regulation, pfizer is conducting many
pediatric research programs for its in-line and development products, and completed its first ema-approved pediatric investigation plan (for lipitor) in 2009.  on december31, 2010, the eu published new pharmacovigilance legislation which had been adopted by the council and parliament of the eu. the legislation will come into effect in mid-2012 and entails
many new and revised requirements for conducting pharmacovigilance, as well as the codification of various existing requirements previously set out in guidance. key changes include the possibility for regulators to require pharmaceutical companies
to conduct post-authorization efficacy studies both at the time of approval and at any time afterwards in light of scientific developments. there are also additional requirements to include statements in product labelling with regard to adverse drug
reaction reporting and additional monitoring of products. there will also be significantly greater transparency of the safety review process.  the new legislation forms part of a three-part pharmaceutical package to amend the existing eu pharmaceutical legislation. the other parts concern legislative changes in the fields of
(i)counterfeit medicines, which is expected to be adopted in the first quarter of 2011, and (ii)the provision of information on prescription medicines to patients, which has reached a reasonably advanced stage, but has proved
controversial to date and the outcome for which is more uncertain.  at the end of the third quarter of 2010, the commissioner
for industry and entrepreneurship of the european commission announced the launch of a process on corporate responsibility in the pharmaceutical industry. the process includes three independent platforms: (i)transparency and ethics in the
sector; (ii)access to medicines in africa; and (iii)access to medicines in europe in the context of pricing and reimbursement. the platform on access
table of contents
to medicines in europe will focus on enhancing collaboration among eu member states and relevant stakeholders, in order to find common non-regulatory approaches to ensure timely and
equitable access to medicines.  canada. health canada is the government agency that provides regulatory and
marketing approval for drugs and therapeutic products in canada. in october 2006, health canada introduced its modernization initiative under the blueprint for renewal: modernizing canadas regulatory system for health products and food
policy framework. the blueprint includes 10 objectives including the progressive licensing framework (plf) also referred to as the legislative and regulatory modernization (lrm); stronger post-market safety and surveillance systems; and
strengthening compliance and enforcement with a directive towards an integrated health system, including closer alignment of healthcare objectives with provinces and territories. in december 2007, the new food and consumer safety action plan
was issued, followed in april 2008 by the introduction of bill c-51, a proposed enabling legislation to amend the food and drugs act. if passed, it would represent a significant drug regulatory system reform and a major change to
canadas drug approval system. the bill was not re-introduced in 2010 as expected, however, the government continues to express commitment to its re-introduction. current regulatory policies and initiatives, such as priority and conditional
approvals, are already providing for internationally competitive approval timelines. as in the eu, sutent was initially approved under the conditional provision. however, unprecedented advances in science and technology are presenting a
potential challenge for health canadas ability to maintain internationally competitive market authorizations. in october 2010, health canada accelerated their modernization efforts. this included the proposed regulatory pathways for orphan
drugs (harmonized with u.s./eu regulations) and for biosimilars referred to as subsequent entry biologics (sebs). this would formalize into regulations health canadas guidance document, which provided for approval of sebs in 2009.
introductory non-excessive prices and price increases are controlled by the federal patented medicines prices
review board. canadas intellectual property regime for drugs, which was implemented under the data protection regulations
and provides for a minimum of eight years of data protection for new chemical entities, has been challenged by recent litigation that has favored generic manufacturers. the federal government
also has jurisdiction over international trade and therefore over the issue of cross-border trade in pharmaceuticals and internet pharmacies.  asia. the regulatory environment in asia presents multiple issues for companies trying to achieve simultaneous global development and registration (i.e., marketing products at the same time as in
the u.s., europe, canada and elsewhere). while each country in asia has its unique regulatory concerns, there are a number of regulatory issues that are common among the majority of asian countries. for example, with the exception of japan, health
authorities in asia generally require marketing approval by a recognized regulatory authority (e.g., the u.s. fda) before they begin to conduct their application review process and/or issue their final approval. proof of reference country approval
is usually satisfied by companies submitting a certificate of pharmaceutical product (cpp), which is a legal document that is issued by the competent health authority certifying that the companys product has satisfied its countrys
registration requirements and manufacturing standards. at a minimum, this requirement delays marketing authorization in asia by 12-15 months following market authorization in the u.s. and europe.
another common regulatory issue in japan and other asian countries, is the requirement for local clinical data in the countrys
population in order to receive final marketing approval. each of japan, china, korea, taiwan and india has regulations in some form that require clinical studies in their country (e.g., china requires a prescribed number of chinese patients
regardless of the product, therapeutic area or disease population). although some agencies have shown flexibility based on scientific rationale related to ethnicity assessments, it is not uncommon for companies to be required to duplicate costly
clinical trials in asia pursuant to these regulations. this can further add to marketing approval delays compared to the u.s. and europe.  the controlling regulatory agency in china is the state food and drug administration (sfda). sfdas scope of responsibilities is similar to that of the fda or ema.
table of contents
two key agencies within sfda are the center for drug evaluation (cde) and the national
institute for the control of pharmaceutical and biological products (nicpbp). the cde, which is analogous to the fdas center for drug evaluation and research (cder), is primarily responsible for the technical review of product applications,
including clinical trial applications (cta) and new drug applications (nda), and drafting technical guidance documents. nicpbp is the quality testing arm of sfda, legally responsible for the testing of pharmaceuticals, biologics and medical devices
nationwide.  chinas regulatory system is unique in many ways, and its drug development and registration requirements are
not always consistent with international standards. as a result, it is not uncommon to see treatments entering the market in china two to four years after first marketing in the u.s. and europe.
intellectual property: although effective enforcement and adequate legal remedies remain areas of concern for foreign companies,
the intellectual property environment has improved in china. the government has taken steps to protect intellectual property rights in conformity with wto provisions, and several companies have established research and development centers in china
due to more confidence in chinas intellectual property environment. however, china remains on the u.s. department of commerce priority watch list for 2011. a framework exists for protecting patents for 20 years but enforcement mechanisms are
often lacking or inconsistent (such as, no effective patent linkage mechanism (noted below), no preliminary injunctions, impractical evidentiary burdens, and heightened sufficiency standards used to invalidate patents at the enforcement stage).
additionally, true data exclusivity still remains elusive in china. the cde provides protection against reliance on data by
generic applicants for a fixed period of time. following its wto accession in 2001, china revised its laws to incorporate concepts from the wto/trips, and chinas relevant laws establish a six-year period of protection against unfair commercial
use of undisclosed test and other data of products containing a new chemical ingredient. however, the current regulations are ambiguous as to how data protection is implemented in practice in china. for example, certain key concepts such as
new chemical ingredient and unfair commercial use are undefined.
environmental law compliance
most of our operations are affected by national, state and/or local environmental laws. we have made, and intend to continue to make,
necessary expenditures for compliance with applicable laws. we also are cleaning up environmental contamination from past industrial activity at certain sites. see note 19 to our consolidated financial statements, legal proceedings and
contingencies, in our 2010 financial report. as a result, we incurred capital and operational expenditures in 2010 for environmental compliance purposes and for the clean-up of certain past industrial activity as follows:
environment-related capital expenditures$48.7 million;
other environment-related expenses$184.8 million.  while we cannot predict with certainty future capital expenditures or operating costs for environmental compliance, including compliance with pending legislation and potential regulation and potential
legislation related to climate change, we have no reason to believe they will have a material effect on our capital expenditures or competitive position.  we have reviewed the potential for physical risks to our facilities and supply chain that may be exacerbated by climate change and have concluded that, because of our facility locations and our existing
distribution networks, we do not believe these risks are material in the near term.  tax matters
the discussion of tax-related matters in note 7 to our consolidated financial statements, taxes on income, in our 2010 financial
report, is incorporated by reference.  employees
in our innovation-intensive business, our employees are vital to our success. we believe we have good relationships with our employees. as
of december31, 2010, we employed approximately 110,600 people in our operations throughout the world.
table of contents
item1a.
risk factors  the
statements in this section describe the major risks to our business and should be considered carefully. in addition, these statements constitute our cautionary statements under the private securities litigation reform act of 1995.
our disclosure and analysis in this 2010 form10-k and in our 2010 annual report to shareholders contain some forward-looking
statements that set forth anticipated results based on managements plans and assumptions. from time to time, we also provide forward-looking statements in other materials we release to the public, as well as oral forward-looking statements.
such statements give our current expectations or forecasts of future events; they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. we have tried, wherever possible, to identify such statements by using words such as anticipate,
estimate, expect, project, intend, plan, believe, will, target, forecast and similar expressions or by using future dates in connection with
any discussion of future operating or financial performance, business plans or prospects, in-line products and product candidates, and share-repurchase and dividend-rate plans. in particular, these include statements relating to future actions,
business plans and prospects, prospective products or product approvals, future performance or results of current and anticipated products, sales efforts, expenses, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal
proceedings, and financial results.  we cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statement will be realized, although
we believe we have been prudent in our plans and assumptions. achievement of future results is subject to substantial risks, uncertainties and potentially inaccurate assumptions. should known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, or should
underlying assumptions prove inaccurate, actual results could differ materially from past results and those anticipated, estimated or projected. you should bear this in mind as you consider forward-looking statements and you are cautioned not to put
undue reliance on forward-looking statements.  we undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking
statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. you are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures
we make on related subjects in our 10-q and 8-k reports to the sec. also note that we provide the following cautionary discussion of risks, uncertainties and possibly inaccurate assumptions
relevant to our businesses. these are factors that, individually or in the aggregate, may cause our actual results to differ materially from expected and historical results. we note these factors for investors as permitted by the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995. you should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. consequently, you should not consider the following to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties.
healthcare reform  as mentioned earlier, the aca was enacted by congress in march 2010 and its provisions are effective on various dates over the next several years. we expect that the rebates, discounts, taxes and other
costs over time will have a significant effect on our expenses and profitability in the future. see the discussion under u.s. healthcare legislation in our 2010 financial report. furthermore, the ipab created by the aca, to reduce the per
capita rate of growth in medicare spending, could potentially limit access to certain treatments or mandate price controls for our products. moreover, expanded government investigative authority may increase the costs of compliance with new
negotiations and programs. we also face the uncertainties that might result from any modification, repeal or invalidation of any of the provisions of the aca.  government regulation and managed care trends  u.s. and foreign
governmental regulations mandating price controls and limitations on patient access to our products impact our business, and our future results could be adversely affected by changes in such regulations. in the u.s., many of our biopharmaceutical
products are subject to increasing pricing pressures. such pressures have increased as the result of the 2003 medicare modernization act due to the enhanced purchasing power of the private sector plans that negotiate on behalf of medicare
beneficiaries. in addition, if the 2003 medicare modernization act or the aca were amended to impose direct governmental price controls and access restrictions, it would have a significant adverse
table of contents
impact on our business. furthermore, mcos, as well as medicaid and other government agencies, continue to seek price discounts. some states have implemented, and other states are considering,
price controls or patient-access constraints under the medicaid program and some states are considering price-control regimes that would apply to broader segments of their populations that are not medicaid eligible. other matters also could be the
subject of u.s. federal or state legislative or regulatory action that could adversely affect our business, including changes in patent laws, the importation of prescription drugs from outside the u.s. at prices that are regulated by the governments
of various foreign countries, restrictions on u.s. direct-to-consumer advertising or limitations on interactions with healthcare professionals and the use of comparative effectiveness methodologies that could be implemented in a manner that focuses
primarily on cost differences and minimizes the therapeutic differences among pharmaceutical products and restricts access to innovative medicines.  the prohibition on the use of federal funds for reimbursement of erectile dysfunction medications by the medicaid program, which became effective january1, 2006, and the similar federal funding
prohibition for the medicare part d program, which became effective january1, 2007, has had an adverse effect on our business. any prohibitions on the use of federal funds for reimbursement of other classes of drugs in the future may also have
an adverse effect.  we encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other countries. in europe and some other
international markets, the government provides healthcare at low direct cost to consumers and regulates pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for the government-sponsored healthcare system. in particular, there were
government-mandated price reductions for certain biopharmaceutical products in certain european countries in 2010, and we anticipate continuing pricing pressures in europe in 2011. this international patchwork of price regulation has led to
different prices and some third-party trade in our products between countries. as a result, it is expected that pressures on the pricing component of operating results will continue. the adoption of restrictive price controls in new jurisdictions or
more restrictive ones in existing jurisdictions could also adversely impact revenue.
generic competition  competition from manufacturers of generic drugs is a major challenge for us around the world. upon the expiration or loss of patent protection for one of our products, or upon the at-risk
launch (despite pending patent infringement litigation against the generic product) by a generic manufacturer of a generic version of one of our patented products, we can lose the major portion of sales of that product in a very short period, which
can adversely affect our business.  also, the patents covering several of our most important medicines, including lipitor,
caduet, viagra, detrol/detrol la, lyrica, sutent, tygacil, rapamune, relpax, and zyvox, are being challenged by generic manufacturers. in addition, our patent-protected products may face competition in the form of generic
versions of branded products of competitors that lose their market exclusivity.  competitive products
we cannot predict with accuracy the timing or impact of the introduction of competitive products or their possible effect on our sales.
products that compete with ours, including some of our best-selling medicines, are launched from time to time. competitive product launches have occurred in recent years and certain potentially competitive products are in various stages of
development, some of which have been filed for approval with the fda and with regulatory authorities in other countries.  dependence on key
in-line products  we recorded direct product revenues of more than $1 billion for each of 15 biopharmaceutical products in
2010: lipitor, enbrel, lyrica, prevnar/prevenar 13, celebrex, viagra, xalatan/xalacom, effexor/effexor xr, norvasc, prevnar/prevenar (7-valent), zyvox, sutent, premarin family, geodon/zeldox
and detrol/detrol la. those products accounted for 60% of our total biopharmaceutical revenues in 2010. lipitor sales in 2010 were approximately $10.7 billion, accounting for approximately 18% of our total 2010 biopharmaceutical
revenues. if the products referenced above or any of our other major products were to become subject to problems such as loss of patent protection, changes in prescription growth rates, material product liability litigation, unexpected
table of contents
side effects, regulatory proceedings, publicity affecting doctor or patient confidence, pressure from existing competitive products, changes in labeling or, if a new, more effective treatment
should be introduced, the adverse impact on our revenues could be significant. as noted, patents covering several of our best-selling medicines have recently expired or will expire in the next few years, and patents covering a number of our
best-selling medicines are the subject of pending legal challenges. we expect we will lose exclusivity for lipitor in the u.s. in november 2011 and, as a result, will lose the substantial portion of our u.s. revenues from lipitor
shortly thereafter. in addition, our revenues could be significantly impacted by the timing and rate of commercial acceptance of key new products.  specialty pharmaceuticals  specialty pharmaceuticals are medicines that
treat rare or life-threatening conditions that have smaller patient populations, such as certain types of cancer and multiple sclerosis. the growing availability and use of innovative specialty pharmaceuticals, combined with their relative higher
cost as compared to other types of pharmaceutical products, is beginning to generate significant payer interest in developing cost-containment strategies targeted to this sector. while the impact on pfizer of payers efforts to control access
and pricing of specialty pharmaceuticals has been limited to date, our growing portfolio of specialty products, combined with the increasing use of health technology assessment in markets around the world and the deteriorating finances of
governments, may lead to a more significant adverse business impact in the future.  research and development investment
the discovery and development of new products as well as the development of additional uses for existing products are very important to
the success of the company. however, balancing current growth and investment for the future remains a major challenge. our ongoing investments in new product introductions and in research and development for new products and existing product
extensions could exceed corresponding sales growth. this could produce higher costs without a proportional increase in revenues.
additionally, pfizers research and development investment plans and resources may not
be correctly matched between the science and the market. the company may not be investing in the right technology platforms, leading therapeutic segments, product classes, geographic markets and/or in-licensing and out-licensing opportunities in
order to deliver a robust pipeline. additionally, even if the areas with the greatest market attractiveness are identified, the science may not work for any given program.  we recently announced a focus on fewer disease areas where we believe we can deliver the greatest medical and commercial success. there can be no assurance that this strategy will deliver the desired
result which could affect profitability in the future.  development, regulatory approval and marketing of products
risks and uncertainties apply particularly with respect to product-related, forward-looking statements. the outcome of the lengthy and
complex process of identifying new compounds and developing new products is inherently uncertain. drug discovery and development is time-consuming, expensive and unpredictable. the process from early discovery or design to development to regulatory
approval can take many years. drug candidates can fail at any stage of the process. there can be no assurance as to whether or when we will receive regulatory approval for new products or for new indications or dosage forms for existing products.
decisions by regulatory authorities regarding labeling and other matters could adversely affect the availability or commercial potential of our products. there is also a risk that we may not adequately address existing regulatory agency findings
concerning the adequacy of our regulatory compliance processes or implement sustainable processes and procedures to maintain regulatory compliance and to address future regulatory agency findings should they occur. there also are many considerations
that can affect marketing of our products around the world. regulatory delays, the inability to successfully complete clinical trials, claims and concerns about safety and efficacy, new discoveries, patent disputes and claims about adverse side
effects are a few of the factors that could adversely affect the realization of research and development and product-related, forward-looking statements.
table of contents
post-approval data  as a condition to granting marketing approval of a product, the fda may require a company to conduct additional clinical trials. the results generated in these phase iv trials could result in loss of
marketing approval, changes in product labeling, and/or new or increased concerns about side effects or efficacy of a product. the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 (the fdaaa) gives the fda enhanced post-market authority,
including the explicit authority to require post-market studies and clinical trials, labeling changes based on new safety information and compliance with fda-approved risk evaluation and mitigation strategies. the fdas exercise of its
authority under the fdaaa could result in delays or increased costs during product development, clinical trials and regulatory review, increased costs to comply with additional post-approval regulatory requirements and potential restrictions on
sales of approved products. foreign regulatory agencies often have similar authority and may impose comparable costs. post-marketing studies, whether conducted by us or by others and whether mandated by regulatory agencies or voluntary, and other
emerging data about marketed products, such as adverse event reports, may also adversely affect sales of our products. further, the discovery of significant problems with a product similar to one of our products that implicate (or are perceived to
implicate) an entire class of products could have an adverse effect on sales of the affected products. accordingly, new data about our products, or products similar to our products, could negatively impact demand for our products due to real or
perceived side effects or uncertainty regarding efficacy and, in some cases, could result in product withdrawal. furthermore, new data and information, including information about product misuse, may lead government agencies, professional societies,
practice management groups or organizations involved with various diseases to publish guidelines or recommendations related to the use of our products or the use of related therapies or place restrictions on sales. such guidelines or recommendations
may lead to lower sales of our products.  biotechnology products
the aca has created a framework for the approval of biosimilars in the u.s. following the expiration of 12 years of exclusivity for the
innovator
biologic with a potential six month pediatric extension. such biosimilars could reference biotechnology products already approved under the u.s. public health service act. additionally, the fda
has approved a biosimilar recombinant human growth hormone, genotropin, that referenced a biotechnology product approved under the u.s. federal food, drug, and cosmetic act. in europe, the european commission has granted marketing
authorizations for several biosimilars pursuant to a set of general and product class-specific guidelines for biosimilar approvals issued over the past few years. if competitors are able to obtain marketing approval for biosimilars referencing our
biotechnology products, our biotechnology products may become subject to competition from biosimilars, with the attendant competitive pressure. expiration or successful challenge of applicable patent rights could generally trigger this competition,
assuming any relevant exclusivity period has expired. we expect that we could face more litigation with respect to the validity and/or scope of patents relating to our biotechnology products with substantial revenue.
research studies
decisions about research studies made early in the development process of a drug candidate can have a substantial impact on the marketing
strategy once the drug receives approval. more detailed studies may demonstrate additional benefits that can help in the marketing, but they consume time and resources and can delay submitting the drug candidate for initial approval. we try to plan
clinical trials prudently, but there is no guarantee that a proper balance of speed and testing will be made in each case. the quality of our decisions in this area could affect our future results.
interest rate and foreign exchange risk  57% of our total 2010 revenues were derived from international operations, including 28% from the europe region and 18% from the japan/asia region. these international-based revenues, as well as our
substantial international net assets, expose our revenues and earnings to foreign currency exchange rate changes. in addition, our interest-bearing investments, loans and borrowings are subject to risk from changes in interest rates and foreign
exchange rates. these risks and the measures we have taken to help contain them are discussed in the section entitled financial risk management in our 2010 financial
table of contents
report. for additional details, see note 9-e to our consolidated financial statements, financial instruments: derivative financial instruments and hedging activities, in our 2010
financial report. those sections of our 2010 financial report are incorporated by reference.  notwithstanding our efforts to
foresee and mitigate the effects of changes in fiscal circumstances, we cannot predict with certainty changes in currency and interest rates, inflation or other related factors affecting our businesses.
risks affecting international operations  our international operations also could be affected by capital and exchange controls, expropriation and other restrictive government actions, changes in intellectual property legal protections and
remedies, trade regulations and procedures and actions affecting approval, production, pricing, and marketing of, reimbursement for and access to, our products, as well as by political unrest, unstable governments and legal systems and
inter-governmental disputes. any of these changes could adversely affect our business.  diversified segment
our animal health unit may be impacted by challenging global economic conditions resulting in high unemployment rates and tight credit
conditions. a high unemployment rate typically results in reduced traffic in veterinary clinics, negatively impacting our companion animal business. tight credit conditions limit the borrowing power of livestock producers, causing some to switch to
lower-priced alternatives.  pfizer nutrition may be impacted by challenging global economic conditions and the resulting
effect on consumer spending. increased competition particularly in high growth emerging markets is also a risk for this business. the nutrition business may also experience significant financial impact associated with changes in national, regional,
and international laws, rules and guidelines and their enforcement. our infant and young child nutrition products are subject to an array of rules and regulations enforced by government entities as well as treaties, conventions and guidelines from
international authorities. changes to these requirements can significantly impact costs relating to taxes, tariffs, trade, labeling, marketing, manufacturing, and the overall availability of our products.
the consumer healthcare unit may be impacted by economic volatility and generic competition
affecting consumer spending patterns and market share gains of competitors branded products or generic store brands. in addition, regulatory and legislative outcomes regarding the safety, efficacy or unintended uses of specific ingredients in
our consumer healthcare products may require withdrawal and/or reformulation of certain products (e.g. cough/cold products).  global
economic conditions  the global economic downturn and the challenging global economic environment has not had, nor do we
anticipate it will have, a material impact on our liquidity. due to our significant operating cash flow, financial assets, access to capital markets and available lines of credit and revolving credit agreements, we continue to believe that we have
the ability to meet our liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. as market conditions change, we will continue to monitor our liquidity position. however, there can be no assurance that our liquidity will not be affected by possible future
changes in global financial markets and global economic conditions.  in addition to industry-specific factors, we, like other
businesses, continue to face the effects of the challenging economic environment which have impacted our biopharmaceutical operations in the u.s. and europe, affecting the performance of products suchas lipitor, celebrex and
lyrica. we believe that patients, experiencing the effects of the challenging economic environment, including high unemployment levels and increases in co-pays, sometimes switch to generic products, delay treatments, skip doses or use less
effective treatments to reduce their costs. challenging economic conditions in the u.s. also haveincreased the number of patients in the medicaid program, under which sales of pharmaceuticals are subject to substantial rebates and, in many
states, to formulary restrictions limiting access to brand-name drugs, including ours. in addition, during 2010, we continued to experience pricing pressure as a result of the economic environment in europe, with government-mandated reductions in
prices for certain biopharmaceutical products in certain european countries.  outsourcing
outsourcing to third parties in areas including transaction processing, accounting, information
table of contents
technology, manufacturing, clinical trials, non-clinical studies, research and development, safety and other areas could expose us to sub-optimal quality, missed deadlines or supply disruptions,
all with potential negative implications for our results.  interactions with healthcare professionals
risks and uncertainties apply where the company provides something of value to a healthcare professional and/or government official,
which, if found to be improper, could potentially result in government enforcement actions and penalties. these risks may increase as non-u.s. jurisdictions adopt new anti-bribery laws and regulations.
difficulties of our wholesale distributors  in 2010, our largest wholesale distributor accounted for approximately 14% of our total revenue, and our top three wholesale distributors accounted for approximately 34% of our total revenue. if one of
our significant wholesale distributors encounters financial or other difficulties, such distributor may decrease the amount of business that it does with us, and we may be unable to collect all the amounts that the distributor owes us on a timely
basis or at all, which could negatively impact our results of operations.  product manufacturing and marketing risks
difficulties or delays in product manufacturing or marketing, including, but not limited to, the inability to increase production capacity
commensurate with demand or the failure to predict market demand for, or to gain market acceptance of, approved products, or the possibility that the quality of incoming materials may be substandard and not detected or that we may fail to maintain
appropriate quality standards throughout the internal and external supply network, could affect future results.  cost and expense
control/unusual events  growth in costs and expenses, changes in product, segment and geographic mix and the impact of
acquisitions, divestitures, restructurings, product withdrawals and other unusual events that could result from evolving business strategies, evaluation of asset realization and organizational restructuring could adversely affect future results.
such risks and uncertainties include, in particular, our ability to
successfully implement our announced plans regarding the companys research and development function including the planned exit from the companys sandwich u.k. site, subject to works
council and union consultations, as well as our ability to realize the projected benefits of our cost-reduction initiatives, including those related to the wyeth integration and to our research and development function.
changes in laws and accounting standards  our future results could be adversely affected by changes in laws and regulations, including changes in accounting standards, taxation requirements (including tax-rate changes, new tax laws and revised
tax law and regulatory interpretations including changes affecting the taxation by the u.s. of income earned outside the u.s. that result from the enactment in august 2010 of the education, jobs and medicaid assistance act of 2010, and that may
result from pending and possible future proposals), competition laws and environmental laws in the u.s. and other countries.  terrorist
activity  our future results could be adversely affected by changes in business, political and economic conditions,
including the cost and availability of insurance, due to the threat of terrorist activity in the u.s. and other parts of the world and related u.s. military action overseas.  legal proceedings  we and certain of our subsidiaries are involved in
various patent, product liability, consumer, commercial, securities, environmental and tax litigations and claims, government investigations, and other legal proceedings that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of our business. litigation
is inherently unpredictable, and excessive verdicts do occur. although we believe we have substantial defenses in these matters, we could in the future incur judgments or enter into settlements of claims that could have a material adverse effect on
our results of operations in any particular period. we also may fail to identify or prevent non-compliance with the laws and regulations associated with the dissemination of product information (approved and unapproved), potentially resulting in
government enforcement and damage to our reputation.
table of contents
patent claims include challenges to the coverage and/or validity of our patents on various
products or processes. although we believe we have substantial defenses to these challenges with respect to all our material patents, there can be no assurance as to the outcome of these matters, and a loss in any of these cases could result in a
loss of patent protection for the drug at issue, which could lead to a significant loss of sales of that drug and could materially affect future results of operations.  business development activities  we expect to continue to enhance our
in-line products and product pipeline through acquisitions, licensing and alliances. see our business development initiativesstrategy and recent transactions in our 2010 financial report, which is incorporated by reference. however,
these enhancement plans are subject to the availability and cost of appropriate opportunities and competition from other pharmaceutical companies that are seeking similar opportunities.  information technology  we rely to a large extent upon sophisticated
information technology systems and infrastructure. the size and complexity of our computer systems make them potentially vulnerable to breakdown, malicious intrusion and random attack. likewise, data privacy breaches by employees and others with
permitted access to our systems may pose a risk that sensitive data may be exposed to unauthorized persons or to the public. while we have invested heavily in the protection of data and information technology, there can be no assurance that our
efforts will prevent breakdowns or breaches in our systems that could adversely affect our business.  failure to realize all of the
anticipated benefits of the acquisition of wyeth  the success of our acquisition of wyeth will depend, in large part, on
our ability to realize the anticipated benefits and cost savings from integrating the operations of pfizer and wyeth. if we are not able to successfully integrate the operations of the two legacy companies, the anticipated benefits and cost savings
of the acquisition may not be realized fully or at all or may take longer to realize than expected.
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
not applicable.
item2.
properties  in 2010,
pfizer continued to consolidate its operations to achieve efficiencies and to dispose of excess space. following the acquisition of wyeth at the end of 2009, the total operational real estate portfolio peaked at 70million square feet. by the
end of 2010, the operational portfolio had been reduced to less than 67million square feet. a further twomillion square feet of facilities currently are non-operational pending disposal. our goal is to continue with further consolidation
in 2011.  pfizer corporate headquarters will continue to be in new york city. with the exception of the specialty care
customer-focused unit (which is headquartered in collegeville, pennsylvania), the biopharmaceutical units will continue to maintain their new york city headquarters.  the diversified business units are headquartered in madison, new jersey.  in
2010, we successfully disposed of surplus office space in the northeast u.s. through exiting several leased facilities and by completing sales of significant office buildings at 685 third avenue, new york, and in new london, connecticut.
our biopharmaceutical and diversified businesses expect to continue to own and lease space around the world for sales and marketing,
customer service and administrative support functions. in many locations these businesses will be co-located to achieve synergies and operational efficiencies.  our global research and development (r&d) facilities support our r&d organizations around the world, with heavy concentration in north america and the u.k. we have started implementation of our
previously announced r&d footprint reduction by moving forward on our facilities-disposition program. the sale of the r&d st.louis, missouri campus was completed early in 2010 and we have begun the disposition process for the r&d
sites at princeton, new jersey, chazy, new york, and a portion of the la jolla, california campus.
table of contents
we have veterinary medicine research and development operations in owned or leased
facilities in kalamazoo and richland township in michigan; durham, north carolina; thane, india; sandwich, u.k.; wavre, belgium; and brisbane, australia.  as previously mentioned, the company has announced a realigned research and development footprint, including a planned exit from the sandwich, u.k. site, subject to works council and union consultations,
and a planned shift of resources from its groton, connecticut site to its cambridge, massachusetts site.  pfizer global supply
(pgs) division is headquartered in various locations with leadership primarily in new york, new york and in peapack, new jersey. pgs operates plants in 76 locations around the world that manufacture products for our organizations including animal
health, consumer healthcare, emerging markets, established products, nutrition, primary care, oncology and specialty/vaccines. locations with major manufacturing facilities include belgium, china, germany, ireland, italy, japan, philippines, puerto
rico, singapore and the united states. pgs also operates multiple distribution facilities around the world. our global supply divisions plant network strategy will result in the exit from nine of these sites over the next
several years. in addition, the capsugel unit has manufacturing facilities in 10 locations around the world. as previously announced, we are currently reviewing strategic alternatives for the
capsugel unit, which may include divestiture.  in general, we believe that our properties are well- maintained, adequate and
suitable for their purposes. see note 11 to our consolidated financial statements, property, plant and equipment, in our 2010 financial report, which discloses amounts invested in land, buildings and equipment and which is incorporated by
reference. see also the discussion under note 17 to our consolidated financial statements, lease commitments, in our 2010 financial report, which is also incorporated by reference.
item3.
legal proceedings
certain legal proceedings in which we are involved are discussed in note 19 to our consolidated financial statements, legal proceedings
and contingencies, in our 2010 financial report, which is incorporated by reference.
item4.
reserved
table of contents
executive officers of the company
the executive officers of the company are set forth in this table. each holds the office or offices indicated until his or her successor
is chosen and qualified at the regular meeting of the board of directors to be held immediately following the 2011 annual meeting of shareholders. each of the executive officers is a member of the pfizer executive leadership team.
name
age
position
ian c. read
president and chief executive officer since december 2010. senior vice president; group president, worldwide biopharmaceutical businesses from october 2009 through december
2010.president, worldwide pharmaceutical operations from august 2006 until october 2009. since joining pfizer in 1978 as an operational auditor, mr. read has held various positions of increasing responsibility in pharmaceutical
operations.he worked in latin america through 1995, holding positions including chief financial officer, pfizer mexico, and country manager, pfizer brazil. in 1996, mr. read was appointed president of pfizers international
pharmaceuticals group, with responsibility for latin america and canada. he became executive vice president, europe in 2000, was named a corporate vice president in 2001, and assumed responsibility for canada, in addition to europe, in 2002. mr.
read later became accountable for operations in both the africa/middle east region and latin america. currently a director of kimberly-clark corporation. serves on the boards of u.s. council for international business and the european federation of
pharmaceutical industries and associations.our director since december 2010 and chair of our boards executive committee.
olivier brandicourt
president and general manager of pfizer primary care since 2008.senior vice president and general manager of u.s. pratt business unit from 2007 until 2008. managing
director of the united kingdom/ireland pfizer subsidiary from 2004 to 2007.
frank a. damelio
executive vice president, business operations and chief financial officer since december 2010. senior vice president and chief financial officer from september 2007 until
december 2010. prior to joining pfizer he was senior executive vice president of integration and chief administrative officer of alcatel-lucent from november 2006 until august 2007. chief operating officer of lucent technologies from january 2006
until november 2006. director of humana, inc. and chair of the humana audit committee. he is a director of the independent college fund of new jersey.
mikael dolsten
president of worldwide research and development since december 2010. senior vice president; president of worldwide research and development from may 2010 until december 2010.
senior vice president; president of pfizer biotherapeutics research & development group from october 2009 until may 2010. he was senior vice president of wyeth and president, wyeth research from june 2008 until october 2009. he was a private
equity partner at orbimed advisors, llc from january 2008 until june 2008. dr. dolsten was global head, corporate division pharma research and discovery, of boehringer ingelheim corporation from 2003 to
2007.
table of contents
geno j. germano
president and general manager, pfizer specialty care and oncology since december 2010. president and general manager, specialty care from october 2009 until december
2010.president, u.s. pharmaceuticals and womens health care unit, wyeth pharmaceuticals from 2008 through october 2009.president and general manager, u.s. pharmaceutical business unit, wyeth pharmaceuticals from 2007 through
2008.executive vice president and general manager, pharmaceutical business unit, wyeth pharmaceuticals from 2004 through 2007.
charles h. hill
executive vice president, worldwide human resources since december 2010.senior vice president, human resources for worldwide biopharmaceuticals businesses from 2008 through
december 2010.vice president, human resources, worldwide pharmaceutical operations from 2004 through 2008.
douglas m. lankler
executive vice president, chief compliance and risk officer since february 2011. executive vice president, chief compliance officer since december 2010. senior vice president and
chief compliance officer from january 2010 until december 2010. senior vice president, deputy general counsel and chief compliance officer from august 2009 until january 2010. senior vice president, associate general counsel and chief compliance
officer from october 2006 until august 2009. prior to october 2006, mr. lankler held various positions of increasing responsibility within the pfizer legal division.
freda c. lewis-hall
executive vice president, chief medical officer since december 2010. senior vice president, chief medical officer from may 2009 until december 2010. previously, she was chief
medical officer and executive vice president, medicines development at vertex pharmaceuticals from june 2008 until may 2009. dr.lewis-hall was senior vice president, u.s.pharmaceuticals, medical affairs for bristol-myers squibb company
from 2003 until may 2008.
kristin c. peck
executive vice president, worldwide business development and innovation since december 2010. senior vice president, worldwide business development, strategy and innovation from
april 2010 until december 2010. senior vice president, worldwide strategy and innovation from 2008 until april 2010. vice president, strategic planning, from 2007 to 2008. chief of staff to the vice chairman from 2006 to 2007 and senior director,
strategic planning from 2004 to 2006. she is a director of king.
cavan m. redmond
group president, animal health, consumer healthcare, capsugel and corporate strategy since december 2010. senior vice president; group president, pfizer diversified businesses
from october 2009 until december 2010. president, wyeth consumer healthcare from december 2007 until october 2009. executive vice president and general manager, biopharma, wyeth pharmaceuticals from 2003 until december
2007.
table of contents
natale s. ricciardi
senior vice president; president, pfizer global manufacturing (now pfizer global supply) since october 2004. he had held a number of positions of increasing responsibility in
manufacturing before being named u.s. area vice president/team leader for pfizer global manufacturing in 1999. director of mediacom communications corp.
amy w. schulman
executive vice president, general counsel and business unit lead, pfizer nutrition since december 2010. senior vice president and general counsel from june 2008 until december
2010. ms. schulman was a partner at the law firm of dla piper from 1997 until joining pfizer in june 2008. member of the board of directors of wesleyan university and the brooklyn academy of music.
david s. simmons
president and general manager, emerging markets and established products units since december 2010.president and general manager, established products from 2008 until
december 2010. since joining pfizer in 1996, mr. simmons has held various positions of increasing responsibility in pharmaceutical operations including, regional president, central southern europe; vice president of marketing, pfizer canada; and
country manager, pfizer greece.he is a member of the u.s.-india business council.
sally susman
executive vice president, policy, external affairs and communications of pfizer since december 2010. senior vice president, policy, external affairs and communications from
december 2009 until december 2010. senior vice president and chief communications officer from february 2008 until december 2009. prior to joining pfizer, ms. susman held senior level positions at the estee lauder companies, including executive vice
president from 2004 to january 2008.
table of contents
part ii
item5.
market for the companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the principal market for our common stock is the new york stock exchange. our stock is also listed on the london stock exchange and the
six swiss stock exchange and is traded on various united states regional stock exchanges. additional information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the table captioned quarterly consolidated financial data (unaudited) in
our 2010 financial report.  this table provides certain information with respect to our purchases of shares of the
companys common stock during the fiscal fourth quarter of 2010:  issuer purchases of equity securities
(a)
period
totalnumberofsharespurchased(b)
averagepricepaid
pershare(b)
totalnumberofsharespurchasedaspart of publiclyannounced plan(a)
approximatedollar value ofshares that mayyetbepurchasedunder the plan(a)
october4, 2010
through
october31, 2010
17,144
$
17.43
$
4,034,050,592
november1, 2010
through
november30, 2010
97,647
$
17.48
$
4,034,050,592
december1, 2010
through
december31, 2010
297,232
$
16.78
$
4,034,050,592
total
412,023
$
16.97
(a)
on january23, 2008, pfizer announced that the board of directors had authorized a $5 billion share-purchase plan (the 2008 stock purchase plan)
to be utilized from time to time. on february1, 2011, pfizer announced that (i)the board of directors had authorized a new $5 billion share-purchase plan which, together with the balance remaining under the 2008 stock purchase plan,
increases our total current authorization to $9 billion and (ii)the company anticipates purchasing $5 billion of its common stock in 2011, with the remaining authorized amount available in 2012 and beyond.
(b)
these columns reflect the following transactions during the fourth quarter of 2010: (i)the surrender to pfizer of 372,977 shares of common stock
to satisfy tax withholding obligations in connection with the vesting of restricted stock and restricted stock units issued to employees; and (ii)the open market purchase by the trustee of 39,046 shares of common stock in connection with the
reinvestment of dividends paid on common stock held in trust for employees who were granted performance  contingent share awards and who deferred receipt of such awards.
table of contents
item6.
selected financial data
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the financial summary in our 2010 financial report.
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the financial review section of our 2010 financial report.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk  information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading financial risk management in our 2010 financial report.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data  information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the report of independent registered public accounting firm on the consolidated financial statements in our 2010 financial report
and from the consolidated financial statements, related notes and supplementary data in our 2010 financial report.
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
item9a.
controls and procedures  disclosure
controls  as of the end of the period covered by this 2010 form 10-k, we carried out an evaluation, under the supervision
and with the participation of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures
(as such term is defined in rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the exchange act). based on this evaluation, our principal executive officer and principal financial officer concluded that our
disclosure controls and procedures are effective in alerting them in a timely manner to material information required to be disclosed in our periodic reports filed with the sec.  internal control over financial reporting  managements report on the
companys internal control over financial reporting (as such term is defined in rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the exchange act), and the related report of our independent registered public accounting firm, are included in our 2010
financial report under the headings managements report on internal control over financial reporting and report of independent registered public accounting firm on internal control over financial reporting, respectively, and are
incorporated by reference.  changes in internal controls  during our most recent fiscal quarter, there has not been any change in our internal control over financial reporting (as such term is defined in rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the exchange act) that
has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. however, we do wish to highlight some changes which, taken together, are expected to have a favorable impact on our controls over a
multi-year period. we continue to pursue a multi-year initiative to outsource some transaction-processing activities within certain accounting processes and are migrating to a consistent enterprise resource planning system across the organization.
these are enhancements of ongoing activities to support the growth of our financial shared service capabilities and standardize our financial systems. none of these initiatives is in response to any identified deficiency or weakness in our internal
control over financial reporting.
item9b.
other information  not
applicable.
table of contents
part iii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance  information about our directors is incorporated by reference from the discussion under item1 of our 2011 proxy statement. information about compliance with section16(a) of the exchange act is
incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance in our 2011 proxy statement. information about the pfizer policies on business conduct governing our employees,
including our chief executive officer, chief financial officer and principal accounting officer, and the code of business conduct and ethics governing our directors, is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading pfizer
policies on business ethics and conduct and code of conduct for directors in our 2011 proxy statement. information regarding the procedures by which our stockholders may recommend nominees to our board of directors is incorporated by
reference from the discussion under the headings governance of the company  governance information  criteria for board membership and requirements, including deadlines, for submission of proxy proposals, nomination of directors
and other business of shareholders in our 2011 proxy statement. information about our audit committee, including the members of the committee, and our audit committee financial experts, is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the
heading the audit committee in our 2011 proxy statement. the balance of the information required by this item is contained in the discussion entitled executive officers of the company in part i of this 2010 form10-k.
item11.
executive compensation
information about director and executive compensation is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the headings: compensation
of non-employee directors, executive compensation, and compensation committee interlocks and insider participation in our 2011 proxy statement.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
information required by this item is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the headings equity compensation plan
information in our 2011 proxy statement.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions and director independence  information about certain relationships and transactions with related parties is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the headings review of related person transactions and
transactions with related persons in our 2011 proxy statement. information about director independence is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading director independence in our 2011 proxy statement.
item14.
principal accounting fees and services  information about the fees for professional services rendered by our independent auditors in 2010 and 2009 is incorporated by reference from the discussion under the heading audit and non-audit fees
in item2 of our 2011 proxy statement. our audit committees policy on pre-approval of audit and permissible non-audit services of our independent auditors is incorporated by reference from the section captioned policy on audit
committee pre-approval of audit and permissible non-audit services of independent registered public accounting firm in item2 of our 2011 proxy statement.
table of contents
part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules  15(a)(1) financial statements. the following consolidated financial statements, related notes, report of independent registered public accounting firm and supplementary
data from our 2010 financial report are incorporated by reference into item8 of part ii of this 2010 form 10-k:
report of independent registered public accounting firm on the consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of income
consolidated balance sheets
consolidated statements of shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
notes to consolidated financial statements
quarterly consolidated financial data (unaudited)  15(a)(2) financial statement schedules. schedules are omitted because they are not required or because the information is provided elsewhere in the financial statements.
the financial statements of unconsolidated subsidiaries are omitted because, considered in the aggregate, they would not constitute a significant subsidiary.  15(a)(3) exhibits. these exhibits are available upon request. requests should be directed to matthew lepore, vice president and corporate secretary, chief
counsel-corporate governance, pfizer inc., 235 east 42nd street, new york, ny 10017-5755. the exhibit numbers preceded by an asterisk (*)indicate exhibits filed with this 2010 form10-k. all other exhibit numbers indicate exhibits filed
by incorporation by reference. exhibit numbers 10(1) through 10(21) are management contracts or compensatory plans or arrangements.
2(1)
agreement and plan of merger dated as of january25, 2009 among pfizer inc., wagner acquisition corp. and wyeth is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report filed on
january29, 2009.
3(1)
our restated certificate of incorporation dated april 12, 2004, is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended march 28, 2004.
3(2)
amendment dated may 1, 2006 to restated certificate of incorporation dated april 12, 2004, is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended july 2,
2006.
3(3)
our by-laws, as amended april 22, 2010, are incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended april 4, 2010.
4(1)
indenture, dated as of january 30, 2001, between us and the chase manhattan bank, is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report filed on january 30, 2001.
4(2)
first supplemental indenture, dated as of march 24, 2009, between us and the bank of new york mellon (successor to jpmorgan chase bank, n.a. (formerly jpmorgan chase bank, formerly
the chase manhattan bank)), as trustee, to indenture dated as of january 30, 2001, is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended june 28, 2009.
4(3)
second supplemental indenture, dated as of june 2, 2009, between us and the bank of new york mellon (successor to jpmorgan chase bank, n.a. (formerly jpmorgan chase bank, formerly
the chase manhattan bank)), as trustee, to indenture dated as of january 30, 2001, is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report filed on june 3, 2009.
4(4)
eighth supplemental indenture, dated as of october 30, 2009, between wyeth, us and the bank of new york mellon (as successor to jpmorgan chase bank, formerly the chase manhattan
bank), as trustee, to indenture dated as of april 10, 1992 (as amended on october 13, 1992), is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report filed on november3, 2009.
table of contents
4(5)
except as set forth in exhibits 4(1)  (4) above, the instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt securities of the company and its subsidiaries have been
omitted.1
10(1)
2001 stock and incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the 2001 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(2)
pfizer inc. 2004 stock plan, as amended and restated, is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the 2009 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(3)
form of stock option grant notice and summary of key terms is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended september26, 2004.
10(4)
form of performance-contingent share award grant notice is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended september 26, 2004.
10(5)
stock and incentive plan, as amended through july 1, 1999, is incorporated by reference from our 1999 10-k report.
10(6)
nonfunded supplemental retirement plan is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(7)
nonfunded deferred compensation and supplemental savings plan, as amended and restated as of february 1, 2002, is incorporated by reference from our 2002 10-k
report.
10(8)
executive annual incentive plan is incorporated by reference from our proxy statement for the 1997 annual meeting of shareholders.
10(9)
deferred compensation plan is incorporated by reference from our 1997 10-k report.
10(10)
non-employee directors retirement plan (frozen as of october 1996) is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(11)
restricted stock plan for non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(12)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of our non-employee directors is incorporated by reference from our 1996 10-k report.
10(13)
the form of indemnification agreement with each of the named executive officers identified in our 2011 proxy statement is incorporated by reference from our 1997 10-k
report.
10(14)
post-retirement consulting agreement, dated as of april 20, 2000, between us and william c. steere, jr., is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended april
2, 2000.
10(15)
severance agreement, dated august22, 2007, between us and frank a. damelio and letter to frank a. damelio regarding replacement pension benefit dated
august22, 2007, are incorporated by reference from our 8-k report filed on august22, 2007.
10(16)
executive severance plan is incorporated by referenced from our 8-k report filed on february 20, 2009.
10(17)
annual retainer unit award plan (for non-employee directors) (frozen as of march 1, 2006) as amended, is incorporated by reference from our 2008 10-k report.
10(18)
nonfunded deferred compensation and unit award plan for non-employee directors, as amended, is incorporated by reference from our 2008 10-k report.
10(19)
nonfunded and deferred compensation and unit award plan for non-employee directors, as amended, is incorporated by reference from our 10-q report for the period ended april 4,
2010.
we agree to furnish to the sec, upon request, a copy of each instrument with respect to issuances of long-term debt of the company and its
subsidiaries.
table of contents
10(20)
form of special award letter agreement is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report filed on october 28, 2009.
10(21)
separation agreement, dated as of december 5, 2010, between us and jeffrey b. kindler, is incorporated by reference from our 8-k report filed on december 9, 2010.
*12
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
*13
portions of the 2010 financial report, which, except for those sections incorporated by reference, are furnished solely for the information of the sec and are not to be deemed
filed.
*21
subsidiaries of the company.
*23
consent of kpmg llp, independent registered public accounting firm.
*24
power of attorney (included as part of signature page).
*31.1
certification by the chief executive officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*31.2
certification by the chief financial officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*32.1
certification by the chief executive officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*32.2
certification by the chief financial officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
*101.ins
xbrl instance document
*101.sch
xbrl taxonomy extension schema
*101.cal
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase
*101.lab
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase
*101.pre
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase
*101.def
xbrl taxonomy extension definition document
table of contents
signatures  under the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report was signed on behalf of the registrant by the authorized person named below.
pfizer inc.
dated: february24, 2011
by:
/s/matthew lepore
matthew lepore
vicepresidentandcorporatesecretary, chief counsel  corporate governance we, the
undersigned directors and officers of pfizer inc., hereby severally constitute amy w. schulman and matthew lepore, and each of them singly, our true and lawful attorneys with full power to them and each of them to sign for us, in our names in the
capacities indicated below, any and all amendments to this annual report on form 10-k filed with the securities and exchange commission.  under the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report was signed by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the date indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ian c. read
ian c. read
president, chief executive officer and director (principal executive officer)
february 24, 2011
/s/frank a. damelio
frank a. damelio
executive vice president, business operations and chief financial officer (principal financial officer)
february 24, 2011
/s/loretta v. cangialosi
loretta v. cangialosi
senior vice presidentcontroller (principal accounting officer)
february 24, 2011
/s/dennis a. ausiello
dennis a. ausiello
director
february 24, 2011
/s/michael s. brown
michael s. brown
director
february 24, 2011
/s/m. anthony burns
m. anthony burns
director
february 24, 2011
/s/robert n. burt
robert n. burt
director
february 24, 2011
/s/w. don cornwell
w. don cornwell
director
february 24, 2011
/s/frances d. fergusson
frances d. fergusson
director
february 24, 2011
/s/william h. gray iii
william h. gray iii
director
february24, 2011
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/constance j. horner
constance j. horner
director
february 24, 2011
/s/suzanne nora johnson
suzanne nora johnson
director
february 24, 2011
/s/james m. kilts
james m. kilts
director
february 24, 2011
/s/george a. lorch
george a. lorch
non-executive chairman of the
board
february 24, 2011
/s/john p. mascotte
john p. mascotte
director
february 24, 2011
/s/stephen w. sanger
stephen w. sanger
director
february 24, 2011
/s/william c. steere, jr.
william c. steere, jr.
director
february 24, 2011
