10-k
y83354e10vk.htm
form 10-k: j.p. morgan chase & co.
form 10-k: j.p. morgan chase & co.
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
commission file
december31, 2002
number 1-5805
j.p. morgan chase & co.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-2624428
(state or other jurisdiction of
(i.r.s. employer
incorporation or organization)
identification no.)
270 park
avenue, new york, ny
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (212)270-6000
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
common stock
depositary shares representing a one-tenth interest in6
5/8% cumulative preferred stock (stated value$500)
adjustable rate cumulative preferred stock, seriesa(stated
value$100)
adjustable rate cumulative preferred stock, seriesl(stated
value$100)
adjustable rate cumulative preferred stock, seriesn(stated
value$25)
floating rate subordinated notes due 2003
floating rate subordinated notes due august1, 2003
6.50% subordinated notes due 2005
6.25% subordinated notes due 2006
6 1/8% subordinated notes due 2008
6.75% subordinated notes due 2008
6.50% subordinated notes due 2009
guarantee of 7.34% capital securities, seriesd, ofchase
capital iv
guarantee of 7.03% capital securities, seriese, ofchase
capital v
guarantee of 7.00% capital securities, seriesg, ofchase
capital vii
guarantee of 8.25% capital securities, seriesh, ofchase
capital viii
guarantee of 7.50% capital securities, seriesi, ofj.p.
morgan chase capital ix
guarantee of 7.00% capital securities, seriesj, ofj.p.
morgan chase capital x
indexed linked notes on the s&p 500 indexdue november26, 2007
jpmorgan market participation noteson the
s&p 500 index due
march12, 2008
the indexed linked notes and
jpmorgan market participation notes are listed on the american stock exchange;
all other securities named above are listed on the new york stock exchange.
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act: none
number of shares of common stock outstanding on february28, 2003: 2,001,935,479
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90days. yes ..x.. no .....
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item
405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to
the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form10-k or any
amendment to this form10-k. [ ]
indicate by check mark whether registrant is an accelerated filer (as
defined in exchange act rule12b-2). yes ..x.. no .....
the aggregate market value of j.p. morgan chase & co. common stock held by
non-affiliates of j.p. morgan chase & co. on june28, 2002
was approximately $67,549,000,000.
document incorporated by reference: portions of registrants proxy statement
for the annual meeting of stockholders to be held may20, 2003, are
incorporated by reference in this form10-k in response to items 10, 11, 12 and
13 of part iii.
form10-k index
part i
page
item 1
business
overview
business segments
competition
supervision and regulation
important factors that may affect future results
non-u.s. operations
distribution of assets, liabilities and stockholders equity;
interest rates and interest differentials
115-119
return on equity and assets
112, 116
securities portfolio
loan portfolio
46-55, 80-81, 121-123
summary of loan and lending-related commitments loss experience
56-57, 80-82, 124-125
deposits
short-term and other borrowed funds
item 2
properties
item 3
legal proceedings
item 4
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the registrant
part ii
item 5
market for registrants common equity and
related stockholder matters
item 6
selected financial data
item 7
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations
item 7a
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting
and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10
directors and executive officers of jpmorgan chase
item 11
executive compensation
item 12
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
and related stockholder matters
item 13
certain relationships and related transactions
item 14
controls and procedures
part iv
item 15
exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
part i
item1: business
overview
j.p. morgan chase & co. (jpmorgan chase
or the firm) is a financial holding
company incorporated under delaware law in
1968. as of december31, 2002, jpmorgan
chase was one of the largest banking
institutions in the united states, with
$759billion in assets and $42billion in
stockholders equity.
on december31, 2000, j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated (j.p. morgan) merged with
and into the chase manhattan corporation
(chase). upon completion of the merger,
chase changed its name to j.p. morgan
chase & co. the merger was accounted for
as a pooling of interests. as a result,
the financial information provided herein
presents the combined results of chase
and j.p. morgan as if the merger had been
in effect for all periods presented. in
addition, certain prior-period amounts
for the predecessor institutions
financial statements have been
reclassified to conform to the current
presentation.
jpmorgan chase is a global financial
services firm with operations in more than
50 countries. its principal bank
subsidiaries are jpmorgan chase bank
(jpmorgan chase bank), a new york banking
corporation headquartered in new york city,
and chase manhattan bank usa, national
association (chase usa), headquartered in delaware. the firms principal nonbank
subsidiary is j.p.
morgan securities inc. (jpmsi).
the bank and nonbank subsidiaries of
jpmorgan chase operate nationally as well
as through overseas branches and
subsidiaries, representative offices and
affiliated banks.
the firms website is
www.jpmorganchase.com. jpmorgan chase makes
available free of charge, through its
website, annual reports on form10-k,
quarterly reports on form10-q and current
reports on form8-k, and any amendments to
those reports filed or furnished, pursuant
to section13(a) or section15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934, as soon as
reasonably practicable after it
electronically files such material with, or
furnishes such material to, the securities
and exchange commission (the sec).
business segments
jpmorgan chases activities are internally
organized, for management reporting
purposes, into five major business
segments (investment bank, treasury &
securities services, investment management
& private banking, jpmorgan partners and
chase financial services). a description
of the firms business segments and the
products and services they provide to
their respective client bases are
discussed in the segment results section
of managements discussion and analysis
(md&a) beginning on page 24, and in note
33 on page 108.
competition
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries and
affiliates operate in a highly competitive
environment. competitors include other
banks, brokerage firms, investment banking
companies, merchant banks, insurance
companies, mutual fund companies, credit
card companies, mortgage banking companies,
automobile financing companies, leasing
companies, e-commerce and other
internet-based companies,
and a variety of other financial services
and advisory companies. jpmorgan chases
businesses compete with these other firms
with respect to the range of products and
services offered and the types of clients,
customers, industries and geographies
served. with respect to some of its
geographies and products, jpmorgan chase
competes globally; with respect to others,
the firm competes on a regional basis.
jpmorgan chases ability to compete
effectively depends on the relative
performance of its products, the degree to
which the features of its products appeal
to customers, and the extent to which the
firm is able to meet its clients
objectives or needs. the firms ability to
compete also depends on its ability to
attract and retain its professional and
other personnel, and on its reputation.
the financial services industry has
experienced consolidation and convergence
in recent years, as financial institutions
involved in a broad range of financial
services industries have merged, of which
the merger of chase and j.p. morgan is an
example. this convergence trend is expected
to continue and could result in competitors
of jpmorgan chase gaining greater capital
and other resources, such as a broader
range of products and services and
geographic diversity. it is possible that
competition will become even more intense
as the firm continues to compete with
financial institutions that may be larger,
or better capitalized, or may have a
stronger local presence in certain
geographies.
supervision and regulation
permissible business activities: the firm
is subject to regulation under state and
federal law, including the bank holding
company act of 1956, as amended (the
bhca). in november 1999, the
gramm-leach-bliley act (glba) was enacted
which eliminated certain legal barriers
separating the conduct of various types of
financial services businesses, such as
commercial banking, investment banking and
insurance. in addition, glba substantially
revamped the regulatory scheme within which
financial institutions such as jpmorgan
chase operate.
under glba, bank holding companies meeting
certain eligibility criteria may elect to
become financial holding companies, which
may engage in any activities that are
financial in nature, as well as in
additional activities that the board of
governors of the federal reserve system
(the federal reserve board) and the
united states department of the treasury
(u.s. treasury department) determine are
financial in nature or incidental or
complementary to financial activities.
under glba, financial activities
specifically include insurance, securities
underwriting and dealing, merchant banking,
investment advisory and lending activities.
jpmorgan chase elected to become a
financial holding company as of march13,
2000.
part i
under regulations implemented by the
federal reserve board, if any depository
institution controlled by a financial
holding company ceases to be
well-capitalized or well-managed (as
defined below), the federal reserve board
may impose corrective capital or managerial
requirements on the financial holding
company and place limitations on its
ability to conduct the broader financial
activities permissible for financial
holding companies.
in addition, the federal reserve board may
require divestiture of the holding
companys depository institutions if the
deficiencies persist. the regulations also
provide that if any depository institution
controlled by a financial holding company
fails to maintain a satisfactory rating
under the community reinvestment act
(cra), the federal reserve board must
prohibit the financial holding company and
its subsidiaries from engaging in any
additional activities other than those
permissible for bank holding companies that
are not financial holding companies. the
depository institution subsidiaries of
jpmorgan chase currently meet the capital,
management and cra requirements necessary
to permit the firm to conduct the broader
activities permitted under glba. however,
there can be no assurance that this will
continue to be the case in the future.
regulation by federal reserve board under
glba: under glbas system of functional
regulation, the federal reserve board acts
as an umbrella regulator, and certain of
jpmorgan chases subsidiaries are regulated
directly by additional regulatory
authorities based on the particular
activities of those subsidiaries (e.g.,
securities and investment advisory
activities are regulated by the sec, and
insurance activities are regulated by state
insurance commissioners). the firm must
continue to file reports and other
information with, and submit to examination
by, the federal reserve board as umbrella
regulator. however, under glba, with
respect to matters affecting functionally
regulated subsidiaries, the federal reserve
board is required to defer to the
applicable functional regulators unless the
federal reserve board concludes that the
activities at issue pose a risk to a
depository institution or breach a specific
law the federal reserve board has authority
to enforce.
effect of glba on bank broker-dealer and
investment advisory activities: to promote
the system of functional regulation
described above, glba provides for the
amendment of certain federal securities
laws to eliminate various exemptions
previously available to banks. for example,
banks will no longer be generally exempt
from the broker-dealer provisions of the
securities exchange act of 1934. as a
result, jpmorgan chases bank subsidiaries
will either need to register with the sec
as broker-dealers or cease conducting many
activities deemed broker-dealer activities.
glba does retain a more limited exemption
from broker-dealer registration for certain
banking products and activities,
including, among others, municipal and
exempted securities transactions; safekeeping and custody arrangements; and
trust, securitization and derivatives
products and activities. the investment
advisers act of 1940 has also been amended
to eliminate certain provisions exempting
banks from the registration requirements of
that statute, and the investment company
act of 1940 has been amended to provide the
sec with regulatory authority over various
bank mutual fund activities. the provisions
discussed in this paragraph had an original
effective date of may12, 2001. the sec has
delayed the effective date of the
provisions dealing with dealer registration
until september30, 2003. the provisions
dealing with registration as a broker are
currently scheduled to be effective may12, 2003. however, the sec has stated that
it intends to promulgate proposed
regulations prior to that date, and the
staff has indicated that there will be
further extensions of the effective date to
give banks sufficient time to comply with
the secs implementing regulations.
dividend restrictions: federal law imposes
limitations on the payment of dividends by
the subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase
that are chartered by a state and are
member banks of the federal reserve system
(a state member bank) or national banks.
nonbank subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase are
not subject to those limitations. the
amount of dividends that may be paid by a
state member bank, such as jpmorgan chase
bank, or by a national bank, such as chase
usa, is limited to the lesser of the
amounts calculated under a recent
earnings test and an undivided profits
test. under the recent earnings test, a
dividend may not be paid if the total of
all dividends declared by a bank in any
calendar year is in excess of the
current years net income combined with the
retained net income of the two preceding
years, unless the bank obtains the approval
of its appropriate federal banking
regulator (which, in the case of a state
member bank, is the federal reserve board
and, in the case of a national bank, is the
office of the comptroller of the currency
(the comptroller of the currency)). under
the undivided profits test, a dividend may
not be paid in excess of a banks
undivided profits. similar restrictions
on the payment of dividends by jpmorgan
chase bank are imposed by new york law. see
note 25 on page 99 for the amount of
dividends that the firms principal bank
subsidiaries could pay, at december31,
2002 and 2001, to their respective bank
holding companies without the approval of
their relevant banking regulators.
in addition to the dividend restrictions
described above, the federal reserve
board, the comptroller of the currency and
the federal deposit insurance corporation
(the fdic) have authority to prohibit or to
limit the payment of dividends by the
banking organizations they supervise,
including jpmorgan chase and its bank and
bank holding company subsidiaries, if, in
the banking regulators opinion, payment
of a dividend would constitute an unsafe
or unsound practice in light of the
financial condition of the banking
organization.
capital requirements: the federal banking
regulators have adopted risk-based
capital and leverage guidelines that
require the firms capital-to-assets
ratios meet certain minimum standards.
the risk-based capital ratio is determined
by allocating assets and specified
off-balance sheet financial instruments
into four weighted categories, with higher
levels of capital being required for the
categories perceived as representing
greater risk. under the guidelines,
capital is divided into two tiers: tier 1
capital and tier 2 capital. for a further
discussion of tier 1 capital and tier 2
capital, see note 26 on page 99. the
amount of tier 2 capital may not exceed
the amount of tier 1 capital. total
capital is the sum of tier 1 capital and
tier 2 capital.
banking organizations are required to
maintain a total capital ratio (total
capital to risk-weighted assets) of 8%
and a tier 1 capital ratio of 4%.
the risk-based capital requirements
explicitly identify concentrations of
credit risk and certain risks arising from
non-traditional banking activities, and the
management of those risks, as important
factors to consider in assessing an
institutions overall capital adequacy.
other factors taken into consideration by
federal regulators include: interest rate
exposure; liquidity, funding and market
risk; the quality and level of earnings;
the quality of loans and investments; the
effectiveness of loan and investment
policies; and managements overall ability
to monitor and control financial and
operational risks, including the risks
presented by concentrations of credit and
non-traditional banking activities. in addition,
the risk-based capital rules incorporate a
measure for market risk in foreign exchange
and commodity activities and in the trading
of debt and equity
instruments. the market risk-based capital
rules require banking organizations with
large trading activities (such as jpmorgan
chase) to maintain capital for market risk
in an amount calculated by using the
banking organizations own internal
value-at-risk models (subject to parameters
set by the regulators).
the federal banking agencies amended their
regulatory capital standards, effective
january1, 2002, to address the treatment
of residual interests, recourse obligations
and direct credit substitutes. the
amendment defines residual interests as
on-balance sheet interests that are
retained by a seller after a securitization
or other transfer of financial assets and
that expose the seller to a greater than
pro rata share of the credit risk in such
assets. under the amendment, risk-based
capital must be held in an amount equal to
such residual interests even if that amount
exceeds the full risk-based capital charge
that would have been required to be held
against the assets transferred. the
amendment also imposes a concentration
limit of 25% of tier 1 capital on
credit-enhancing interest-only strips (a
type of residual interest), requiring any
amount in excess of that limit to be
deducted from tier 1 capital. the amendment
also treats recourse obligations and direct
credit substitutes (such as letters of
credit) more consistently for risk-based
capital purposes than previously. the
amendment introduces a multi-level approach
to assessing capital requirements to
positions in certain asset securitizations
based on the credit ratings assigned to
such position by nationally recognized
statistical rating organizations (nrsros).
for certain unrated positions other than
residual interests, the amendment provides
alternative methods for assessing capital
requirements, including the limited use of
a banking organizations internal risk
rating system, and, for positions arising
under securitization programs covering
multiple participants, ratings assigned to
the program by nrsros.
the federal banking agencies have also
adopted, effective april1, 2002,
regulations that impose increased capital
charges on a banking organizations equity
investments in nonfinancial companies. in
general, the new risk-based capital
requirements apply to such investments
regardless of the legal authority under
which they are made. the level of capital
charge increases as the banking
organizations concentration in such
investments increases. if the aggregate
value of a banking organizations
nonfinancial equity investments is less
than 15% of its tier 1 capital, then 8% of
such value is required to be deducted from
the banking organizations tier 1 capital.
if the aggregate value of a banking
organizations nonfinancial equity
investments is more than 15% but less than
25% of the banking organizations tier 1
capital, the deduction increases to
12% of such value, and if such aggregate
value is more than 25% of the banking
organizations tier 1 capital, the
deduction rises to 25%. the new charges do
not apply to investments made prior to
march13, 2000. equity investments made
through small business investment companies
in an amount equal to up to 15% of the
banking organizations tier 1 capital are
exempt from the new charges, but the full
amount of the equity investments is still
included when calculating the aggregate
value of the banking organizations
nonfinancial equity investments.
the federal banking regulators have
established minimum leverage ratio
guidelines. the leverage ratio is defined
as tier 1 capital divided by average total
assets (net of allowance for loan losses,
goodwill and certain intangible assets).
the minimum leverage ratio is 3% for strong
bank holding companies (i.e., those rated
composite 1 under the bank
subsidiaries, other subsidiaries, parent
company, earnings and capital adequacy, or
bopec, rating system) and for bank
holding companies that have implemented the
federal reserve boards risk-based capital
measure for market risk. other bank holding
companies must have a minimum leverage
ratio of 4%. bank holding companies may be
expected to maintain ratios well above the
minimum levels depending upon their
particular condition, risk profile and
growth plans.
tier 1 components: capital surplus and
common stock remain the most important
forms of capital at jpmorgan chase. because
common equity has no maturity date and
because dividends on common stock are paid
only when and if declared by the board of
directors, common equity is available to
absorb losses over long periods of time.
noncumulative perpetual preferred stock is
similar to common stock in its ability to
absorb losses. if the board of directors
does not declare a dividend on
noncumulative perpetual preferred stock in
any dividend period, the holders of the
instrument are never entitled to receive
that dividend payment. jpmorgan chases
outstanding noncumulative preferred stock
is a type commonly referenced as a frap:
a fixed-rate/adjustable preferred stock.
however, because the interest rate on fraps
may increase (up to a predetermined
ceiling), the federal reserve board treats
the firms noncumulative fraps in a manner
similar to cumulative perpetual preferred
and trust preferred securities. the federal
reserve board permits cumulative perpetual
preferred stock and trust preferred
securities to be included in tier 1 capital
but only up to certain limits, as these
financial instruments do not provide as
strong protection against losses as common
equity and noncumulative, non-frap
securities. cumulative perpetual preferred
stock does not have a maturity date,
similar to other forms of tier 1 capital.
however, any dividends not declared on
cumulative preferred stock accumulate and
thus continue to be due to the holder of
the instrument until all arrearages are
satisfied. trust preferred securities are a
type of security generally issued by a
special-purpose trust established and owned
by jpmorgan chase. proceeds from the
issuance to the public of the trust
preferred security are lent to the firm for
at least 30 (but not more than 50) years.
the intercompany note
part i
that evidences this loan provides that the
interest payments by jpmorgan chase on the
note may be deferred for up to five years.
during the period of any such deferral, no
payments of dividends may be made on any
outstanding jpmorgan chase preferred or
common stock or on the outstanding trust
preferred securities issued to the public.
tier 2 components: long-term subordinated
debt (generally having an original maturity
of 10-12years) is the primary form of
jpmorgan chases tier 2 capital.
subordinated debt is deemed a form of
regulatory capital because payments on the
debt are subordinated to other creditors of
jpmorgan chase, including holders of senior
and medium long-term debt and
counterparties on derivative contracts.
under glba, all financial holding
companies are bank holding companies for
purposes of the capital requirements
described above. however, glba
specifically prohibits the federal reserve
board from imposing capital adequacy rules
on certain functionally regulated
subsidiaries (such as broker-dealers and
insurance companies) that are in
compliance with
the applicable capital requirements of
their functional regulators.
the minimum risk-based capital requirements
adopted by the federal banking agencies
follow the capital accord of the basel
committee on banking supervision. the basel
committee, which is comprised of bank
supervisors and central banks from the
group of ten countries, issued its capital
accord in 1988 to achieve convergence in
the capital regulations applicable to
internationally active banking
organizations. the basel committee issued a
proposed replacement for the capital accord
in january, 2001 and, subsequently, issued a number of working papers
supplementing various aspects of that
replacement (the new accord). based on
these documents, the new accord would adopt
a three-pillar framework for addressing
capital adequacy. these pillars would
include minimum capital requirements, more
emphasis on supervisory assessment of
capital adequacy and greater reliance on
market discipline. under the new accord,
minimum capital requirements would be more
differentiated based upon perceived
distinctions in creditworthiness. such
requirements would be based either on
ratings assigned by rating agencies or, in
the case of a banking organization that met
certain supervisory standards, on the
organizations internal credit ratings. the
minimum capital requirements in the new
accord would also incorporate a capital
charge for operational risk. at present,
the target date for implementing the new
accord is the end of 2006.
fdicia: the federal deposit insurance
corporation improvement act of 1991
(fdicia) revised certain provisions of
the federal deposit insurance act, as well
as certain other federal banking statutes.
in general, fdicia provides for expanded
regulation of depository institutions and
their affiliates, including parent holding
companies, by their federal banking
regulators and, among other things,
requires the relevant federal banking
regulator to take prompt corrective
action with respect to a depository
institution if that institution does not
meet certain capital adequacy standards.
pursuant to fdicia, the federal reserve
board, the fdic and the comptroller of the
currency adopted regulations setting forth
a five-tier scheme for measuring the
capital adequacy of the depository
institutions they supervise. under the
regulations (commonly referred to as the
prompt corrective action rules), an
institution would be placed in one of the
following five capital categories when
these ratios fall within the prescribed
ranges:
ratios
total
tier 1
tier 1
capital
capital
leverage
at least
well-capitalized
%
%
%
adequately capitalized
%
%
%
(a
)
less than
undercapitalized
%
%
%
(a
)
significantly undercapitalized
%
%
%
critically undercapitalized
tangible equity to total assets of 2% or less
(a)may be 3% in some cases
an institution may be treated as being
in a capital category lower than that
indicated based on other supervisory
criteria.
supervisory actions by the appropriate
federal banking regulator under the
prompt corrective action rules generally
will depend upon an institutions
classification within the five capital
categories. the regulations apply only to
banks and not to bank holding companies
such as jpmorgan chase; however, subject
to limitations that may be imposed
pursuant
to glba, as described below, the federal
reserve board is authorized to take
appropriate action at the holding company
level based on the undercapitalized status
of the holding companys subsidiary
banking institutions. in certain instances
relating to an undercapitalized banking
institution, the bank holding company
would be required to guarantee the
performance of the undercapitalized
subsidiary and may be liable for civil
money damages for failure to fulfill its
commitments on that guarantee.
as of december31, 2002, each of
jpmorgan chases banking subsidiaries
was well-capitalized.
fdic insurance assessments: fdicia also
required the fdic to establish a
risk-based assessment system for fdic
deposit insurance. under the fdics
risk-based insurance premium assessment
system, each depository institution is
assigned to one of nine risk
classifications based upon certain capital
and supervisory measures and, depending
upon its classification, is assessed
insurance premiums on its deposits.
depository institutions insured by the
bank insurance fund are required to pay
premiums ranging from 0 basis points to 27
basis points of u.s. deposits. each of
jpmorgan chases banks, including jpmorgan
chase bank and chase usa, currently
qualifies for the 0 basis point
assessment. legislation has been
introduced in congress that, if enacted,
would give the fdic discretion to impose
deposit insurance premiums on all
depository institutions. in addition, if
the ratio of insured deposits to money in
the bank insurance fund drops below
specified levels, the fdic would be
required to impose premiums on all banks
insured by the bank insurance fund. all
depository institutions must also pay an
annual assessment so that the financing
corporation (fico) may pay interest on
bonds it issued in connection with the
resolution of savings association
insolvencies occurring prior to 1991. the
fico assessment for the first quarter of
2003 is 1.68 basis points
of u.s.
deposits. the rate schedules are subject
to future adjustments by the fdic. in
addition, the fdic has authority to impose
special assessments from time to time,
subject to certain limitations specified
in the deposit insurance funds act.
powers of the fdic upon insolvency of an
insured depository institution: an
fdic-insured depository institution can be
held liable for any loss incurred or
expected to be incurred by the fdic in
connection with another fdic-insured
institution under common control with such
institution being in default or in
danger of default (commonly referred to as
cross-guarantee liability). default is
generally defined as the appointment of a
conservator or receiver and in danger of
default is defined as certain conditions
indicating that a default is likely to
occur absent regulatory assistance. an fdic
cross-guarantee claim against a depository
institution is generally superior in right
of payment to claims of the holding company
and its affiliates against such depository
institution.
if the fdic is appointed the conservator or
receiver of an insured depository
institution, upon its insolvency or in
certain other events, the fdic has the
power: (1)to transfer any of the
depository institutions assets and
liabilities to a new obligor without the
approval of the depository institutions
creditors; (2)to enforce the terms of the
depository institutions contracts pursuant
to their terms; or (3)to repudiate or
disaffirm any contract or lease to which
the depository institution is a party, the
performance of which is determined by the
fdic to be burdensome and the disaffirmance
or repudiation of which is determined by
the fdic to promote the orderly
administration
of the depository institution. the above
provisions would be applicable to
obligations and liabilities of those of
jpmorgan chases subsidiaries that are
insured depository institutions, such as
jpmorgan chase bank and chase usa,
including, without limitation, obligations
under senior or subordinated debt issued by
those banks to investors (referred to below
as public noteholders) in the public
markets.
under federal law, the claims of a receiver
of an insured depository institution for
administrative expenses and the claims of
holders of u.s. deposit liabilities
(including the fdic, as subrogee of the
depositors) have priority over the claims
of other unsecured creditors of the
institution, including public noteholders,
in the event of the liquidation or other
resolution of the institution. as a result,
whether or not the fdic ever sought to
repudiate any obligations held by public
noteholders of any subsidiary of the firm
that is an insured depository institution,
such as jpmorgan chase bank or chase usa,
the public noteholders would be treated
differently from, and could receive, if
anything, substantially less than, the
depositors of the depository institution.
the usa patriot act: following the
september11, 2001 attacks on new york and
washington, d.c., the united states
government acted in several ways to
tighten control on activities perceived to
be connected to money laundering and
terrorist funding. beginning on september
23, 2001, president bush issued a series
of orders which identify terrorists and
terrorist organizations and require the
blocking of property and assets of, as
well as prohibiting all transactions or
dealing with, such terrorists, terrorist
organizations and those that assist or
sponsor them. on october26, 2001,
president bush signed into law the usa
patriot act of 2001 (the act).
the act substantially broadens existing
anti-money laundering legislation and the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
united states, imposes new compliance and
due diligence obligations, creates new
crimes and penalties, compels the
production of documents located both
inside and outside the united states,
including those of non-u.s. institutions
that have a correspondent relationship in
the united states, and clarifies the safe
harbor from civil liability to customers.
the act mandates the u.s. treasury
department to issue a number of
regulations to further clarify the acts
requirements or provide more specific
guidance on their application.
the act requires all financial
institutions, as defined, to establish
anti-money laundering compliance and due
diligence programs. such programs must
include, among other things, adequate
policies, the designation of a compliance
officer, employee training programs, and an
independent audit function to review and
test the program. jpmorgan chase has had in
place, pursuant to previously existing laws
and regulations, a know your customer
policy and an anti-money laundering
compliance program which requires, as
appropriate based on a risk-based analysis,
performing due diligence with respect to
establishing the identity and address of
the beneficial owners of an account, the
source of the accounts funds and the
proposed use of the account, as well as
requiring the identification and reporting
of suspicious transactions to appropriate
law enforcement authorities. jpmorgan chase
believes its programs satisfy the
requirements of the act.
the act requires financial institutions
that maintain correspondent accounts for
non-u.s. institutions or persons or that
are involved in private banking for
non-united states persons or their
representatives, to establish appropriate,
specific and, where necessary, enhanced due
diligence policies, procedures, and
controls that are reasonably designed
to detect and report instances of money
laundering through those accounts. in
furtherance of these provisions, the act
mandates specific minimum standards
regarding the establishment of private
banking accounts and prohibits financial
institutions from establishing,
maintaining, administering or managing
correspondent accounts with any non-u.s.
bank that does not have a physical presence
in any jurisdiction unless the so-called
shell bank is affiliated with a regulated
physically-established bank. jpmorgan chase
will continue to revise and update its
know your customer policy and its
anti-money laundering programs to reflect
changes required by the act, and the u.s.
treasury department regulations to be
issued thereunder, in order to remain in
compliance with the act and its provisions.
other supervision and regulation: under
current federal reserve board policy,
jpmorgan chase is expected to act as a
source of financial strength to its bank
subsidiaries and to commit resources to
support the bank subsidiaries in
circumstances where it might not do so
absent such policy. however, because glba
provides for functional regulation of
financial holding company activities by
various regulators, glba prohibits the
federal reserve board from requiring
payment by a holding company or subsidiary
to a depository institution if the
functional regulator of the payor objects
to such payment. in such a case, the
federal reserve board could instead require
the divestiture of the depository
institution and impose operating
restrictions pending the divestiture.
part i
any loans by a bank holding company to any
of its subsidiary banks are subordinate in
right of payment to deposits and to certain
other indebtedness of the subsidiary banks.
in the event of a bank holding companys
bankruptcy, any commitment by the bank
holding company to a federal bank
regulatory agency to maintain the capital
of a subsidiary bank at a certain level
will be assumed by the bankruptcy trustee
and entitled to a priority of payment.
the bank subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase are
subject to certain restrictions imposed by
federal law on extensions of credit to, and
certain other transactions with, the firm
and certain other affiliates and on
investments in stock or securities of
jpmorgan chase and those affiliates. these
restrictions prevent jpmorgan chase and
other affiliates from borrowing from a bank
subsidiary unless the loans are secured in
specified amounts.
the firms bank and certain of its nonbank
subsidiaries are subject to direct
supervision and regulation by various other
federal and state authorities (many of
which will be considered functional
regulators under glba). jpmorgan chase
bank as a new york state-chartered bank and
a state member bank, is subject to
supervision and regulation by the new york
state banking department as well as by the
federal reserve board and the fdic.
jpmorgan chases national bank
subsidiaries, such as chase usa, are
subject to substantially similar
supervision and regulation by the
comptroller of the currency. supervision
and regulation by each of the foregoing
regulatory agencies generally include
comprehensive annual reviews of all major
aspects of the relevant banks business and
condition, as well as the imposition of
periodic reporting requirements and
limitations on investments and other
powers. the firm also conducts securities
underwriting, dealing and brokerage
activities through jpmsi and other
broker-dealer subsidiaries, all of which
are subject to the regulations of the sec
and the national association of securities
dealers, inc. jpmsi is a member of the new
york stock exchange. the operations of
jpmorgan chases mutual funds also are
subject to regulation by the sec. the types
of activities in which the non-u.s.
branches of jpmorgan chase bank and the
international subsidiaries of jpmorgan
chase may engage are subject to various
restrictions imposed by the federal reserve
board. those non-u.s. branches and
international subsidiaries also are subject
to the laws and regulatory authorities of
the countries in which they operate.
the activities of jpmorgan chase bank and
chase usa as consumer lenders also are
subject to regulation under various federal
laws, including the truth-in-lending, the
equal credit opportunity, the fair credit
reporting, the fair debt collection
practice and the electronic funds transfer
acts, as well as various state laws. these
statutes impose requirements on the making,
enforcement and collection of consumer
loans and on the types of disclosures that
need to be made in connection with such
loans.
in addition, under the requirements imposed
by glba, jpmorgan chase and its
subsidiaries are required periodically to
disclose to their retail customers the
firms policies and practices with respect
to (1)the sharing of non-public customer
information with jpmorgan chase affiliates
and others and (2)the confidentiality and
security of that information. under glba,
retail customers also must be given the
opportunity to opt out of information
sharing arrangements with non-affiliates,
subject to certain exceptions set forth in
glba.
important factors that may affect future results
from time to time, the firm has made and
will make forward-looking statements. these
statements can be identified by the fact
that they do not relate strictly to
historical or current facts.
forward-looking statements often use words
such as anticipate, target, expect,
estimate, intend, plan, goal,
believe or other words of similar
meaning. forward-looking statements give
jpmorgan chases current expectations or
forecasts of future events, circumstances
or results. jpmorgan chases disclosure in
this report, including in the md&a section,
contains forward-looking statements. the
firm also may make forward-looking
statements in its other documents filed
with the sec and in other written
materials. in addition, the firms senior
management may make forward-looking
statements orally to analysts, investors,
representatives of the media and others.
any forward-looking statements made by or
on behalf of the firm speak only as of the
date they are made. jpmorgan chase does
not undertake to update forward-looking
statements to reflect the impact of
circumstances or events that arise after
the date the forward-looking statement was
made. the reader should, however, consult
any further disclosures of a
forward-looking nature jpmorgan chase may
make in its annual reports on form10-k,
its quarterly reports on form10-q and its
current reports on form8-k.
all forward-looking statements, by their
nature, are subject to risks and
uncertainties. the firms actual future
results may differ materially from those
set forth in jpmorgan chases
forward-looking statements. factors that
might cause jpmorgan chases future
financial performance to vary from that
described in its forward-looking
statements include the credit, market,
operational, liquidity, interest rate and
other risks discussed in the md&a section
of this report and in other
periodic reports filed with the sec. in
addition, the following discussion sets
forth certain risks and uncertainties that
the firm believes could cause its actual
future results to differ materially from
expected results. however, other factors
besides those listed below or discussed in
jpmorgan chases reports to the sec also
could adversely affect the firms results,
and the reader should not consider any
such list of factors to be a complete set
of all potential risks or uncertainties.
this discussion is provided as permitted
by the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995.
business conditions and general economy.
the profitability of jpmorgan chases
businesses could be adversely affected by a
worsening of general economic conditions in
the united states or abroad. the difficult
global market and economic conditions that
existed in 2001 continued in 2002 and this
challenging environment could persist for
some period of time in 2003. uncertainties
in the financial markets have been
exacerbated by investor concerns over the
integrity of the u.s. financial markets and
uncertainty surrounding terrorists threats
and the possible outbreak of war. factors
such as the liquidity of the global
financial markets, the level and volatility
of equity prices and interest rates,
investor sentiment, inflation, and the
availability and cost of credit could
significantly affect the activity level of
clients with respect to size, number and
timing of transactions effected by the
firms investment banking business,
including its underwriting and advisory
businesses, and also may affect the
realization of cash returns from jpmorgan
chases private equity business. a further
market downturn would likely lead to a
decline in the volume of transactions that
jpmorgan chase executes for its customers
and, therefore, lead to a decline in the
revenues it receives from trading
commissions and spreads. higher interest
rates or continued weakness in the market
also could affect the willingness of
financial investors to participate in loan
syndications or underwritings managed by
jpmorgan chase. the firm generally
maintains large trading portfolios in the
fixed income, currency, commodity and
equity markets and has significant
investment positions, including merchant
banking investments at jpmorgan partners.
the revenues derived from mark-to-market
values of jpmorgan chases business are
affected by many factors, including
jpmorgan chases credit standing; its
success in proprietary positioning;
volatility in interest rates and in equity
and debt markets; and the economic,
political and business factors described
below. jpmorgan chase anticipates that
these revenues will experience volatility
from time to time. continued market
weakness or worsening of the economy could
cause the firm to incur mark-to-market
losses in the values of these positions.
a market downturn also could result in a
decline in the fees jpmorgan chase earns
for managing assets. for example, a higher
level of u.s. or non-u.s. interest rates or
a downturn in trading markets could affect
the flows of moneys to or from the mutual
funds managed by the firm. moreover, even
in the absence of a market downturn,
below-market performance by jpmorgan
chases mutual funds could result in a
decline in assets under management and,
therefore, in the fees the firm receives.
an economic downturn or significantly
higher interest rates could adversely
affect the credit quality of jpmorgan
chases on-balance sheet and off-balance
sheet assets by increasing the risk that a
greater number of the firms customers
would become delinquent on their loans or
other obligations to jpmorgan chase.
further, a continuing challenging economic
environment could lead to a higher rate of
delinquencies by
customers or counterparties which, in turn,
would result in a higher level of
charge-offs and a higher level of provision
for credit losses for jpmorgan chase, all of which could
adversely affect the firms earnings. the
firms consumer businesses are particularly
affected by domestic economic conditions,
including u.s. interest rates, the rate of
unemployment, the level of consumer
confidence, changes in consumer spending,
and the number of personal bankruptcies, as
these factors will affect the level of
consumer loans and credit quality.
competition. jpmorgan chase operates in a
highly competitive environment and expects
various factors to cause competitive
conditions to continue to intensify. for
example, technological advances and the
growth of e-commerce have made it possible
for non-depository institutions to offer
products and services that traditionally
were banking products and for financial
institutions to compete with technology
companies in providing electronic and
internet-based financial solutions. in
addition, the firm expects cross-industry
competition to continue to intensify,
particularly as continued merger activity
in the financial services industry produces
larger, better-capitalized companies that
are capable of offering a wider array of
financial products and services, and at
more competitive prices.
non-u.s. operations; trading in non-u.s.
securities. the firm does business
throughout the world, including in
developing regions of the world commonly
known as emerging markets. jpmorgan chases
businesses and revenues derived from
non-u.s. operations are subject to risk of
loss from unfavorable political and
diplomatic developments, currency
fluctuations, social instability, changes
in governmental policies or policies of
central banks, expropriation,
nationalization, confiscation of assets and
changes in legislation relating to non-u.s.
ownership. jpmorgan chase also invests in
the securities of corporations located in
non-u.s. jurisdictions, including emerging
markets. revenues from the trading of
non-u.s. securities also may be subject to
negative fluctuations as a result of the
above factors. the impact of these
fluctuations could be accentuated because,
generally, non-u.s. trading markets,
particularly in emerging market countries,
are smaller, less liquid and more volatile
than u.s. trading markets.
operational risk. jpmorgan chase, like all
large corporations, is exposed to many
types of operational risk, including the
risk of fraud by employees or outsiders,
unauthorized transactions by employees or
operational errors, including clerical or
record-keeping errors or errors resulting
from faulty or disabled computer or
telecommunications systems. given the high
volume of transactions at jpmorgan chase,
certain errors may be repeated or
compounded before they are discovered and
successfully rectified. in addition, the
firms necessary dependence upon automated
systems to record and process its
transaction volume may further increase the
risk that technical system flaws or
employee tampering or manipulation of those
systems will result in losses that are
difficult to detect. the firm may also be
subject to disruptions of its operating
systems, arising from events that are
wholly or partially beyond its control
(including, for example, computer viruses
or electrical or telecommunications
outages), which may give rise to losses in
service to customers and to loss or
liability to the firm. the firm is further
exposed to the risk that its external
vendors may be unable to fulfill their
contractual obligation to the firm (or will
be subject to the same risk of fraud or
operational errors by their respective
employees as is the firm), and to the risk
that its (or its vendors) business
continuity and data security systems prove
not to be sufficiently adequate. although
jpmorgan chase maintains a system of
controls designed to keep operational risk
at appropriate levels, the firm has in the
past suffered losses from operational risk,
and there can be no assurance that jpmorgan
chase will not suffer losses from
operational risks in the future.
government monetary policies and economic controls.
jpmorgan chases businesses and earnings
are affected by general economic
conditions, both domestic and
international. jpmorgan chases businesses
and earnings also are affected by the
fiscal or other policies that are adopted
by various regulatory authorities of the
u.s., non-u.s. governments and
international agencies. for example,
policies and regulations of the federal
reserve board influence, directly and
indirectly, the rate of interest paid by
commercial banks on their interest-bearing
deposits and also may impact the value of
financial instruments held by the firm.
these actions of the federal reserve board
also determine to a significant degree the
cost to jpmorgan chase of funds for
lending and investing. the nature and
impact of future changes in economic and
market conditions and fiscal policies are
not predictable and are beyond jpmorgan
chases control. in addition, these
policies and conditions can impact the
firms cus-
part i
tomers and counterparties, both in the u.s. and
abroad, which may increase the risk that
such customers or counterparties default
on their obligations to jpmorgan chase.
reputational and legal risk. the firms
ability to attract and retain customers and
employees could be adversely affected to
the extent its reputation is damaged. the
failure of the firm to deal, or to appear
to fail to deal, with various issues that
could give rise to reputational risk could
cause harm to the firm and its business
prospects. these issues include, but are
not limited to, appropriately dealing with
potential conflicts of interest, legal and
regulatory requirements, ethical issues,
money-laundering, privacy, record-keeping,
sales and trading practices and the proper
identification of the legal, reputational,
credit, liquidity and market risks inherent
in its products. failure to address
appropriately these issues could also give
rise to additional legal risk to the firm,
which could, in turn, increase the size and
number of claims and damages asserted
against the firm or subject the firm to
enforcement actions, fines and penalties.
credit, market, liquidity and private
equity risk. jpmorgan chases revenues also
are dependent upon the extent to which
management can successfully achieve its
business strategies within a disciplined
risk environment. jpmorgan chases ability
to grow its businesses is affected by
pricing and competitive pressures, as well
as by the costs associated with the
introduction of new products and services
and the expansion and development of new
distribution channels. the ability of
management to utilize the shareholder
value added methodology to evaluate
investment opportunities and the ability to
maintain expense discipline will be
important factors in determining the extent
to which the firm achieves its financial
targets. in addition, to the extent any of
the instruments and strategies jpmorgan
chase uses to hedge or otherwise manage its
exposure to market, credit and private
equity risk are not effective, the firm may
not be able to mitigate effectively its
risk exposures in particular market
environments or against particular types of
risk. jpmorgan chases balance sheet growth
will be dependent upon the economic
conditions
described above, as well as on its
determination to securitize, sell, purchase
or syndicate particular loans or loan
portfolios. jpmorgan chases trading
revenues and interest rate risk are
dependent upon its ability to identify properly, and mark-to-market, changes in
the value of its financial instruments
caused by changes in market prices or
rates. the firms earnings will also be
dependent upon how effectively it
determines and assesses the cost of credit,
and manages risk concentrations, including
exposure limits for industry and
single-name obligors. to the extent its
assessment of migrations in credit quality,
risk concentrations, or assumptions or
estimates used in establishing its loan
loss reserves prove inaccurate or not
predictive of actual results, the firm
could suffer higher-than-anticipated credit
losses. the successful management of
credit, market, operational and private
equity risk is an important consideration
in managing the firms liquidity risk, as
evaluation by rating agencies of the
management of these risks affects their
determinations as to the firms credit
ratings and, therefore, its cost of funds.
non-u.s. operations
for geographic distributions of total
revenue, total expense, income before
income tax expense and net income, see
note 32 on page 107. for a discussion of
non-u.s. loans, see note 9 on page 81 and
the sections entitled country exposure
in the md&a on page 53 and cross-border
outstandings on page 122.
item2: properties
the headquarters of jpmorgan chase is
located in new york city at 270 park
avenue, which is a 50-story bank and
office building owned by jpmorgan chase.
this location contains approximately 1.3
million square feet of commercial office
and retail space.
jpmorgan chase entered into 2 leases for
approximately 2.2million square feet of
office space in two midtown manhattan
office buildings, 277 park avenue and 245
park avenue. the 277 park avenue building
is fully occupied, and 245 park avenue is
in the process of being prepared for
occupancy. jpmorgan chase also has a
number of other large office leaseholds in
various locations in manhattan.
jpmorgan chase owns and occupies a 60-story
building at one chase manhattan plaza in
new york city. this location has
approximately 2million square feet of
commercial office and retail space, of
which approximately 800,000 square feet is
leased to outside tenants.
jpmorgan chase also owns and occupies a
22-story building at 4 new york plaza, new
york city. this location has 900,000 square feet of
commercial office and retail space, none of which is leased to
outside tenants.
on may31, 2001, jpmorgan chase had
entered into a contract with the city of
new york to sell to the city of new york,
or its designee, the two-building complex
at 23 wall street/15 broad street in new
york city. the two buildings comprise
approximately 1million square feet of
commercial office and retail space. the
city of new york and the new york stock
exchange had previously announced their
intention to build a new exchange on the
land currently occupied by these
facilities. the city of new york elected
to cancel its purchase contract with
jpmorgan chase in september 2002. the
two-building complex is currently being
marketed for sale.
jpmorgan chase built and fully occupies a
two-building
complex known as chase metrotech center in
downtown brooklyn, new york that was
completed in 1992. this facility contains
approximately 1.75million square feet and
houses operations and product support
functions.
in 2000 jpmorgan chase entered into
leases for two build to suit office
buildings at the newport office center in
jersey city, new jersey. the two
buildings, comprising approximately 1.1
million square feet of office and retail
space, were occupied by jpmorgan chase
during 2002.
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries also
own and occupy administrative and
operational facilities in hicksville, new
york; tampa, florida; tempe, arizona;
newark, delaware; and in houston, arlington
and el paso, texas.
jpmorgan chase occupies, in the aggregate,
approximately 2.6million square feet of
space in the united kingdom. the most
significant components of leased space in
london are 350,000 square feet at 125
london wall, 325,000 square feet at
aldermanbury, and a 450,000 square-foot
office complex at 60 victoria embankment in
london. jpmorgan chase also owns and
occupies a 350,000 square-foot operations
center in bournemouth.
in addition, jpmorgan chase and its
subsidiaries occupy branch offices and
other administrative and operational
facilities throughout the u.s. and in
non-u.s. countries under various types of
ownership and leasehold agreements.
the majority of the properties occupied
by jpmorgan chase are used across all of
jpmorgan chases business segments and
for corporate purposes.
in the third quarter of 2002, jpmorgan
chase incurred a $98million charge to
cover the costs of exiting excess vacant
space on the west coast. jpmorgan chases
space requirements continue to be affected
by the present economic downturn and by the
consolidation of operations as a result of
the merger. jpmorgan chase will continue to
evaluate its current and projected space
requirements and, as opportunities arise,
may dispose of additional premises,
although there is no assurance that it will
be able to do so, nor is there any
assurance that the firm will not have to
incur additional charges in connection with
any such disposition.
item3: legal proceedings
enron litigation. jpmorgan chase is
involved in a number of lawsuits and
investigations arising out of its banking
relationships with enron corp. and its
subsidiaries (enron). on january2, 2003,
the firm settled its dispute with eleven
insurance companies that had issued surety
bonds guaranteeing obligations of enron
corp., and received from the insurance
companies $502million in cash and $75
million of unsecured claims. still pending
in london is a lawsuit by the firm against
westdeutsche landesbank girozentrale
seeking to compel payment of $165million
under an enron-related letter of credit
issued by the bank.
actions involving enron have also been
initiated by other parties against jpmorgan
chase and its directors and certain of its
officers. these lawsuits include a series
of purported class actions brought on
behalf of shareholders of enron, including
the lead action captioned newby v. enron
corp., and a series of purported class
actions brought on behalf of enron
employees who participated in various
employee stock ownership plans, including
the lead action captioned tittle v. enron
corp., both of which are pending in u.s.
district court in
houston. the consolidated complaint filed
in newby named as defendants, among others,
jpmorgan chase, several other investment
banking firms, two law firms, enrons
former accountants and affiliated entities
and individuals and other individual
defendants, including present and former
officers and directors of enron and
purports to allege claims against jpmorgan
chase and the other defendants under
federal and state securities laws. the
tittle complaint named as defendants, among
others, jpmorgan chase, several other
investment banking firms, a law firm,
enrons former accountants and affiliated
entities and individuals and other
individual defendants, including present
and former officers and directors of enron
and purports to allege claims against
jpmorgan chase and certain other defendants
under the racketeer influenced and corrupt
organizations act (rico) and state common
law. on december20, 2002, the court denied
the motions of jpmorgan chase and other
defendants to dismiss the newby action.
additional actions against jpmorgan chase
or its affiliates relating to enron have
been filed. these actions include a
purported consolidated class action
lawsuit by jpmorgan chase stockholders
alleging that jpmorgan chase issued false
and misleading press releases and other
public documents relating to enron in
violation
of section10(b) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
and rule10b-5 thereunder;
shareholder derivative actions
alleging breaches of fiduciary
duties and alleged failures to
exercise due care and diligence by
the firms directors and named
officers in the management of
jpmorgan chase; and various
actions in disparate courts by
enron investors and creditors
alleging state law and common law
claims against jpmorgan chase and
many other defendants.
in addition, a number of federal, state and
local regulatory and law enforcement
authorities and congressional committees,
and an examiner appointed in the enron
bankruptcy case, have initiated
investigations of enron and of certain of
the firms financial transactions with
enron. in that regard, the firm has
delivered, or is currently in the process
of delivering, voluntarily and pursuant to
subpoena, information to the house energy
and commerce committee, the senate
government affairs committee, the senate
permanent subcommittee on investigations,
u.s. representative henry waxman, the
securities and exchange commission,
the federal reserve bank of new york, the
new york state banking department, the new
york county district attorneys office, the
u.s. department of justice, and the enron
bankruptcy examiner. the firm intends to
continue to cooperate with these
authorities and with such other agencies
and authorities as may request information
from jpmorgan chase.
worldcom litigation. jpmsi and jpmorgan chase have been
named as defendants in fifteen actions that
were filed in either united states district
courts or state courts in six states and
the district of columbia and in one
arbitral panel beginning in july 2002
arising out of alleged accounting
irregularities in the books and records of
worldcom inc. plaintiffs in all but one of
these actions are institutional investors,
including state pension funds, who
purchased debt securities issued by
worldcom pursuant to public offerings in
may 2000 and may 2001. jpmsi acted as an
underwriter of both of those offerings. in
addition to jpmsi and
jpmorgan chase, the defendants in various
of the actions include other underwriters,
certain executives of worldcom and
worldcoms auditors. in the actions,
plaintiffs allege that defendants either
knew or were reckless or negligent in not
knowing that the securities were sold to
plaintiffs on the basis of
misrepresentations and omissions of
material facts concerning the financial
condition of worldcom. the complaints
against jpmorgan chase and jpmsi assert
claims under federal and state securities
laws, erisa, other state statutes and under
common law theories of fraud and negligent
misrepresentation.
commercial financial services litigation.
jpmsi (formerly known as chase securities,
inc.) has been named as a defendant or
third-party defendant in 14 actions that
were filed in or transferred to the united
states district court for the northern
district of oklahoma or filed in oklahoma
state court beginning in october 1999
arising out of the failure of commercial
financial services, inc. (cfsi).
plaintiffs in these actions are
institutional investors who purchased over
$1.6billion in original face amount of
asset-backed securities issued by cfsi. the
securities were backed by delinquent credit
card receivables. in addition to jpmsi, the
defendants in various of the actions are
the founders and key executives of cfsi, as
well as its auditors and outside counsel.
jpmsi is alleged to have been the
investment banker to cfsi and to
part i
have acted as an initial purchaser and as
placement agent in connection with the
issuance of certain of the securities.
plaintiffs allege that defendants either
knew or were reckless in not knowing that
the securities were sold to plaintiffs on
the basis of misleading misrepresentations
and omissions of material facts. the
complaints against jpmsi assert claims
under the securities exchange act of 1934,
the oklahoma securities act, and under
common law theories of fraud and negligent
misrepresentation. in the actions against
jpmsi, damages in the amount of
approximately $1.6billion allegedly
suffered as a result of defendants
misrepresentations and omissions, plus
punitive damages, are being claimed. jpmsi
also has entered into tolling agreements
with certain investors. cfsi has commenced
an action against jpmsi in oklahoma state
court and has asserted claims against jpmsi
for professional negligence and breach of
fiduciary duty. cfsi alleges that jpmsi
failed to detect and prevent its
insolvency. cfsi seeks unspecified damages.
ipo allocation litigation. beginning in may
2001, jpmorgan chase and certain of its
securities subsidiaries have been named,
along with numerous other firms in the
securities industry, as defendants in a
large number of putative class action
lawsuits filed in the united states
district court for the southern district of
new york. these suits purport to challenge
alleged improprieties in the allocation of
stock in various public offerings,
including some offerings for which a
jpmorgan chase entity served as an
underwriter. the suits allege violations of
securities and antitrust laws arising from
alleged material misstatements and
omissions in registration statements and
prospectuses for the initial public
offerings and with respect to aftermarket
transactions in the offered securities. the
securities claims allege, among other
things, misrepresentations concerning
commissions paid to jpmorgan chase and
aftermarket transactions by customers who
received allocations of shares in the
respective initial public offerings. the
antitrust claims allege an illegal
conspiracy to require customers, in
exchange for initial public offering
allocations, to pay undisclosed and
excessive commissions and to make
after-market purchases of the initial
public offering securities at a price
higher than the offering price as a
precondition to receiving allocations. on
february13, 2003, the court denied the
motions of jpmorgan chase and others to
dismiss the securities complaints. jpmorgan
chase also has received various subpoenas
and informal requests from governmental and
other agencies seeking information relating
to initial public offering allocation
practices. on february20, 2003, the
national association of securities dealers
(nasd) censured jpmsi and fined it $6
million for activities it found to
constitute unlawful profit sharing by
hambrecht & quist group prior to its
acquisition in 2000. in agreeing to the
resolution of the charges, jpmsi neither
admitted nor denied the nasds contentions.
jpmsi has been advised by the sec that it
is also considering bringing a disciplinary
action against jpmsi. jpmsi has submitted
to the staff of the sec a letter outlining
the basis for jpmsis position that no such
action is warranted and is currently in
discussions with the sec.
research analysts conflicts. on december
20, 2002, the firm reached an agreement in
principle with the sec, the nasd, the new
york stock exchange, the new york state
attorney
generals office, and the north american
securities administrators association, on
behalf of state securities regulators, to
resolve their investigations of jpmorgan
chase relating to research analyst
independence. pursuant to the agreement in
principle, jpmorgan chase will agree,
among other things (i)to pay $50million
for retrospective relief, (ii)to adopt
internal structural and operational
reforms that will further augment the
steps it has already taken to ensure the
integrity of jpmorgan chase analyst
research, (iii)to contribute $25million
spread over five years to provide
independent third-party research to
clients, and (iv)to contribute $5million
towards investor education. the settlement
is subject to finalization of mutually
satisfactory settlement documents and must
be approved by the sec and state
regulatory authorities.
litigation reserve and other. during the
fourth quarter of 2002, the firm
established a reserve of $900million
related to costs anticipated to be incurred
in connection with the various private
litigations and regulatory inquiries
involving enron and the other material
legal actions, proceedings and
investigations discussed above. this
reserve represents managements best
estimate, after consultation with counsel,
of the current probable aggregate costs
associated with these matters. of the $900
million, $600million has been allocated to
the various cases, proceedings and
investigations associated with enron. the
balance of $300million has been allocated
to the various litigations, proceedings and
investigations involving the firms debt
and equity underwriting activities and
equity research practices, and includes the
$80million settlement in december 2002
relating to equity research practices. it
is possible that the reserve could be
subject to revision in the future.
in addition to the various cases,
proceedings and investigations for which
the reserve has been established, jpmorgan
chase and its subsidiaries are named as
defendants in a number of other legal
actions and governmental proceedings
arising in connection with their respective
businesses. additional actions,
investigations or proceedings may be
brought from time to time in the future. in
view of the inherent difficulty of
predicting the outcome of legal matters,
particularly where the claimants seek
very large or indeterminate damages or
where the cases present novel legal
theories or involve a large number of
parties, the firm cannot state with
confidence what the eventual outcome of the
pending matters (including the pending
matters as to which the reserve has been
established) will be, what the timing of
the ultimate resolution of these matters will
be, or what the eventual loss related to
each pending matter will be. subject to the
foregoing caveat, jpmorgan chase
anticipates, based upon its current
knowledge, after consultation with counsel
and after taking into account the
establishment of the aforementioned $900
million reserve, that the outcome of the
legal actions, proceedings and
investigations currently pending against it
should not have a material adverse effect
on the consolidated financial condition of
the firm, although the outcome of a
particular proceeding or the imposition of
a particular fine or penalty may be
material to jpmorgan chases operating
results for a particular period depending
upon, among other factors, the size of the
loss or liability and the level of jpmorgan
chases income for that period.
item4: submission of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
executive officers of the registrant
name
age
positions and offices held with jpmorgan chase
(at december 31, 2002)
william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer since november 2001, prior to which he
was president and chief executive officer from december 2000. he was
chairman and chief executive officer from january through december 2000 and
president and chief executive officer from june through december 1999, prior to
which he had been vice chairman of the board.
david a. coulter
head of the investment bank and of investment management & private banking.
he had been head of chase financial services until may 2002. prior to joining
jpmorgan chase in 2000, he led the west coast operations of the beacon
group, prior to which he was chairman and chief executive officer of
bankamerica corporation and bank of america nt & sa.
dina dublon
chief financial officer. until 1998, she was executive vice president and
corporate treasurer.
john j. farrell
director human resources.
thomas b. ketchum
chairman of the technology council. prior to the merger, he was an executive of
j.p. morgan & co. incorporated, serving as chief financial officer since september
2000 and chief administrative officer since 1998, prior to which he was regional
executive and head of investment banking for the americas.
donald h. layton
head of chase financial services and of treasury & securities services. he had
been co-head of the investment bank until may 2002. prior to the merger, he was
responsible for global markets, the international infrastructure and cash management
and securities processing services.
marc j. shapiro
head of finance, risk management and administration. until 1997, he was
chairman and chief executive officer of texas commerce bank, which now is
part of jpmorgan chase bank.
jeffrey c. walker
head of jpmorgan partners, jpmorgan chases global private equity group.
lesley daniels webster
head of market risk management.
frederick w. hill
director of corporate marketing and communications. until 1997, he had been
senior vice president, communications and community relations, for mcdonnell
douglas corporation.
donald h. mccree, iii
senior credit officer since january 2003 and head of credit risk policy and global
credit management. he had been co-head of north american credit markets
group and until january 2001 had been co-head of investment banking in europe.
william h. mcdavid
general counsel.
joseph l. sclafani
controller.
unless otherwise noted, during the five fiscal years ended december31, 2002,
all of jpmorgan chases above-named executive officers have continuously held
senior-level positions with jpmorgan chase or its predecessor institutions,
j.p. morgan & co. incorporated and the chase manhattan corporation. there are
no family relationships among the foregoing executive officers.
parts ii & iii
part ii
item5: market for registrants common equity and related stockholder matters
the outstanding shares of jpmorgan chases
common stock are listed and traded on the
new york stock exchange, the london stock
exchange limited and the tokyo stock
exchange. for the quarterly high and low
prices of jpmorgan chases common stock on
the new york stock exchange for the last
two years, see the section entitled
supplementary information  selected
quarterly financial data (unaudited) on
page111. jpmorgan chase declared
quarterly cash dividends on its common
stock in the amount of $0.34 per share for
each quarter of 2002 and 2001. the common dividend payout ratio based
on reported net income was 171% for 2002, 168% for 2001 and 42% for
2000. at february28, 2003, there were 126,759 holders of
record of jpmorgan chases common stock.
for information regarding securities
authorized for issuance under the firms
employee stock-based compensation plans, see note24 on
page96.
item6: selected financial data
for five-year selected financial data,
see five-year summary of financial
highlights (unaudited) on page112.
item7: managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
managements discussion and analysis of
the financial condition and results of
operations, entitled managements
discussion and analysis, appears on pages17 through 69. such information should be
read in conjunction with the consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto,
which appear on pages71 through 110.
item7a: quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
for information related to market risk,
see the market risk management section
on pages58 through 62 and note28 on page101.
item8: financial statements and supplementary data
the consolidated financial statements, together with the notes
thereto and the report of pricewaterhousecoopers llp dated
january21, 2003 thereon, appear on pages70 through 110.
supplementary financial data for each full quarter within the
two years ended december31, 2002 are included on page111
in the table entitled supplementary information  selected
quarterly financial data (unaudited). also included is a glossary
of terms on pages113 and 114.
item9: changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
part iii
item10: directors and executive officers of jpmorgan chase
see item13 on page13.
item11: executive compensation
see item13 on page13.
item12: security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
for security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management, see item13 on page13. for
stockholders matters regarding securities authorized for
issuance under the firms employee stock-based compensation plans, see note24 on page96.
item13: certain relationships and related transactions
information related to jpmorgan chases
executive officers is included on page 11.
pursuant to instruction g (3)to form10-k,
the remainder of the information to be
provided in items 10, 11, 12 and 13 of form
10-k (other than information pursuant to
rule402 (i), (k)and (l)of regulation
s-k) is incorporated by
reference to jpmorgan chases definitive
proxy statement for the annual meeting of
stockholders, to be held may20, 2003,
which proxy statement will be filed with
the securities and exchange commission
pursuant to regulation14a within 120days
of the close of jpmorgan chases 2002
fiscal year.
item14: controls and procedures
within the 90-day period prior to the
filing of this report, an evaluation was
carried out under the supervision and with
the participation of the firms
management, including its chief executive
officer and chief financial officer, of
the effectiveness of the design and
operation of its disclosure controls and
procedures (as defined in rule13a-14(c)
under the securities exchange act of
1934). based upon that evaluation, the
chief executive officer and chief
financial officer concluded that the
design and operation of these disclosure
controls and procedures were effective. no
significant changes were made in the
firms internal controls or in other
factors that could significantly affect
these controls subsequent to the date of
their evaluation.
pages 14-15 not used
table of contents
financial:
managements discussion and analysis:
overview
results of operations
reconciliation from reported results to
operating basis
segment results
risk and capital management
capital and liquidity management
credit risk management
market risk management
operational risk management
private equity risk management
critical accounting estimates used by
the firm
accounting and reporting developments
comparison between 2001 and 2000
audited financial statements:
managements report on responsibility for
financial reporting
report of independent accountants
consolidated financial statements
notes to consolidated financial statements
supplementary information:
selected quarterly financial data
five-year summary of financial highlights
glossary of terms
this section of the annual
report provides
managements discussion
and analysis (md&a) of
the financial condition
and results of operations
for jpmorgan chase. see
glossary of terms on pages
113 and 114 for a
definition of terms used
throughout this annual
report.
certain forward-looking statements
the md&a contains certain
forward-looking
statements. those
forward-looking statements
are subject to risks and
uncertainties, and
jpmorgan chases actual
results may differ from
those set forth in the
forward-looking
statements. see jpmorgan
chases reports filed with
the securities and
exchange commission for a
discussion of factors that
could cause jpmorgan
chases actual results to
differ materially from
those described in the
forward-looking
statements.
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
overview
j.p. morgan chase & co. is a leading global financial services firm with
assets of $759billion and operations in more than 50 countries. the firm
serves more than 30million consumer customers and the worlds most prominent
corporate, institutional and government clients. the firms wholesale
businesses are comprised of the investment bank, treasury & securities
services, investment management & private banking and jpmorgan partners. chase
financial services is composed of the firms retail and middle market
businesses.
financial performance of jpmorgan chase
as of or for the year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(in millions, except per share and ratio data)
revenue
$
29,614
$
29,344
%
noninterest expense
22,764
23,596
(4
)
provision for credit losses
4,331
3,182
net income
1,663
1,694
(2
)
net income per share  diluted
0.80
0.80
return on average common equity (roce)
3.9
%
3.9
%
bp
tier 1 capital ratio
8.2
%
8.3
%
(10
)bp
total capital ratio
12.0
11.9
tier 1 leverage ratio
5.1
5.2
(10
)
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
j.p. morgan chase &co. (jpmorgan chase or the firm) reported 2002 net
income of $1.7billion, or $0.80 per share, compared with net income of $1.7
billion, or $0.80 per share, in 2001. the results for the year were negatively
affected by sluggish capital markets, by concentrated exposures in certain
segments of the firms private equity and commercial credit portfolios, by
large charges related to litigation and by continuing integration expenses
resulting from the merger of j.p. morgan and chase. on the positive side, the
consumer businesses reported record results, and treasury & securities
services (t&ss) had a solid year, highlighting the benefits of the firms
diversified business model.
as a result of the firms balance of businesses, 2002 total reported revenues
of $29.6billion were up 1% from 2001. the national consumer credit businesses
at chase financial services (cfs) benefited from the low-interest rate
environment, with the mortgage company, in particular, having an exceptional
year. t&ss reported modest revenue growth, as strong gains in treasury
services and institutional trust services offset a decline in investor
services. at the investment bank (ib), the slower-than-expected economic
recovery and diminished investor confidence led to continued weakness in
capital markets activity, which was reflected in lower trading revenue and
investment banking fees. investment management & private banking (impb)
revenues declined as a result of lower global equity valuations and reduced
investor activity; assets under supervision declined primarily due to market
depreciation and institutional outflows. deterioration in equity markets
adversely affected jpmorgan partners (jpmp); write-offs and write-downs of
private holdings and net mark-to-market losses on public securities were not
offset by cash gains, as financing and exit opportunities remained
constrained.
the firms total reported noninterest expense declined 4% from 2001 and
included several large charges in both years. in 2002, the costs associated
with merger and restructuring initiatives were $1.2billion, versus $2.5
billion the previous year. also in 2002, the firm recorded a $1.3billion
charge in connection with the settlement of its enron-related surety
litigation and the establishment of a reserve related to certain material
litigation, proceedings and investigations and recorded a $0.1billion charge
related to excess real estate. excluding the impact of these charges in both
years, the firms full-year 2002 noninterest expense of $20.2billion was
lower than that of 2001.
in addition, in 2002, the firm announced several programs aiming to align
expense levels with lower revenue prospects. severance and related costs from
these initiatives added $890million to noninterest expense for the year,
approximately 70% of which were in ib. despite those costs, all business
segments reported lower-to-flat noninterest expenses, except cfs, where higher
business volumes drove expense growth. ib reduced headcount in line with lower
market activity levels. impb has reduced its expense run-rate by more than half
a billion dollars since the beginning of 2001. in t&ss, tight expense
management allowed for investments while keeping expense levels flat with 2001
levels. the firms expenses were further reduced by the adoption in 2002 of
sfas 142, which eliminated the amortization of goodwill.
the provision for credit losses increased 36% from 2001. this was principally
attributable to troubled commercial credits in the telecommunications and
cable sectors, partially offset by a decrease in the consumer provision.
in addition to analyzing results on a reported basis, management looks at
results on an operating basis to assess the overall firm and each of its
business segments and to facilitate an estimate of future earnings for the
business segments, absent unusual events. jpmorgan chases operating earnings,
which exclude merger and restructuring costs and special items, were $3.4
billion, compared with $3.8billion in 2001. for additional information and a
reconciliation between the firms reported and operating results, see pages 22
and 23.
risk management
management of credit, market, operational and private equity risk is central
to the firms businesses.
total nonperforming assets rose to $4.8billion at december31, 2002, an
increase of 22% from year-end 2001, primarily as a result of significant and
rapid deterioration in credit quality in the telecommunications, cable and
merchant energy sectors. the firm established a more stringent exposure review
process and lower absolute exposure limits for industry and single-name
concentrations, including investment-grade obligors.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
market risk parameters across the firm remained stable, and trading results
were within value-at-risk (var) limits throughout the year.
the firm continued to develop its self-assessment, operational risk-event
monitoring and internal control processes to enhance its operational risk
management discipline.
the firm created a policy review office to enhance the procedures it uses to
examine transactions with clients in terms of appropriateness, ethical issues
and reputational risk. the policy review office has intensified the scrutiny
of the firms transactions from the clients point of view, with the goal
that these transactions are not used to deceive investors or others.
finally, the firm reviewed the level of private equity risk in its portfolio
and has decided to reduce, over time, the amount of capital invested in
private equity to approximately 10% of the firms common stockholders equity,
from approximately 20% at december31, 2002.
capital and liquidity management
at december31, 2002, the firms tier 1 capital ratio was 8.2%, compared with
8.3% at year-end 2001. in the third quarter, the board of directors declared
its intention to continue the current quarterly dividend of $0.34 per share
on the firms common stock, provided that capital ratios remain strong and
earnings prospects exceed the current dividend.
sound liquidity management remains an important factor in maintaining the
firms credit ratings. liquidity management takes into account the need to
fund both on- and off-balance sheet liabilities and commitments. it seeks to
ensure that the firms obligations will be met even if access to funding is
temporarily impaired. although the firms debt ratings were downgraded one
notch this year to aa-/aa3 at jpmorgan chase bank and to a+/a1 at the holding
company, the firms funding costs and capital markets businesses were not
materially adversely affected.
corporate governance
the firm has adopted the new york stock exchange proposals relating to
corporate governance practices for boards of directors and has posted the
boards practices, as well as charters of the principal board committees, on
the firms website, www.jpmorganchase.com. the firm seeks to be a leader in
corporate governance and disclosure practices.
business outlook
global economic conditions and activity in financial markets are expected to
remain uncertain in 2003. accordingly, the outlook for the firms investment
banking and capital markets activities remains cautious. earnings improvements
in ib are anticipated to be primarily driven in 2003 by lower credit costs in
a still challenging  but stabilizing  credit environment and by lower
expenses. at cfs, continuation of the current low-interest rate environment
should enable the credit-related businesses (mortgage, credit card and auto)
to perform well, although it is likely revenues and earnings will be lower
than the record set in 2002, which included large net gains on hedging of
mortgage servicing rights (msrs).
expenses for the firm in 2003 may be slightly higher than in 2002 (excluding
from 2002 expenses the impact of the litigation and merger charges). expensing
stock options, higher pension and occupancy costs and increased spending
(primarily at cfs) are likely to more than offset the savings anticipated from
ib right-sizing initiatives and lower severance costs.
despite this cautious view for the short term, the firm remains committed to
its diversified business model and believes that it is well positioned to
produce higher returns when economic conditions improve and capital markets
recover.
results of operations
this section discusses jpmorgan chases results of operations on a reported
basis. the accompanying financial data conforms with u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles (gaap). the section should be read in conjunction with
the financial statements and footnotes beginning on page 71.
investment banking fees were 24% lower than last year, reflecting the
industry-wide slowdown in corporate m&a activities and new issuance of debt and
equity securities. advisory fees of $756million were 39% lower than last year,
and underwriting fees for debt and equity instruments of $2.0billion were 15%
lower than last year. for a table that breaks out investment banking fees, see
note 4 on page 77, and for a further discussion on these revenues, see the ib
results on pages 2628.
revenues
year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(in millions)
investment banking fees
$
2,763
$
3,612
(24
)%
trading revenue
2,594
4,918
(47
)
fees and commissions
10,756
9,481
private equity  realized gains (losses)
(105
)
nm
private equity  unrealized gains (losses)
(641
)
(1,884
)
securities gains
1,563
other revenue
1,158
net interest income
11,526
10,802
total revenue
$
29,614
$
29,344
%
nm-not meaningful.
the 47% decline in trading revenue was primarily attributable to the
challenging market conditions that persisted throughout 2002.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
equity markets declined substantially, contributing to lower client activity
and revenues, primarily in equity derivatives. also contributing to lower
equity trading results was a shift in the classification of broker-dealer
trading revenues, from trading revenues in 2001 to brokerage and
investment services fees in 2002. beginning in 2001, bid and offer prices on
nasdaq stocks were quoted in dollars and cents, instead of fractions of whole
dollars. as a result, in 2002, jpmorgan chase began to negotiate with its
institutional clients commission-based pricing structures that would support
the costs of delivering enhanced brokerage services in connection with their
nasdaq trades. revenues earned from agreed-upon commissions are now recorded
as brokerage and investment services within fees and commissions.
fixed income trading revenues declined 33% from last year, as lower portfolio
management results, primarily in interest rate trading, offset an overall
increase in client activity.
trading revenue, on a reported basis, excludes the impact of net interest
income related to ibs trading activities; this income is recorded within net
interest income. however, in assessing the profitability of ibs trading
business, the firm combines these revenues for segment reporting. for a table
that breaks out trading revenues, see note 3 on page 76, and for a further
discussion on these revenues, see the ib results on pages 2628.
fees and commissions
fees and commissions were $10.8billion in 2002, an increase of 13% from last
year, reflecting the following:
mortgage servicing fees were $298million, compared with a loss of $230
million in 2001, stemming from the favorable impact of chase home
finances hedging of msrs. in 2002, hedging gains resulting from wider
mortgage swap spreads and a favorable interest rate environment were
significantly greater than the offsetting impairment of the msrs value.
for a further discussion of these fees, see the chase home finance
discussion on page 36.
credit card revenue of $2.9billion was a record for the firm. revenues
were 36% above 2001, reflecting the positive impact on servicing fees
from the growth in securitized receivables managed by chase cardmember
services; average securitized receivables grew by more than $8.5
billion. the increase in credit card revenue also reflected the impact
of the providian acquisition, higher late charges and higher interchange
income as a result of increased purchase volume. for a further
discussion of credit card business revenues, see page 37.
other lending-related service fees increased 10%, a result of higher
standby letter-of-credit fees from new business volumes. also
contributing to the increase were higher auto loan servicing fees, the
result of increased securitizations in 2002.
deposit service fees were 10% above 2001. lower interest rates reduced
the value of customers compensating deposit balances; consequently,
customers paid increased fees for deposit services. also contributing to
the increase were higher cash management fees, primarily at treasury
services, reflecting growth in payment processing volumes from
institutional clients.
these fees and commissions were offset by lower investment management,
custody and processing service fees. these fees were down 5% to $3.8billion
in 2002, primarily a result of the lower value of equity-related assets under
supervision at impb, as well as lower fees earned at t&ss from non-u.s.
assets under custody. both investment management and custody fees were
affected by the decline in the value of assets under supervision and assets
under custody, respectively, as these fees are generally calculated as a
percentage of the total market value of the assets. also contributing to the
lower fees was the market-driven slowdown in securities lending, as well as a
decrease in processing service fees for unit investment trusts.
brokerage and investment services declined slightly, despite the aforementioned
reclassification into this line of approximately $100million of broker-dealer
revenues related to nasdaq transactions. the decline was the result of reduced
trading volume and narrower spreads on brokerage transactions.
for a table showing the components of fees and
commissions, see note 4 on page 77.
private equity gains (losses)
aggregate private equity losses (realized and unrealized) totaled $746million
in 2002, reflecting the continuing difficult capital markets environment. the
private equity markets offered limited exit opportunities and constrained
financing, thereby depressing realized gains. further, the results in 2002
reflected net mark-to-market losses on public securities, as well as
write-downs and write-offs on private holdings, particularly in the
telecommunications and technology sectors. for a further discussion of
private equity gains (losses), see jpmp results on pages 3334.
securities gains
securities gains of $1.6billion were up 80% from last year. of these gains,
$1.1billion was attributable to the firms available-for-sale (afs)
investment securities portfolio, which was favorably positioned in a lower
interest rate environment. the balance was directly related to the hedging of
msrs that offset impairment charges due to mortgage prepayments. for a further
discussion of securities gains, see both the ib and chase home finance
discussions on pages 2628 and 36, respectively.
other revenue
the increase in other revenue of $260million reflected the following:
increased revenues from residential mortgage origination and sales
activities, to $671million in 2002 from $576million in 2001, were
driven by the surge in loan applications and originations. the growth in
originations allowed for larger volumes of loan sales and
securitizations. for a further discussion of this revenue, see chase
home finance on page 36.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
unfavorable valuation adjustments were $36million, compared with $177
million in 2001. the adjustment in 2002 was related to residual
positions held after the completion of loan syndications and commercial
real estate loan securitizations. these residual positions are recorded
at the lower of cost or market value. the higher negative valuation
adjustments in 2001 primarily related to loans in the technology and
telecommunications sectors.
for a table that breaks out other revenue, see note 4 on page 78.
net interest income
net interest income (nii) rose 7% to $11.5billion, compared with $10.8
billion in 2001. the primary contributors to the increase were the
significant growth in average consumer loans, which were 7% higher than last
year, and higher trading-related nii. these were offset by a decline in
commercial loans and the narrowing of spreads in the deposit businesses.
average consumer loan volume grew, benefiting from low interest rates, as
well as the acquisition in february 2002 of the providian master trust,
including $7.9billion of credit card receivables and related relationships.
total average credit card receivables rose 11% to $21.6billion; of this
amount $4.8billion related to providian. nii at chase home finance increased
due to higher average available-for-sale mortgage loans, higher spreads and
lower asset funding costs.
nii related to commercial loans declined, the result of lower outstanding
volumes. at the same time, spreads narrowed, reflecting the reduction in
interest rates. also contributing to the decline was the higher level of
nonperforming loans. nonperforming commercial loans rose 84% to $3.7billion.
for a further discussion of nonperforming loans in the commercial portfolio,
see page 47.
a portion of the firms nii relates to trading-related assets. in 2002, this
component was $1.9billion, compared with $1.4billion in the prior year. the
increase was attributable to the change in the composition of trading assets
and improved spreads.
on an aggregate basis, the firms total average interest-earning assets for
2002 were $555billion, compared with $547billion last year. the net
interest spread on these assets, on a fully taxable-equivalent basis, was
2.09% in 2002, 10 basis points higher than last year.
expenses
year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(in millions)
compensation expense
$
10,983
$
11,844
(7
)%
occupancy expense
1,606
1,348
technology and communications expense
2,554
2,631
(3
)
amortization of intangibles
(56
)
other expense
4,788
4,521
surety settlement and litigation reserve
1,300
nm
merger and restructuring costs
1,210
2,523
(52
)
total noninterest expense
$
22,764
$
23,596
(4
)%
nm- not meaningful.
compensation expense
compensation expense in 2002 was $11.0billion, 7% lower than last year, and
included severance costs of $746million associated with expense initiatives
undertaken during the year. in 2001, severance related to the merger of j.p.
morgan and chase and other previously announced restructuring programs was
recorded within merger and restructuring costs. the decline reflected
reductions in staffing levels, as well as lower incentives reflecting the
lower level of earnings. the amounts accrued for incentives are subject to
managements discretion and to calculations that correlate incentives with
income before incentives.
expense-management programs had a significant impact in ib and, to a lesser
extent, impb, the two business segments whose revenues were most negatively
affected by the downturn in the economy. as a result, these two segments
reduced the number of employees in their businesses. also contributing to the
decline in expenses was the reversal of previously accrued expenses of $120
million related to forfeitable stock-based compensation awards issued under
employee benefit plans. the awards contained stock price targets that were
deemed unlikely to be attained within the timeframes specified under the
terms of the awards.
the decline in compensation expense was partially offset by the hiring of new
employees at expanding business segments, primarily cfs and t&ss.
the total number of full-time equivalent employees at december31, 2002, was
94,335, compared with 95,812 at the prior year-end. although overall levels
remained relatively stable, headcount in ib and impb was reduced by
approximately 3,100 full-time equivalent employees, whereas in cfs headcount
increased by more than 2,400.
the firm reviews the actuarial assumptions for its pension and other
postretirement benefit plans on an annual basis. to reflect the decline in
market interest rates during 2002, the year-end discount rate for the firms
u.s. plans was set at 6.50%, a 75-basis point decline from the prior year.
additionally, considering the current mix of plan assets, the year-end assumed
long-term rate of return was adjusted downward to 8.00% for both u.s. pension
plan assets and other postretirement benefit plan assets, from 9.25% and
9.00%, respectively. the assumed long-term rate of return is a blended average
of the firms investment advisors projected long-term (10years or more)
returns for various asset classes. the impact of these changes is expected to
increase 2003 u.s. pension and other postretirement benefit expenses by
approximately $60million. additionally, the adverse effect of losses on u.s.
plan assets is expected to further increase u.s. pension and other
postretirement benefit expenses by approximately $70million. in 2002, these
expenses included curtailment charges and special termination benefits
totaling $64million resulting from management-initiated and
outsourcing-related employee terminations. actuarial assumptions for the
firms various non-u.s. plans also were adjusted to reflect local market
conditions. the impact of these changes on non-
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
u.s. pension and other postretirement benefit expenses is not expected to be
material. for further information on postretirement employee benefit plans,
see note 23 on pages 9496.
occupancy expense
occupancy expense rose 19% from last year, partly the result of a $98million
charge in the third quarter of 2002 to cover the costs of exiting excess
vacant premises on the west coast of the united states, principally in the san
francisco area. also contributing to the increase was the leasing of
additional space in new jersey and in midtown manhattan, partly necessitated
by the relocation of certain functions at the beginning of the year from a
previously-owned building in downtown manhattan. the firm expects 2003
occupancy costs to increase by approximately $150million due to the move to
midtown manhattan, extra safety measures and higher anticipated real estate
taxes in new york.
technology and communications expense
the decline in technology and communications expense was primarily
attributable to an initiative to rationalize and reshape the firms technology
infrastructure. this initiative resulted in reduced spending for software,
equipment and workstations. additionally, the technology sourcing process was
streamlined in favor of a select list of preferred vendors, resulting in
additional expense reductions. the impact of these initiatives was partially
offset by the higher amortization of capitalized software, as well as
expenditures to enhance the telecommunications network.
amortization of intangibles
amortization of intangibles declined 56% from 2001. the decline primarily
reflected the implementation of sfas 142, which now requires a periodic
review of goodwill for impairment rather than the amortization of goodwill,
as was the case last year. this was partly offset by the impact of the
acquisition of the providian master trusts credit card relationship
intangibles. in 2002, there were no impairments recognized on goodwill
recorded the consolidated balance sheet. for a discussion on the impact of
sfas 142 on the firms amortization of intangibles expense and the expected
level of expense for 2003, see note 14 on page 89.
other expense
other expense increased 6% in 2002 compared with 2001 as a result of the
following (for the table showing the components within other expense, see note
6 on page 79):
professional services expense increased $164million from 2001,
primarily as a result of legal fees. also contributing to the increase
was the hiring of professionals who assisted in the collection of credit
card accounts and fees paid by ib for sub-advisor services for a fund in
europe. these incremental expense items were partly offset by lower
systems consultant costs.
higher outside services expense of $106million was driven by the costs of
servicing the providian credit card portfolio and processing higher mortgage
servicing volume. during a transition period, from the acquisition in
february until august 2002, providian financial corp. provided servicing for
the portfolio.
higher marketing expense of $88million principally stemmed from
direct-marketing campaigns for credit cards.
these expense increases were partially offset by lower travel and
entertainment expense of $42million.
surety settlement and litigation reserve
the $1.3billion charge in 2002 reflected the settlement of the enron-related
surety litigation and the establishment of a litigation reserve. on january2,
2003, the firm announced it had settled its dispute with 11 insurance companies
that had issued surety bonds that guaranteed obligations of enron corp.
(enron) under prepaid commodity forward contracts. the firm settled for 60%
of the principal amount of the bonds and received a cash payment of $502
million and $75million of unsecured claims. in connection with this agreement
and one additional, ongoing lawsuit related to a prepaid contract backed by
a letter of credit  the firm took a pre-tax charge of $400million
(approximately $260million after-tax). the firm also established a $900
million reserve (approximately $600million after-tax) related to litigation
and regulatory matters involving enron, as well as other material legal
actions, proceedings and investigations in which it is involved.
merger and restructuring costs
during 2002, the firm incurred merger and restructuring costs of $1.2
billion, a 52% decline from 2001. refer to the discussion of compensation
expense on page 20 for a description of other severance costs incurred in
2002 and to note 6 on page 78.
provision for credit losses
the provision for credit losses increased $1.1billion or 36% from the prior
year, primarily reflecting higher charge-offs of loans and lending-related
commitments in the telecommunications and cable sectors. the consumer
provision decreased 21% from last year reflecting growth in credit card
securitizations, partially offset by the impact of the providian acquisition.
in 2002, the firm increased the allowance for credit losses by $443million
(by making provisions in excess of net charge-offs), compared with an $850
million increase in the allowance last year. for further information on the
provision for credit losses, see page 56.
income tax expense
jpmorgan chase recognized income tax expense of $856million in 2002,
compared with $847million in 2001. the effective tax rate was 34% in 2002,
versus 33% last year. the increase in the effective tax rate was principally
attributable to the level of income in certain state and local tax
jurisdictions in 2002. for a further discussion of income taxes, see note 22
on pages 93 and 94.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
reconciliation from reported results to operating basis
the firm prepares its financial statements using u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles (gaap). the financial statements prepared in
accordance with gaap appear on pages 7174 of this annual report. that
presentation, which is referred to as reported basis, provides the reader
with an understanding of the firms results that can be consistently tracked
from year to year and enables a comparison of the firms performance with
other companies gaap financial statements.
in addition to analyzing the firms results on a reported basis, management
looks at results on an operating basis to assess each of its businesses and
to measure overall firm results against targeted goals. the definition of
operating basis starts with the reported gaap results and then excludes the
impact of merger and restructuring costs, credit card securitizations, the
amortization of goodwill and special items (which management defined during
2002 as significant nonrecurring gains or losses of $75million or more).
both restructuring charges and special items are viewed by management as
transactions that are not part of the firms normal daily business operations
or are unusual in nature and therefore are not indicative of trends.
the following summary table provides a reconciliation between the firms
reported and operating results:
year ended december 31,
reported
credit
special
operating
reported
credit
special
amortization
operating
(in
millions, except per share data)
results (a)
card (b)
items (c)
reclasses
basis
results (a)
card (b)
items (c)
of goodwill (d)
reclasses
basis
consolidated income statement
revenue:
investment banking fees
$
2,763
$
$
$
$
2,763
$
3,612
$
$
$
$
$
3,612
trading revenue (e)
2,594
1,880
4,474
4,918
1,361
6,279
fees and commissions
10,756
(698
)
10,058
9,481
(340
)
9,141
private equity
gains (losses)
(746
)
(746
)
(1,233
)
(1,233
)
securities gains
1,563
1,563
other revenue
1,158
(36
)
1,122
(17
)
net interest income (e)
11,526
2,173
(1,880
)
11,819
10,802
1,405
(1,361
)
10,846
total revenue
29,614
1,439
31,053
29,344
1,048
30,392
noninterest expense:
compensation expense (f)
10,983
(746
)
10,237
11,844
11,844
noncompensation expense(f)(g)
10,571
(1,398
)
(144
)
9,029
9,229
(585
)
8,644
merger and restructuring costs
1,210
(1,210
)
2,523
(2,523
)
severance and related costs(f)
total noninterest expense
22,764
(2,608
)
20,156
23,596
(2,523
)
(585
)
20,488
operating margin
6,850
1,439
2,608
10,897
5,748
1,048
2,523
9,904
credit costs
4,331
1,439
5,770
3,182
1,048
4,230
income before income tax
expense and effect of
accounting change
2,519
2,608
5,127
2,566
2,523
5,674
income tax expense
1,743
1,872
income before effect of
accounting change
1,663
1,721
3,384
1,719
1,690
3,802
net effect of change in
accounting principle
(25
)
net income
$
1,663
$
$
1,721
$
$
3,384
$
1,694
$
$
1,715
$
$
$
3,802
earnings per share  diluted
$
0.80
$
$
0.86
$
$
1.66
$
0.80
$
$
0.86
$
0.19
$
$
1.85
(a)
represents condensed results as reported in jpmorgan chases financial
statements.
(b)
represents the impact of credit card securitizations. for securitized
receivables, amounts that normally would be reported as net interest income and
as provisions for credit losses are reported as noninterest revenue.
(c)
includes merger and restructuring costs and special items. for a
description of special items, see glossary of terms on page 114.
(d)
prior-period operating earnings for 2001 have been adjusted by adding back
goodwill amortization to report results on a basis comparable with 2002. for
further explanations, see page 23.
(e)
on an operating basis, jpmorgan chase reclassifies trading-related net
interest income from net interest income to trading revenue.
(f)
the compensation and noncompensation expense categories include severance
and other related costs associated with expense containment programs
implemented in 2002. for purposes of reviewing results on an operating basis,
these costs have been reclassified to a separate line.
(g)
includes occupancy expense, technology and communications expense,
amortization of intangibles, other expense and surety settlement and litigation
reserve.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
as previously mentioned, operating results exclude the impact of credit card
securitizations. jpmorgan chase periodically securitizes a portion of its
credit card portfolio by selling a pool of credit card receivables to a trust,
which issues securities to investors. when credit card receivables are
securitized, the firm ceases to accrue the related interest and credit costs;
instead, the firm receives fee revenue for continuing to service those
receivables and additional revenue from any interest and fees on the
receivables in excess of the interest paid to investors, net of credit losses
and servicing fees. as a result, securitization does not change jpmorgan
chases reported or operating net income; however, it does affect the
classification of items in the consolidated statement of income.
the firm also reports credit costs on a managed or operating basis.
credit costs on an operating basis are composed of the provision for credit
losses in the consolidated statement of income (which includes a provision
for credit card receivables on the consolidated balance sheet) as well as the
credit costs associated with securitized credit card loans. as the holder of
the residual interest in the securitization trust, the firm bears its share
of the credit costs for securitized loans. in the firms gaap financial
statements, credit costs associated with securitized credit card loans reduce
the noninterest income remitted to the firm from the trust. this income is
reported in credit card revenue in fees and commissions over the life of the
securitization.
commencing january1, 2002, the firm adopted sfas 142 and, accordingly, ceased
amortizing goodwill. there was no impairment of goodwill upon adoption of sfas
142. prior-period operating earnings have been adjusted by adding back
amortization of goodwill to report results on a basis comparable with 2002.
the following table provides a reconciliation of earnings per share (eps)
based on the firms reported net income to eps calculated on an operating
basis.
year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(per share data)
net income
$
0.80
$
0.80
%
amortization of goodwill (net of taxes)
0.19
nm
special items (net of taxes):
merger and restructuring costs
0.40
0.85
(53
)
real estate charge
0.03
nm
surety settlement and litigation reserve
0.43
nm
net effect of change in accounting principle
0.01
nm
operating earnings
$
1.66
$
1.85
(10
)%
nm-not meaningful.
for a five-year trend of the firms results on an operating basis, see page
112. all years are calculated on a basis using the same definition for
operating results.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
segment results
the wholesale businesses of jpmorgan chase are known globally as jpmorgan
and are comprised of the investment bank, treasury & securities services,
investment management & private banking and jpmorgan partners. the retail and
middle market businesses are known as chase and make up chase financial
services.
jpmorgan chases segment results reflect the manner in which financial
information is currently evaluated by the firms management. the firm
allocates equity to its business units utilizing a risk-adjusted methodology,
which quantifies credit, market and operational risks within each business
and, for jpmp, private equity risk. for a discussion of those risks, see the
risk management section on pages 45-65. the firm allocates additional equity
to its businesses incorporating an asset capital tax on managed assets and
some off-balance sheet instruments. in addition, businesses are allocated
equity equal to 100% of goodwill and 50% for certain other intangibles
generated through acquisitions. the firm estimates the portfolio effect on
required economic capital based on correlations of risk across risk
categories. this estimated diversification benefit is not allocated to the
business segments.
the firm uses the shareholder value added (sva) framework to measure
performance of its business segments. to derive sva for its business
segments, the firm applies a 12% (after-tax) cost of equity to each segment,
except jpmp; this business is charged a 15% (after-tax) cost of equity. the
capital elements and resultant capital charges provide the businesses with
the financial framework to evaluate the trade-off between the use of capital
by each business unit versus its return to shareholders. capital charges are
an integral part of the sva measurement for each business. under the firms
economic capital model, economic capital is overallocated to
segment results
operating basis
treasury &
investment management
investment bank
securities services
& private banking
year ended december 31,
over/(under)
over/(under)
over/(under)
(in millions, except ratios)
2001(b)
2001(b)
2001(b)
operating revenue
$
12,399
(15
)%
$
4,046
%
$
2,868
(11
)%
operating expense
7,978
(9
)
3,001
2,336
(9
)
operating margin
4,421
(25
)
1,045
(19
)
credit costs
2,392
(86
)
operating earnings (losses)
1,365
(53
)
(20
)
average common equity
18,323
(3
)
2,998
6,115
(3
)
average managed assets
494,958
(3
)
18,018
(4
)
35,729
(3
)
shareholder value added
(853
)
nm
(357
)
(26
)
roce
%
(800
)bp
%
bp
%
(200
)bp
overhead ratio
(200
)
(a)
includes support units and the effects remaining at the
corporate level after the application of management
accounting policies.
(b)
prior period amounts have been adjusted to conform with
current methodologies.
bp-denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
nm-not meaningful.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
the business
segments, as compared with the firms total common stockholders equity. the
revenue and sva impact of the overallocation is reported in support units and
corporate. (see glossary of terms on page 114 for a definition of sva and
page 39 for more details).
in allocating the allowance (and provision) for credit losses, each business
is responsible for its credit costs, including actual net charge-offs and
changes in the specific and expected components of the allowance. the residual
component of the allowance, available for losses in any business segment, is
maintained at the corporate level. management views the residual component as
necessary to address uncertainties at december31, 2002, primarily in the
commercial portfolio.
the segment results also reflect revenue- and expense-sharing agreements
between certain lines of business. in 2002, agreements between treasury
services and middle market were revised, and prior periods have been restated
to conform to the current presentation. revenues and expenses attributed to
their shared activities are recognized in each line of business, and the
double counting is eliminated at each of the segments (e.g., treasury &
securities services and chase financial services). these arrangements promote
cross-selling and management of shared client expenses. they also ensure that
the contributions of both businesses are fully recognized.
prior-period segment results have been adjusted to reflect alignment of management accounting policies or changes in organizational structure
among businesses. restatements of segment results may occur in the future.
see note 33 for further information about jpmorgan chases five business segments.
contribution of
businesses operating revenue
(in millions)
contribution of
businesses operating earnings
(losses)
(in millions)
%
%
change
change
investment bank
$
14,671
$
12,399
(15
)%
investment bank
$
2,918
$
1,365
(53
)%
treasury & securities services
$
3,978
$
4,046
%
treasury & securities services
$
$
%
investment management & private banking
$
3,226
$
2,868
(11
)%
investment management & private banking
$
$
(20
)%
jpmorgan partners
$
(1,470
)
$
(954
)
%
jpmorgan partners
$
(1,116
)
$
(789
)
%
chase financial services
$
10,951
$
13,541
%
chase financial services
$
1,538
$
2,490
%
segment results (continued)
operating basis
chase
jpmorgan partners
financial services
jpmorgan chase (a)
year ended december 31,
over/(under)
over/(under)
over/(under)
(in millions, except ratios)
2001(b)
2001(b)
2001(b)
operating revenue
$
(954
)
%
$
13,541
%
$
31,053
%
operating expense
6,421
20,156
(2
)
operating margin
(1,252
)
7,120
10,897
credit costs
3,159
5,770
operating earnings (losses)
(789
)
2,490
3,384
(11
)
average common equity
5,454
(16
)
10,293
41,368
average managed assets
10,210
(16
)
179,404
759,876
shareholder value added
(1,614
)
1,242
(1,631
)
(31
)
roce
nm
nm
%
bp
%
(100
)bp
overhead ratio
nm
nm
(400
)
(200
)
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
investment bank
jpmorgan chase is one of the worlds leading investment banks, as evidenced
by the breadth of its client relationships and product capabilities. at the
center of the investment banks franchise are extensive relationships with
corporations, financial institutions, governments and institutional investors
worldwide. the firm provides a full range of investment banking and
commercial banking products and services, including advising on corporate
strategy and structure, capital raising in equity and debt markets,
sophisticated risk management and market-making in cash securities and
derivative instruments in all major capital markets. the firm also commits
its own capital to proprietary investing and trading activities to capture
market opportunities.
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
over/(under)
and employees)
operating revenue
$
12,399
$
14,671
(15
)%
operating expense:
compensation expense
3,952
5,286
(25
)
noncompensation expense
3,439
3,496
(2
)
severance and related costs
nm
total operating expense
7,978
8,782
(9
)
operating margin
4,421
5,889
(25
)
credit costs
2,392
1,148
operating earnings
$
1,365
$
2,918
(53
)%
average common equity
$
18,323
$
18,964
(3
)%
average assets
494,958
510,282
(3
)
shareholder value added
(853
)
nm
roce
%
%
(800
)bp
overhead ratio
overhead ratio (excluding severance
and related costs)
compensation as % of revenue
(excluding severance and related costs)
(400
)
full-time equivalent employees
14,837
17,619
(16
)%
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
nm-not meaningful.
financial results overview
performance at the investment bank (ib) is influenced by numerous factors,
including global economic conditions and their impact on capital markets and
ibs clients. changes in market share, risks and expenses can also impact
financial performance. the year 2002 presented a challenging economic and
credit environment for investment banking. in response, ib increased its
focus on the management of credit and market risks, as well as the management
of staffing and expense levels. while the outlook for 2003 remains uncertain,
ib believes it is well positioned to improve results as economic conditions
and the capital markets recover.
reflecting the difficult market environment in 2002, ibs operating margin
declined 25% from last year. operating revenue declined 15%, driven by a
reduction in capital markets and lending revenue and in investment banking
fees. this was partially offset by a 9% decline in operating expenses. credit
costs rose to $2.4billion in 2002. the lower operating margin together with
higher credit costs resulted in operating earnings of $1.4billion, a decline
of 53% from 2001.
operating
revenue:
(in millions)
operating
earnings:
(in
millions, except ratios)
roce
$
15,692
$
3,522
%
$
14,671
$
2,918
%
$
12,399
$
1,365
%
operating revenue of $12.4billion consisted of investment banking fees for
advisory and underwriting services; capital markets revenue related to
market-making, trading and investing, and corporate lending activities.
investment banking fees were 25% lower than last year. advisory revenues
declined 40%, reflecting lower global announced m&a volumes. underwriting and
other fees declined 17%, reflecting lower levels of debt underwriting
following record levels in 2001 and lower loan syndications. equity
underwriting revenues were down from last year, reflecting decreased market
volumes, partially offset by increased market share.
the firm maintained its no.2 ranking in underwriting u.s. investment-grade
bonds and its no.1 ranking in global loan syndications. it also improved its
ranking and market share in u.s. equity and equity-related underwriting. in
addition, the firm finished the year ranked no.5 in global announced m&a.
ibs capital markets and lending activities are
comprised of four primary areas:
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
market shares and rankings (a)
december 31,
market
share
ranking
market share
ranking
* global syndicated loans
%
#1
%
#1
* u.s. investment-grade bonds
#2
#2
* euro-denominated corporate
international bonds
#4
#3
* global equity & equity-related
#8
#9
* u.s. equity & equity-related (b)
#6
#8
* global announced m&a
#5
#4
(a)
derived from thomson financial securities data. global
announced m&a based on rank value; all others based on
proceeds, with full credit to each book manager/equal if
joint. because of joint assignments, market share of all
participants will add up to more than 100%.
(b)
u.s. equity and equity-related adjusted to reflect all equity
issuances in the u.s. market for both u.s. and non-u.s. issuers.
fixed income includes revenues from market-making activities and from
portfolio management and proprietary risk-taking activities across the
complete range of global fixed income markets (including government and
corporate debt, foreign exchange, interest rate and commodities markets).
treasury activities include managing the firms overall interest rate
exposure and investment securities activities. assets, liabilities and
capital are transfer-priced to global treasury to reduce the sensitivity of
business segment results to changes in interest rates. global treasurys
activities complement, and offer a strategic balance and diversification
benefit to, the firms trading activities.
credit portfolio revenues include net interest income, credit-related fees
and loan sale activity for the investment banks commercial credit portfolio.
additionally, credit portfolio revenues reflect changes in the credit
valuation adjustment (cva), which is the component of the fair value of a
derivative that reflects the credit quality of the counterparty (see page 51
of credit risk for a further discussion of the cva). credit portfolio
revenues also include the results of single-name and portfolio hedging
activity used to manage the credit exposures arising from the firms lending
and derivative activities. (see pages 5053 of credit risk for a further
discussion on credit derivatives). credit portfolio revenues also reflect any
market gains or losses related to assets received as part of a loan
restructuring.
equities includes revenues from market-making activities, including portfolio
management and proprietary risk-taking in cash instruments and derivatives,
across the complete range of global equity markets.
ib evaluates its capital markets and lending activities by considering all
revenues related to these activities. these revenues include trading, fees
and commissions, securities gains and related net interest income and other
revenues. in addition, these activities are managed on a total-return
revenue basis. this represents total operating revenues plus the unrealized
gains or losses on third-party or internally transfer-priced assets and
liabilities in fixed income and treasury activities, which are not accounted
for on a mark-to-market basis through earnings.
over/(under)
year ended december 31,
business revenue:
investment banking fees
advisory
$
$
1,248
(40
)%
underwriting and other fees
1,953
2,343
(17
)
total
$
2,696
$
3,591
(25
)%
capital markets and lending
fixed income
$
5,417
$
6,215
(13
)%
treasury
1,839
1,521
credit portfolio
1,443
1,092
equities
1,004
2,252
(55
)
total
$
9,703
$
11,080
(12
)%
operating revenue
$
12,399
$
14,671
(15
)%
capital markets and lending total return revenue
fixed income
$
5,394
$
6,301
(14
)%
treasury
1,514
credit portfolio
1,443
1,092
equities
1,004
2,252
(55
)
total
$
9,355
$
10,595
(12
)%
capital markets and lending total-return revenues were $9.4billion, down 12%
from 2001. fixed income total-return revenues of $5.4billion decreased 14%
from 2001, driven by lower portfolio management results related to
market-making activities and lower results within proprietary risk-taking
activities, which offset higher client trading activities. offsetting the
total-return revenue decline was the performance of global treasury, which
produced strong returns in fixed income markets. global treasurys
total-return revenues of $1.5billion were up 59% from last year. credit
portfolio revenues were $1.4billion, up 32% from 2001; losses related to
exposure to enron and argentina depressed 2001 results. the 55% decline in
equities from 2001 to $1.0billion was attributable to lower portfolio
management results in equity derivatives and lower client revenues. on an
operating revenue basis, capital markets revenues of $9.7billion in 2002
were 12% below 2001.
2002 selected industry awards
derivatives house of the year  risk magazine
interest rate derivatives house of the year  risk magazine
credit derivatives house of the year  risk magazine
structured finance house of the year  the banker
worlds best debt house  euromoney
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
dimensions of 2002 revenue diversification by
business revenues:
equity capital markets
%
advisory
%
fixed income capital markets
%
credit portfolio
%
treasury
%
underwriting fees
%
dimensions of 2002 revenue diversification by
client segment:
media and telecommunications
%
general industries
%
financial institutions
%
dimensions of 2002 revenue diversification by
geographic region:
asia/pacific
%
europe/middle east and africa
%
north america
%
latin america
%
operating expense declined 9% from 2001 and included $587million of severance
and related costs associated with expense-management initiatives. excluding
these costs, expenses would have been down 16%, with compensation costs down
25% and noncompensation costs down 2% from 2001. the decline in compensation
costs reflected lower incentive compensation, as well as the impact of lower
staffing levels. lower noncompensation costs reflected declines in travel and
entertainment costs and lower technology and communications costs, partially
offset by higher legal costs. including the severance and related costs, the
overhead ratio for 2002 was 64%, compared with 60% in 2001. excluding the
severance and related costs, the overhead ratio was 60% in 2002.
in october 2002, ib completed a review of all major businesses. the analysis
underscored the value of the firms integrated business model, the breadth of
its product offerings and the strength of the client franchise. to improve
financial performance under current market conditions, ib announced a series
of initiatives intended to improve efficiency as well as enable selective
strategic investment. these initiatives, which began in the fourth quarter of
2002, are expected to generate approximately $700million of savings and
result in a reduction in staffing levels of more than 2,000, as well as a
reduction in consultants employed by the firm. severance and other costs
related to these initiatives are estimated at approximately $450million,
with $293million recorded in the fourth quarter of 2002 and the remaining
costs to be recognized in 2003. another $294million of severance and related
costs recorded in 2002 related to initiatives announced earlier in the year.
in a revenue environment similar to 2002, and with credit costs substantially
lower than in 2002, these initiatives would enable the investment bank to
target a return on equity of 12% in 2003.
credit costs increased 108%, reflecting significantly higher charge-offs,
primarily in the telecommunications and cable sectors, and provisions in excess
of charge-offs. for a further discussion, see credit risk management on pages
4557.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
treasury & securities services
treasury & securities services, a global leader in transaction processing and
information services to wholesale clients, is composed of three businesses.
institutional trust services provides a range of fiduciary services to debt
and equity issuers and broker-dealers, from traditional trustee and
paying-agent functions to global securities clearance. investor services
provides securities custody and related functions, such as securities lending,
investment analytics and reporting, to mutual funds, investment managers,
pension funds, insurance companies and banks worldwide. treasury services
provides treasury and cash management, as well as payment, liquidity
management and trade finance services, to a diversified global client base of
corporations, financial institutions and governments.
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
over/(under)
and employees)
operating revenue
$
4,046
$
3,978
%
operating expense
3,001
3,006
operating margin
1,045
credit costs
(86
)
operating earnings
$
$
%
average common equity
$
2,998
$
2,958
%
average assets
18,018
18,794
(4
)
shareholder value added
roce
%
%
bp
overhead ratio
(200
)
assets under custody (in billions)
$
6,336
$
6,264
%
full-time equivalent employees
14,416
14,367
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
financial results overview
treasury & securities services (t&ss) operating earnings increased 7% over
2001 and delivered a return on equity of 23%. expense discipline mitigated a
weak revenue environment. revenue growth of 2% was limited by weakness in the
economy and financial markets.
operating revenue increase of 2% was driven by growth at institutional trust
services (its) of 14%. growth came mainly from new business volumes in
global securities clearance and securitization services. acquisitions also
provided growth, most notably systems & services technologies, inc., a
third-party and backup servicer specializing in subprime auto receivables,
which generated $40million of new revenue in 2002. revenue at treasury
services rose 5% on higher revenues associated with middle market customers,
increased volumes, new product initiatives and higher balance deficiency
fees. revenue at investor services contracted 9% as the value of assets held
in custody and, consequently, fees declined. foreign exchange revenue
dropped, along with securities lending activity due to reduced market
activity. also contributing to the decline were higher deposit balances in
2001 following the events of september11, as clients looked to depository
institutions to hold cash funds. across all business units, low interest
rates have reduced earnings from the value of deposits linked to transaction
processing. t&ss results for 2002 included a pre-tax gain of $50million on
the sale of the firms interest in centrale de livraison de valeurs
mobilieres (cedel), an overseas securities clearing firm.
operating
revenue:
(in millions)
operating
earnings:
(in
millions, except ratios)
roce
$
3,930
$
%
$
3,978
$
%
$
4,046
$
%
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
dimensions of 2002 revenue diversification by
business revenues:
institutional trust services
%
investor services
%
other
%
treasury services
%
dimensions of 2002 revenue diversification by
client segment(a):
non-bank financial institutions
%
banks
%
large corporates
%
middle market
%
public sector/governments
%
(a)
represents relationships as a percentage of revenues
dimensions of 2002 revenue diversification by
geographic region:
europe, middle east & africa
%
asia
%
the americas(b)
%
(b)
includes north america, latin america and the caribbean
operating expense was virtually flat to 2001, despite higher expenses related
to acquisitions. during 2002, t&ss achieved expense reductions through
productivity and quality initiatives, including six sigma and selected staff
reductions. in addition, investor services restructured its expense base in
response to the weak revenue environment. despite low revenue growth, the
overhead ratio for t&ss was 74%, compared with 76% in 2001.
league table #1 rankings
u.s. dollar clearing and commercial payments
u.s. corporate debt trusteeship
securities lending
chips, fedwire, ach origination
u.s. commercial paper issuing and paying agent
american depositary receipts
u.s. provider of non-indigenous euro clearing services
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
investment management & private banking
jpmorgan fleming asset management provides investment management services to
private- and public-sector institutional investors, high net worth
individuals and retail customers across asset classes and global markets.
jpmorgan private bank provides personalized advice and solutions to wealthy
individuals and families. assets under supervision (aus) totaled $636
billion.
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
over/(under)
and employees)
operating revenue
$
2,868
$
3,226
(11
)%
operating expense
2,336
2,570
(9
)
credit costs
pre-tax margin
(28
)
operating earnings
$
$
(20
)%
average common equity
$
6,115
$
6,275
(3
)%
average assets
35,729
36,896
(3
)
shareholder value added
(357
)
(284
)
(26
)
roce
%
%
(200
)bp
tangible roce
(300
)
overhead ratio
pre-tax margin ratio(a)
(300
)
full-time equivalent employees
7,793
8,162
(5
)%
(a)
measures the percentage of operating
earnings before taxes to total operating
revenue.
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp
equals 1%.
financial results overview
investment management & private banking (impb) operating earnings are
influenced by numerous factors, including global economic conditions, equity
and fixed income asset valuations, investor activity levels and investment
performance. global economic conditions remained weak in 2002. in addition,
poor investor sentiment driven by the uncertain economic outlook and
concerns surrounding corporate governance weighed heavily on the financial
markets. these factors led to significantly depressed equity markets (the
s&p 500 index declined 23% for the year 2002) and reduced levels of investor
activity across impbs private banking and retail client bases. in response
to these challenges, impb undertook restructuring and productivity programs
and reduced incentives, without impairing its core capabilities. impb is
well positioned to enhance earnings when economic conditions improve.
operating revenue of $2.9billion was 11% lower than last year. investment
management operating revenues of $1.5billion decreased 11% from the prior
year, reflecting the impact of equity market depreciation and institutional
outflows across all asset classes. during the third quarter of 2002, brown &
co., the firms specialty online brokerage unit, was transferred from cfs to
impb as part of the firms strategy to grow its retail asset management
business. (all prior periods have been restated to reflect the
reorganization.)
private banking operating revenues of $1.4billion decreased 12% from 2001.
net interest income decreased 15%, reflecting the private banks smaller loan
portfolio and lower deposit balances, as well as narrower interest rate
spreads. fees from assets under management declined as a result of equity
market depreciation and client outflows in the early part of 2002. brokerage
commissions declined as private banking clients executed fewer transactions.
operating
revenue:
(in millions)
operating
earnings:
(in
millions, except ratios)
roce
$
4,024
$
%
$
3,226
$
%
$
2,868
$
%
leadership positions:
no.1 private bank in the united states and no.3 globally based on aus
awarded global finances best asset management bank
awarded worth magazine editors choice as best u.s. private bank
y
no.5 institutional asset management worldwide pensions & investments
relationships with nearly 40% of the individuals listed in the forbes billionaires global list
no.4 provider of global money market funds imoneynet
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
diversification of impbs $636billion of
assets under supervision at december31, 2002  by client
segment:
($ in billions)
institutional
$341/54%
private banking
$232/36%
retail
$63/10%
diversification of impbs $636billion of
assets under supervision at december31, 2002  by
geographic region:
($ in billions)
americas
$447/70%
europe/asia
$189/30%
diversification of impbs $636billion of
assets under supervision at december31, 2002  by product
class:
($ in billions)
custody, restricted stock, brokerage, deposits
$120/19%
aum fixed income and cash
$297/47%
aum equities and other
$219/34%
operating expense decreased 9%, reflecting the full-year benefit of merger
and other programs initiated in 2002, as well as reductions in
performance-related incentives due to lower earnings. severance and related
costs associated with expense initiatives announced in 2002 were $47million.
there were no such costs in 2001.
the increase in credit costs of $50million was concentrated in a small
number of u.s. private clients.
assets under supervision at december31, 2002, were $636billion, a decline
of 16% from the prior year-end. aus represent assets under management
(aum), as well as custody, restricted stock, deposit and brokerage
accounts. assets under management represent assets actively managed by impb
on behalf of private banking, institutional and retail clients. aum at
december31, 2002, declined 15% from the prior year-end primarily due to
equity market depreciation and institutional outflows, offset by an increase
in retail mutual fund assets. custody, restricted stock, deposit and
brokerage accounts, which are lower-fee products than aum, declined 20%. the
diversification of aus across client segments, geographic regions and
product classes helps to mitigate the impact of market volatility on
revenues. the firm has a 45% interest in american century companies, inc.,
whose aum totaled $72billion and $89billion at december31, 2002 and 2001,
respectively.
assets under supervision(a)
over/(under)
at december 31, (in billions)
client segment:
private banking
$
$
(9
)%
institutional
(20
)
retail
assets under management
(15
)
custody/restricted stock/brokerage/deposits
(20
)
assets under supervision
$
$
(16
)%
geographic region:
americas
$
$
(18
)%
europe and asia
(6
)
assets under management
(15
)
custody/restricted stock/brokerage/deposits
(20
)
assets under supervision
$
$
(16
)%
product class:
fixed income and cash
$
$
(10
)%
equities and other
(21
)
assets under management
(15
)
custody/restricted stock/brokerage/deposits
(20
)
assets under supervision
$
$
(16
)%
(a)
excludes aum of american century companies, inc.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
jpmorgan partners
jpmorgan partners, the global private equity organization of jpmorgan
chase, provides equity and mezzanine capital financing to private
companies. it is a diversified investor, investing in buyouts, growth
equity and venture opportunities across a variety of industry sectors,
with the objective of creating long-term value for the firm and
third-party investors.
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
over/(under)
and employees)
operating revenue
$
(954
)
$
(1,470
)
%
operating expense
operating margin
(1,252
)
(1,763
)
operating losses
$
(789
)
$
(1,116
)
%
average common equity
$
5,454
$
6,475
(16
)%
average assets
10,210
12,143
(16
)
shareholder value added
(1,614
)
(2,097
)
full-time equivalent employees
financial results overview
jpmorgan partners (jpmp) faced a challenging year in 2002, resulting in
negative operating revenue of $954million and operating losses of $789
million. opportunities to realize value through sales or initial public
offerings (ipos) of investments were limited, because of constrained m&a
and ipo markets. in addition, jpmp recorded negative valuation adjustments
in investments concentrated in telecommunications and technology,
industries that continue to face poor operating conditions and limited
financing opportunities.
private equity losses totaled $733million in 2002, consisting of losses of
$647million in direct investments and $150million in private funds,
partially offset by $64million in gains from portfolio hedging activities.
realized cash gains of $563million declined 45% from the previous year
due to limited exit opportunities. realized cash gains were recognized
across all industries but were primarily harvested from investments in
the industrial and consumer sectors.
private
equity gains (losses)
year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(in millions)
realized gains (losses):
cash gains
$
$
1,030
(45
)%
write-offs
(654
)
(355
)
(84
)
subtotal
(91
)
nm
unrealized gains (losses):
public mark-to-market (a)
(210
)
(520
)
private write-downs
(432
)
(1,338
)
subtotal
(642
)
(1,858
)
private equity gains (losses) (b)
$
(733
)
$
(1,183
)
%
(a)
includes mark-to-market and reversals of
mark-to-market due to public securities sales.
(b)
includes the impact of portfolio hedging
activities.
nm-
not meaningful.
jpmps realized gains were more than offset by net write-offs (realized
losses) and write-downs (unrealized losses) of $1.1billion. these
write-downs and write-offs included $621million from the technology, media
and telecommunications (tmt) sector, which continues to suffer from an
industry-wide contraction. jpmp also recorded unrealized losses of $210
million from mark-to-market losses on its public portfolio, largely in tmt.
jpmps operating revenue also includes third-party management fees and net
revenue allocated to or from other jpmorgan chase business segments.
investment pace, portfolio diversification and capital under
management
in 2002, increased emphasis was placed on leveraged buyouts and growth
equity opportunities. jpmps direct investment pace for the firms account
in 2002 was essentially flat with 2001 at $950million, with investment
activity primarily related to buyouts. more than 60% of the total direct
investment activity was in the industrial growth and life
sciences/healthcare industry sectors.
jpmp investment portfolio
december 31, 2002 (in millions)
carrying value
cost
public securities (101 companies)(a)
$
$
private direct securities (945 companies)
5,865
7,316
private fund investments (324 funds)(b)
1,843
2,333
total investment portfolio
$
8,228
$
10,312
(a)
quoted public value was $761million at december31, 2002.
(b)
unfunded commitments to private equity funds were $2.0billion at december31, 2002.
33j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual
report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
during 2002, several factors contributed to improved diversification. at
december31, 2002, the portfolio was $8.2billion, a reduction of $1.0billion
from year-end 2001, primarily due to a decline in tmt investments. at the end
of 2002, tmt investments were $1.5billion, or 18%, of the total portfolio,
compared with $2.5billion, or 27%, of the portfolio at year-end 2001.
industrial growth investments have increased to 27% of the portfolio as of
december31, 2002, from 22% at the end of 2001, reflecting increased
investment in industrial buyout activity during 2002.
at december31, 2002, jpmps public securities portfolio was $520million, a
48% decline from 2001 and less than one-sixth of the $3.4billion public
securities balance at december31, 1999. the 2002 decline resulted from lower
market valuations and from accelerated sales of public securities that were not
subject to restrictions. these sales of public securities reduced the earnings
volatility created by this portfolio segment.
although 2002 reflected a reduction in the amount of publicly-held
securities in jpmps portfolio, this portion of the portfolio could
increase significantly, both in dollar amount and as a proportion of the
total portfolio, due to changes in equity market prices and ipo
opportunities available to portfolio companies.
currently, there are limited sales and financing activity in private equity
markets, constraining realization opportunities.
the firm continues to regard jpmp as a strategic business that will create
value over the long term. jpmp is seeking to reduce or exit selected
businesses and investments that are not central to its operations with the
goal that, over time, jpmps private equity portfolio will be reduced from
approximately 20% of the firms common stockholders equity as of december
31, 2002, to approximately 10%.
jpmps diversified private equity portfolio by industry
group
% of carrying value as of december31, 2002 and 2001
amounts above the bars represent the carrying values of the
investments.
(in billions)
telecommunications, media & technology
$
2.5
$
1.5
life sciences/healthcare infrastructure
$
0.7
$
0.7
industrial growth
$
2.0
$
2.2
consumer retail & services
$
1.1
$
1.0
real estate
$
0.4
$
0.4
financial services
$
0.6
$
0.6
funds
$
1.9
$
1.8
j.p. morgan chase& co./2002 annual report
chase financial services
chase financial services is a major provider of banking, investment and
financing products and services to consumers and small and middle market
businesses throughout the united states. the majority of its revenues and
earnings are produced by its national consumer credit businesses, chase home
finance (chf), chase cardmember services (ccs) and chase auto finance
(caf). it also serves as a full-service bank for consumers and small- and
medium-sized businesses through chase regional banking (crb) and chase
middle market (cmm).
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
over/(under)
and employees)
operating revenue
$
13,541
$
10,951
%
operating expense
6,421
5,617
operating margin
7,120
5,334
credit costs
3,159
2,873
operating earnings
$
2,490
$
1,538
%
average common equity
$
10,293
$
9,118
%
average managed assets
179,404
162,753
shareholder value added
1,242
roce
%
%
bp
overhead ratio
(400
)
full-time equivalent employees
43,607
41,195
%
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
financial results overview
chase financial services (cfs) operating earnings increased 62% to a record
$2.5billion in 2002. shareholder value added almost tripled to $1.2billion,
and return on common equity increased to 24% from 17% last year. revenue growth
of 24% reflected high business volumes across all consumer credit businesses
and significant gains in home finance on the hedging of msrs, partially offset
by the negative impact of lower interest rates on deposits. expenses increased
14% as a result of higher business volumes, partially offset by six sigma and
other productivity efforts. the overhead ratio improved in 2002 to 47%, down
from 51% in 2001. credit costs increased, primarily due to higher average
loans.
the firm anticipates that cfs operating revenue and earnings will be
lower in 2003 due to reduced msr hedging gains and the impact of
declining interest rates on its deposit businesses.
operating revenue exceeded $13.5billion in 2002, an increase of 24% from
2001. the national consumer credit businesses drove the revenue increase.
home finance revenues increased 73% over the prior year, driven by strong
mortgage originations and gains on the hedging of msrs. credit card revenues
increased 34% due to the providian acquisition, lower funding costs and
higher purchase volume. auto finance revenues grew 26%, driven by
originations of over $25billion and lower funding costs. middle market
revenues increased 4%, driven by growth in average deposit volume and higher
fees for deposit services; the low-interest rate environment reduced the
value of customers deposit balances and, consequently, increased deposit
fees. regional banking revenues declined 9% on lower deposit spreads
resulting from lower interest rates, partially offset by higher deposit
volume.
operating expense rose 14% to $6.4billion. the increase reflects the
acquisition of the providian master trust, growth in consumer credit business
volumes, higher incentive costs on better business results and higher credit
card marketing expenditures. partially offsetting these increases were almost
$250million in expense savings achieved through six sigma and other
productivity efforts. the overhead ratio improved to 47% from 51% a year ago,
as a result of both revenue increases and expense initiatives.
credit costs, on a managed basis, increased 10%, driven by a 23% increase
in credit card receivables, including the providian portfolio. credit
quality of the card portfolio remained relatively stable, the result of
proactive credit risk management and enhanced collections initiatives. cfs
increased its allowance for credit losses in 2002 by $233million,
primarily due to the providian acquisition. higher securitizations,
however, mitigated the increase in the allowance. for a further discussion
of the consumer credit portfolio, see pages 54-55.
operating revenue:
(in millions)
operating earnings:
(in
millions, except ratios)
roce
$
10,059
$
1,638
%
$
10,951
$
1,538
%
$
13,541
$
2,490
%
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
chase financial services businesses
over/(under) 2001
year ended december 31,
operating
operating
operating
operating
operating
operating
(in millions, except ratios)
revenue
expenses
earnings
revenue
expenses
earnings
home finance
$
2,919
$
1,270
$
%
%
%
cardmember services
5,992
2,121
auto finance
regional banking
2,795
2,114
(9
)
(2
)
(15
)
middle market
1,493
other consumer services (a)
(354
)
(138
)
(112
)
(36
)
total
$
13,541
$
6,421
$
2,490
%
%
%
(a)
includes the elimination of revenues and expenses related to the shared
activities with treasury services, discontinued operations, support services and, in 2001, unallocated credit costs.
chase home finance
chf is the fourth-largest mortgage originator and the fourth-largest mortgage
servicer in the united states, with more than 4million customers. in 2002,
chf capitalized on a record year for the u.s. mortgage industry as
historically low interest rates contributed to higher production volumes and
favorable margins. chf experienced its own record year, with total revenues
and operating earnings increasing 73% and 136%, respectively, demonstrating
chfs strength in both origination and servicing.
during 2002, chf successfully shifted its origination growth into
higher-margin business sectors. loan originations in these higher-margin
sectors (i.e., retail, wholesale, telephone-based and e-commerce)
contributed to a record $113billion in origination volume, an increase of
30% over 2001. as part of this increase in origination volume during 2002,
home equity, a strategic growth area, rose 52% to $14billion. chfs
correspondent-negotiated business, a lower-margin sector, was down 56% to
$43billion, due to pricing and market conditions. low interest rates also
contributed to the increase in revenue through improved net interest
margins. in 2003, chf will continue its initiatives to retain customers
considered likely to refinance.
in mortgage servicing, lower interest rates led to high prepayment levels,
which resulted in the accelerated amortization and impairment of msrs. in
2002, chf partnered with the firms global treasury group to manage the
interest rate sensitivity of msrs. global treasury managed the risk
exposure of the msrs through a series of derivatives (e.g., a combination
of swaps, swaptions and floors) and afs securities that increased in value
when interest rates declined. during 2002, msr valuation adjustments of
$4.1billion were more than offset by $4.7billion in gains on derivatives,
realized gains from sales of afs securities and net interest earned on afs
securities. the net positive result of $582million was an increase of $838
million over 2001, driven by wider mortgage-swap spreads and a falling
interest rate environment. management anticipates an eventual decrease in
this revenue category, as mortgage-swap spreads and interest rates revert
to normal levels. the carrying value of msrs also declined $1.4billion as
a result of periodic amortization, $244million more than in 2001. for a
further discussion of msr activities, see note 12 on pages 8788.
operating expense increased 28% on the growth in origination volume and a
very high level of loan servicing activity, partially offset by gains in
productivity and benefits realized from six sigma initiatives. the overhead
ratio declined to 44% from 59% in 2001, a result of strong revenue growth.
net charge-offs remained low, reflecting the continued strong credit quality
of chfs loan portfolio.
business-related metrics
as of or for the year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(in billions, except ratios)
originations:
retail, wholesale and correspondent
$
$
%
correspondent negotiated transactions
(56
)
loans serviced
(1
)
end-of-period outstandings
63.6
59.0
total average loans owned
56.2
55.7
number of customers (in millions)
msr carrying value
3.2
6.6
(52
)
net charge-off ratio
0.25
%
0.18
%
bp
overhead ratio
(1,500
)
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual
report
chase cardmember services
ccs is the fourth-largest u.s. credit card issuer, with more than $51
billion in managed receivables. operating earnings for 2002 were a record
$716million, 44% greater than 2001. the primary drivers were the
acquisition of the providian portfolio and overall higher revenue. these
results were achieved in a highly competitive market environment and a weak
u.s. economy. industry challenges included competitive pricing, increased
competition for new accounts, depressed response rates to credit card
solicitations as costs to acquire new accounts increased, and declining
acceptances to balance consolidation offers.
total operating revenue increased 34%, reflecting receivables growth, lower
funding costs, higher late fees, an increase in interchange revenue due to
higher purchase volumes and successful sales of fee-based products. excluding
the providian portfolio, operating revenues increased 12%. operating expenses
increased 33%; excluding providian, operating expenses increased 14%, driven
by higher volumes and an increase in marketing expenditures, which enabled
ccs to maintain a consistent level of new cardmember acquisitions amid a
competitive market environment. total accounts increased 22%, reflecting the
addition of 3.7million new accounts, as well as accounts related to the
providian acquisition. total volume (purchases, cash advances and balance
transfers) increased 16% to a record $84billion. managed credit card-related
receivables increased 23% to $51.1billion.
business-related
metrics
as of or for the year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(in billions, except ratios)
end-of-period outstandings
$
51.1
$
41.6
%
average outstandings
49.1
38.5
total purchases & cash advances (a)
84.0
72.2
total accounts (in millions)
29.2
23.9
net charge-off ratio
5.89
%
5.49
%
bp
30+ day delinquency rate
4.67
4.77
(10
)
overhead ratio
(100
)
note: the above metrics include other consumer loans.
(a)sum of total customer purchases, cash
advances and balance transfers.
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
the managed credit card-related net charge-off ratio was 5.89%, an increase
of 40 basis points from 2001. this increase partly reflects the inclusion
of the providian portfolio. excluding the providian portfolio, this ratio
was 5.66%, an increase of 17 basis points from 2001. this increase
reflected higher contractual losses (nonbankruptcy-related), partially
offset by receivable growth. including providian, the total managed 30+ day
delinquency rate improved to 4.67% at december31, 2002, from 4.77% a year
ago.
chase auto finance
caf is the largest u.s. bank originator of auto loans and leases, with
more than 2.5million accounts. in 2002, caf had a record number of auto
loan and lease originations, growing 28% over 2001 to $25.4billion. loan
and lease receivables of $36.4billion were 28% higher than the prior
year. operating earnings grew 41% to $180million. these results reflected
higher revenue on increases in average loan and lease receivables and
lower funding costs, offset by higher operating expenses and higher credit
costs driven by loan volumes.
in 2002, cafs operating revenues grew 26% to $696million. its market
share among auto finance companies improved from 4.1% in 2001 to 5.7% in
2002, the result of strong organic growth and an origination strategy that
allies the business with manufacturers and dealers. caf relationships with
several major car manufacturers contributed to 2002 growth, as did cafs
dealer relationships, which increased from approximately 12,200 dealers in
2001 to approximately 12,700 dealers in 2002. operating expenses increased
by 17%, reflecting volume growth.
business-related metrics (a)
as of or for the year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(in billions, except ratios)
loan and lease receivables
$
36.4
$
28.4
%
average loan and lease receivables
30.6
24.7
origination volume
25.4
19.9
market share
5.7
%
4.1
%
bp
net charge-off ratio
0.53
0.55
(2
)
overhead ratio
(200
)
(a)excludes amounts related to chase education finance.
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
the resulting overhead ratio improved to 35% from 37%. the net charge-off
ratio was 0.53% in 2002, down from 0.55% in 2001.
caf is also comprised of chase education finance, a top provider of
government-guaranteed and private loans for higher education. loans are
provided through a joint venture with sallie mae, a government-sponsored
enterprise and the leader in funding and servicing education loans. chase
education finances origination volume totaled $2.6billion, an increase of
12% from last year.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual
report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
chase regional banking
crb provides payment, liquidity, investment, insurance and credit products
and services to three primary customer segments: small businesses, affluent
consumers and mass-market consumers. within these segments, crb serves
324,000 small businesses and 2.9million consumers and is the no.1 bank,
ranked by deposits, in the new york tri-state area and is a leading bank in
texas.
in 2002, crb divested two nonstrategic businesses  the national deposit
business was sold to e*trade in february, and the virgin islands branches
were sold to firstbank puerto rico in october. in addition, brown & co.,
the specialty online brokerage unit, was transferred to impb. prior-period
amounts have been adjusted for the brown & co. transfer.
crb had operating earnings of $399million in 2002, down 15% from 2001. the
decrease was attributable to 9% lower revenue, predominantly driven by
lower interest rates, which compressed spreads on deposits. customer
deposit balances grew 6% (10% excluding divestitures) to $71billion at
december31, 2002.
business-related metrics
as of or for the year ended december
31,
over/(under)
(in billions, except ratios)
total average deposits (in billions)
$
$
%
total average assets under
management (a) (in billions)
number of branches
(1
)
number of atms
1,876
1,907
(2
)
number of online
customers (in thousands)
1,185
overhead ratio
%
%
600bp
(a)
assets under management includes deposits.
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
operating expenses were down $38million, or 2%, from 2001, principally
driven by productivity initiatives and expense management. despite the
decline in expenses, the overhead ratio increased to 76% as a result of lower
revenue. credit costs declined $96million, primarily reflecting the run-off
of an installment loan portfolio.
chase middle market
business-related metrics
as of or for the year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(in billions, except ratios)
total average loans
$
13.7
$
14.3
(4
)%
total average deposits
24.1
18.5
nonperforming average loans as
a % of total average loans
1.91
%
2.35
%
(44
)bp
overhead ratio
(200
)
bp- denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
cmm is a premier provider of commercial banking and corporate financial
services to companies with annual sales of $10million to $1billion, as
well as to not-for-profit, real estate and public-sector entities. cmm
maintains a leadership position in the new york tri-state market and
select texas markets; it also leverages its expertise in distinct industry
segments and select regional markets across the country.
the cmm relationship management model brings customized solutions to more
than 14,000 middle market companies, utilizing the products and services of
the entire firm. product offerings include cash management, credit, corporate
finance, international banking services and various credit products, such as
leasing and asset-backed financing. cmm is organized around geographies,
industries and products to deliver greater value to customers. cmms 2002 and
2001 results included 100% of the revenues and expenses attributed to the
shared activities with treasury services. see page 25 for a discussion of the
firms revenue- and expense-sharing agreements between business segments.
cmms operating earnings increased 22% compared with the prior year, the
result of deposit volume growth, increased fees for deposit services, expense
discipline and a reduction in credit costs. lower interest rates reduced the
value of customer deposit balances and, consequently, increased the fees paid
by customers for deposit services. the lower credit costs reflect reduced
charge-offs and improving credit quality. the overhead ratio improved to 55%,
compared with 57% last year.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
support units and corporate
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
over/(under)
(in millions, except employees)
operating revenue
$
(847
)
$
(964
)
$
operating expense
(98
)
credit costs
(34
)
pre-tax loss
(1,102
)
(1,351
)
income tax benefit
(359
)
(702
)
operating losses
$
(743
)
$
(649
)
(94
)
average common equity
$
(1,815
)
$
(2,266
)
average assets
21,557
13,080
8,477
shareholder value added
(362
)
(183
)
(179
)
full-time equivalent employees
13,321
14,149
(828
)
note: amounts are shown in place of % changes.
the support units and corporate sector includes enterprise technology
services (ets), corporate business services (cbs), legal, audit,
corporate finance, human resources, risk management, executive
management and corporate marketing.
support units and corporate reflects the accounting effects remaining at
the corporate level after the application of the firms management
accounting policies. these policies allocate the costs associated with
technology, operational and staff support services to the business
segments. the residual component of the allowance for credit losses is not
allocated to the business segments.
ets is an internal technology service organization, and cbs manages the firms
support services, including real estate management, human resources and finance
operations and procurement. ets and cbs seek to provide services to the firms
businesses that are competitive with comparable third-party providers in terms
of price and service quality. these units leverage the firms global scale and
technology to gain efficiencies through consolidation, standardization, vendor
management and outsourcing.
in december 2002, jpmorgan chase entered into a seven-year agreement with
ibm to outsource portions of the firms internal technology infrastructure
services. this agreement will enable the firm to transform its technology
infrastructure through absolute cost savings, increased cost variability,
access to the best research and innovation and improved service levels. by
moving from a traditional fixed-cost approach to one with increased
capacity and cost variability, the firm expects to be able to respond more
quickly to changing market conditions. the impact on expenses as a result
of this agreement is expected to be minimal in 2003.
for 2002, support units and corporate had an operating loss of $743million,
compared with a loss of $649million in 2001. this sector usually operates at
a moderate loss. negative operating revenue usually results from the
application of the firms transfer pricing policies and the overallocation of
capital to the various business segments. expense items usually result from
timing differences in allocations to other business sectors and residuals
from interoffice allocation among the business segments. income tax benefit
reflects the difference between the aggregate recorded at the consolidated
level and the amount recorded at the business segments. included in 2002
operating expense was a $120million reversal of previously accrued expenses;
these were associated with forfeitable stock-based compensation awards issued
under employee benefit plans that contained stock price targets that were
deemed unlikely to be attained within the timeframes specified under the
terms of the awards.
in 2002, credit costs in excess of net charge-offs not allocated to the
segments were $133million, compared with $167million of such costs in
2001. although the support units and corporate sector has no traditional
credit assets, the residual component of the allowance for credit losses
is maintained at the corporate level and is not allocated to any specific
business segment. for a further discussion of the residual component, see
page 56.
included in the 2001 operating losses of $649million was a pretax loss of
$152million at labmorgan, resulting from the write-downs of investments
and equity accounting losses. labmorgan was restructured in 2001, and its
remaining investment portfolio of $49million at december31, 2002, is
managed by jpmorgan partners.
the negative capital position of $1.8billion in support units and
corporate results from an overallocation of economic capital to the
businesses as compared with available common stockholders equity.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual
report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
risk and capital management
risk management at jpmorgan chase is guided by several principles, including:
defined risk governance
independent oversight
continual evaluation of risk appetite, managed through risk limits
portfolio diversification
risk assessment and measurement, including value-at-risk analysis and portfolio stress testing
performance measurement (sva)that
allocates risk-adjusted capital to business
units and charges a cost against that
capital
risk management and oversight begins
with the risk policy committee of the board of directors, which reviews the governance
of these activities, delegating the formulation of policy and
day-today risk oversight and management to the executive committee
and to the two corporate risk committees: capital and risk
management.
the executive committee provides guidance regarding
strategies and risk appetite and is responsible for an
integrated view of risk exposures, including the
interdependencies among jpmorgan chases various risk
categories.
the capital committee focuses on firm-wide capital planning, internal
capital allocation and liquidity management. the risk management
committee focuses on credit risk, market risk, operational risk,
private equity risk and fiduciary risk. both risk committees have
decision-making authority, with major policy decisions and risk
exposures subject to review by the executive committee.
in addition to the risk policy committee, the audit committee of the board
of directors is responsible for discussion of guidelines and policies to
govern the process by which risk assessment and management is undertaken.
in addition, the audit committee reviews with management the system of
internal controls and financial reporting that is relied upon to provide
reasonable assurance of compliance with the firms operational risk
management processes.
the firms use of sva, which incorporates a risk-adjusted capital methodology
as its primary performance measure, has strengthened its risk management
discipline by charging the businesses the cost of capital linked to the risks
associated with their respective activities.
for a discussion of capital allocation methodologies, see the respective
risk management sections on pages 45-65.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual
report
capital and liquidity management
capital management
jpmorgan chases capital management framework helps to optimize the use of capital by:
determining the amount of capital commensurate with:
internal assessments of risk as estimated by the firms economic capital allocation model
the firms goal to limit losses, even under stress conditions
targeted regulatory ratios and credit ratings
the firms liquidity management strategy
directing capital investment to activities with the most favorable risk-adjusted returns
available versus required capital
yearly averages
(in billions)
common stockholders equity
$
41.4
$
41.5
required economic risk capital:
credit risk
13.1
12.8
market risk
4.8
4.6
operating risk
8.7
8.8
private equity risk
5.1
6.4
goodwill /intangibles
8.8
8.5
asset capital tax
3.8
3.9
diversification effect
(7.0
)
(7.2
)
total required economic risk capital
37.3
37.8
capital in excess of required economic capital
$
4.1
$
3.7
economic risk capital: jpmorgan chase assesses capital adequacy utilizing
internal risk assessment methodologies. the firm assigns economic capital
based primarily on four risk factors. the methodology quantifies credit,
market and operating risk for each business and, for jpmp, private equity
risk, and assigns capital accordingly. these methodologies are discussed in
the risk management sections of this annual report.
capital also is assessed against business units for certain nonrisk
factors. businesses are assessed capital equal to 100% of any goodwill and
50% for certain other intangibles generated through acquisitions.
additionally, jpmorgan chase assesses an asset capital tax against
managed assets and some off-balance sheet instruments. these assessments
recognize that certain minimum regulatory capital ratios must be
maintained by the firm. jpmorgan chase also estimates the portfolio effect
on required economic capital based on correlations of risk in stress
scenarios across risk categories. this estimated diversification benefit
leads to a reduction in required economic capital for the firm.
the total required economic capital for jpmorgan chase as determined by
its models and after considering the firms estimated diversification
benefits is then compared with available common stockholders equity to
evaluate overall capital utilization. the firms policy is to maintain an
appropriate level of excess capital to provide for growth and additional
protection against losses.
the 2002 excess capital position was slightly higher than in 2001. the
increase was primarily due to a decline in private equity risk capital
due to the lower carrying value of the portfolio, partially offset by
increases in credit risk capital and goodwill/intangibles capital at
chase financial services, principally as a result of the acquisition of
the providian master trust.
internal capital allocations may change from time to time to reflect
refinements of economic capital methodologies. for 2003, the firm is
revising its capital measurement methodologies for commercial credit risk
and operating risk. these changes are discussed on pages 57 and 64.
regulatory capital: jpmorgan chases primary federal banking regulator, the
board of governors of the federal reserve system (federal reserve board),
establishes capital requirements, including well-capitalized standards and
leverage ratios, for the consolidated financial holding company and its
state-chartered banks, including jpmorgan chase bank. the office of the
comptroller of the currency establishes similar capital requirements and
standards for the firms national bank subsidiaries, including chase
manhattan bank usa, n.a. as of december31, 2002, the financial holding
company and its banking subsidiaries maintained capital levels well in
excess of the minimum capital requirements.
currently, the firm targets a tier 1 capital ratio of 8% to 8.25%. the
capital committee reviews the firms capital targets and policies regularly
in light of changing economic conditions and business needs. additional
information regarding the firms capital ratios and a more detailed
discussion of federal regulatory capital standards are presented in note 26
on pages 99 and 100.
dividends: dividends declared in any quarter will be determined by jpmorgan
chases board of directors. the board of directors expressed its intent, on
september17, 2002, to continue the current dividend level, provided that
capital ratios remain strong and earnings prospects exceed the current
dividend.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
liquidity management
in managing liquidity, management considers a variety of liquidity risk
measures as well as market conditions, prevailing interest rates, liquidity
needs and the desired maturity profile of its liabilities.
overview
liquidity risk arises from the general funding needs of the firms
activities and in the management of its assets and liabilities. jpmorgan
chase recognizes the importance of sound liquidity management as a key
factor in maintaining strong credit ratings and utilizes a liquidity
framework intended to maximize liquidity access and minimize funding
costs. active liquidity management seeks to ensure that the firm will be
able to replace maturing obligations when due and fund its assets at
appropriate maturities and rates in all market environments.
liquidity management framework
the capital committee sets the overall liquidity policy for the firm and
reviews the contingency funding plan. in addition, the capital committee
provides oversight of the firms exposure to special-purpose entities
(spes), with particular focus on potential liquidity support requirements
that the firm may have to those spes. the liquidity risk committee,
reporting to the capital committee, meets monthly to identify and monitor
liquidity issues, provide policy guidance, oversee adherence and maintain
an evolving contingency plan.
jpmorgan chase utilizes liquidity monitoring tools to maintain appropriate
levels of liquidity through normal and stress periods. the firms liquidity
analytics rely on managements judgment about jpmorgan chases ability to
liquidate assets or use them as collateral for borrowings. these analytics
also involve estimates and assumptions, taking into account credit risk
managements historical data on the funding of loan commitments (e.g.,
commercial paper back-up facilities), liquidity commitments to spes,
commitments with rating triggers and collateral-posting requirements. for a
further discussion on spes and other off-balance sheet arrangements, see
off-balance sheet arrangements on page 44 as well as note 11 on pages
8387.
the firms three primary measures of liquidity are:
holding company short-term surplus: measures the parent holding
companys ability to repay all obligations with a maturity under one
year at a time when the ability of the firms banks to pay dividends
to the parent holding company is constrained.
cash capital surplus: measures the firms ability to fund assets on
a fully collateralized basis, assuming access to unsecured funding is
lost.
basic surplus: measures jpmorgan chase banks ability to sustain a
90-day stress event that is specific to the firm where no new funding
can be raised to meet obligations as they come due.
each of the firms liquidity surplus positions, as of december31, 2002,
indicates that jpmorgan chases long-dated funding, including core deposits,
exceeds illiquid assets and that the firms obligations can be met if access to
funding is temporarily impaired.
an extension of the firms ongoing liquidity management is its contingency
funding plan, which is intended to help the firm manage through liquidity
stress periods. the plan considers temporary and long-term stress scenarios
and forecasts potential funding needs where access to unsecured funding is
severely limited or nonexistent. these scenarios take into account both on-
and off-balance sheet exposures, evaluating access to funds by the parent
holding company, jpmorgan chase bank and chase manhattan bank usa, n.a.,
separately.
funding
credit ratings: jpmorgan chases parent holding company and jpmorgan chase
banks credit ratings as of december31, 2002, were as follows:
jpmorgan chase
jpmorgan chase bank
short-term
senior
short-term
senior
debt
long-term debt
debt
long-term debt
moodys
p-1
a1
p-1
aa3
s&p
a-1
a+
a-1
+
aa-
fitch
f-1
a+
f-1
a+
as of february28, 2003, the ratings outlook for the parent holding company
by moodys investor services (moodys) was stable, and the ratings
outlook for the parent holding company by standard & poors (s&p) and
fitch, inc. (fitch) was negative.
the cost and availability of unsecured financing are influenced by credit
ratings. during 2002, s&p, moodys and fitch lowered the debt ratings of
jpmorgan chases parent holding company and its subsidiaries one notch to
the levels noted above. this resulted in an increase in the marginal cost of
long-term wholesale funds to the parent holding company. jpmorgan chase
banks cost of short-term funds has not been materially affected by the
downgrade, although certain counterparties and investors have reduced limits
and maturities of exposure to the firm as a result of these actions. the
financial impact of the ratings downgrade on the firm has not been material.
see page 44, 52 and note 11 on page 86 for further information about the
implications of a ratings downgrade for the firm.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
balance sheet: the firms total assets increased to $759billion at
december31, 2002, from $694billion at december31, 2001. auto financing
and residential consumer loans increased on higher originations, offset by
increased loan securitizations; commercial loans declined, reflecting
weaker loan demand and the firms ongoing efforts to reduce commercial
exposures. increases in debt and equity trading assets and investment
security assets were driven by increased trading and hedging activity.
derivative receivables increased primarily as a result of the decline in
interest rates. growth in trading assets and investment securities was
financed primarily by increases in repurchase agreements, trading
liabilities and deposits.
sources of funds: the diversity of the firms funding sources enhances
flexibility and limits dependence on any one source of funds, while
minimizing the cost of funds. jpmorgan chase has access to funding markets
across the globe and leverages a broad investor base. liquidity is
generated using a variety of both short-term and long-term instruments,
including deposits, federal funds purchased, repurchase agreements,
commercial paper, bank notes, medium- and long-term debt, capital
securities and stockholders equity. during the year, the firm extended its
liability maturity profile while reducing reliance on shorter-dated
wholesale funding instruments (e.g., federal funds purchased and commercial
paper). a major source of liquidity for jpmorgan chase bank is provided by
its large core deposit base. core deposits include all u.s. deposits,
except noninterest-bearing time deposits and certificates of deposit of
$100,000 or more. in addition to core deposits, the firm benefits from
substantial, stable deposit balances originated by t&ss through the normal
course of its business.
additional funding flexibility is provided by the firms ability to access
the repurchase and asset securitization markets. these alternatives are
evaluated on an ongoing basis to achieve the appropriate balance of secured
and unsecured funding. the ability to securitize loans, and the associated
gains on those securitizations, are principally dependent on the credit
quality and yields on the assets securitized and are generally not
dependent on the ratings of the issuing entity. transactions between the
firm and its securitization structures are reflected in jpmorgan chases
financial statements; these relationships include retained interests in
securitization trusts, derivative transactions and liquidity facilities.
for further details, see notes 11 and 29.
issuance: corporate credit spreads widened in 2002 across industries and
sectors, driven by headline risk, increased investment-grade defaults and
investor risk aversion. jpmorgan chases credit spreads increased relative
to peer commercial bank spreads but remained comparable with peer investment
bank spreads.
consistent with the policy discussed earlier in this section, the firm
maintains funding at the holding company sufficient to cover maturing
obligations over the next 12months, which requires periodic issuance of
long-term debt and capital. the firm raised the majority of its liquidity
needs earlier in the year before the increase in cost of funding occurred.
the firm believes that the financial impact from the increased cost of
long-term debt to be raised in 2003 will not be material.
during 2002, jpmorgan chase issued approximately $11billion of long-term
debt and $1billion of trust preferred capital securities. during the year,
$12.2billion of long-term debt matured or was redeemed, and $550million of
preferred stock of subsidiary was redeemed. in addition, the firm
securitized approximately $7.2billion of residential mortgage loans, $9.4
billion of credit card loans and $3.4billion of auto loans, resulting in
pre-tax gains on securitizations of $214million, $45million and $6
million, respectively. for a further discussion of loan securitizations, see
note 11 on pages 83-87.
derivatives are used in liquidity risk management and funding to achieve the
firms desired interest rate risk profile. the firm enters into derivatives
contracts to swap fixed-rate debt to floating-rate obligations and to swap
floating-rate debt to fixed-rate obligations. derivatives contracts are also
used to hedge the variability in interest rates that arises from other
floating-rate financial instruments and forecasted transactions, such as the
rollover of short-term assets and liabilities.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
off-balance sheet arrangements
special-purpose entities or special-purpose vehicles (spvs) are an
important part of the financial markets, providing market liquidity by
facilitating investors access to specific portfolios of assets and risks.
spes are not operating entities; typically they are set up for a single,
discrete purpose, have a limited life, and have no employees. the basic spe
structure involves a company selling assets to the spe. the spe funds the
purchase by selling securities to investors. to insulate investors from
creditors of other entities, including the seller of the assets, spes can
be structured to be bankruptcy-remote. they are critical to the functioning
of many investor markets, including, for example, the market for
mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and commercial paper.
jpmorgan chase is involved with spes in three broad categories of
transactions: loan securitizations, multi-seller conduits, and client
intermediation. capital is held, as appropriate, against all spe-related
transactions and exposures such as derivative transactions and lending
commitments.
the firm has no commitments to issue its own stock to support an spe
transaction, and its policies require that transactions with spes be
conducted at arms length and reflect market pricing. consistent with this
policy, no jpmorgan chase employee is permitted to invest in spes with
which the firm is involved where such investment would violate the firms
worldwide rules of conduct. these rules prohibit employees from
self-dealing and prohibit employees from acting on behalf of the firm in
transactions with which they or their family have any significant financial
interest. for a further discussion of spes and the firms accounting for
spes, see note 11 on pages 83-87.
for certain liquidity commitments to spes, the firm could be required to
provide funding if the credit rating of jpmorgan chase bank were downgraded
below specific levels, primarily a-1, p-1 and f-1. the amount of these
liquidity commitments was $48.6billion at december31, 2002; $35.5billion
relate to the firms multi-seller conduits and structured commercial loan
vehicles further described in note 11 on page 86. the total commercial
paper outstanding for the multi-seller conduits and structured commercial
loan vehicles was $24.7billion at december31, 2002. the remaining $13.1
billion in commitments relate to vehicles established by third parties. if
jpmorgan chase bank is required to provide funding under these commitments,
the firm could be replaced as liquidity provider. additionally, for the
multi-seller conduits and the structured commercial loan vehicles, jpmorgan
chase bank could facilitate the sale or refinancing of the assets in the
spe. all of these commitments are included in the firms total $196.7
billion in other unfunded commitments to extend credit, described in more
detail in note 29 on pages 102 and 103.
the following table summarizes jpmorgan chases contractual cash obligations
and off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments by remaining
maturity at december31, 2002:
(in millions)
under
1-3
4-5
after
contractual cash obligations
1 year
years
years
5 years
total
long-term debt
$
7,053
$
10,056
$
9,257
$
13,385
$
39,751
operating leases
1,371
1,161
4,849
8,118
total
$
7,790
$
11,427
$
10,418
$
18,234
$
47,869
off-balance sheet lending-related commitments
consumer-related
$
136,429
$
$
$
14,665
$
151,138
commercial-related:
other unfunded commitments to extend credit
132,547
51,380
11,419
1,308
196,654
standby letters of credit and guarantees
23,925
11,904
1,697
1,322
38,848
other letters of credit
2,383
2,618
total commercial-related
158,855
63,514
13,116
2,635
238,120
total lending-related commitments
$
295,284
$
63,558
$
13,116
$
17,300
$
389,258
for further information about off-balance sheet lending-related financial
instruments, see note 29 on pages 102 and 103.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
credit risk management
credit risk is the risk of loss due to obligor or counterparty default.
this risk is managed at both the transaction and portfolio levels. credit
risk management practices are designed to preserve the independence and
integrity of the risk assessment process.
credit risk
credit risk represents the loss the firm would experience if an obligor
or counterparty could not meet its contractual obligations. the firm is
subject to credit risk in its lending (e.g., loans and lending-related
commitments) and in its derivatives and certain other trading activities.
the credit risk related to the issuers of the securities used in the
firms capital market activities is marked-to-market, measured and
managed through the firms market risk management process.
the credit risks of the consumer and commercial portfolios are markedly
different. broadly speaking, losses on consumer exposures are more
predictable, less volatile and less cyclical than losses on commercial
exposures. for the commercial portfolio, the actual loss volatility can
be much greater over the course of an economic cycle.
credit risk management practices
credit risk management begins with an assessment of the likelihood of
default and the risk of loss that could result from an obligor or
counterparty default. the firm seeks to assess all credit exposures,
whether on- or off-balance sheet. these exposures include loans,
derivative receivables and lending-related commitments (e.g., letters of
credit and undrawn commitments to extend credit). at both the business
unit and corporate levels, processes in place are intended to ensure that
credit risks are accurately assessed, properly approved, continually
monitored and actively managed.
to measure these risks, estimates are made of both expected and unexpected
losses for each segment of the portfolio using statistical techniques.
first, off-balance sheet exposures are converted to on-balance sheet loan
equivalent amounts, based on the amount expected to be drawn at the time
of default. then expected and unexpected losses are calculated. expected
losses are statistically-based estimates of credit losses over time,
anticipated as a result of counterparty default. expected losses are used
to set risk-adjusted credit loss provisions. however, expected credit
losses are not the sole indicators of risk. for commercial assets, if
losses were entirely predictable, the expected loss rate could be factored
into pricing and covered as a normal and recurring cost of doing business.
unexpected losses represent the potential volatility of actual losses
relative to the expected level of loss. unexpected losses are what create
risk and represent the primary focus of credit risk management.
the responsibility for credit risk management resides with two functions
that were integrated in early 2003: credit risk policy and global credit
management. both are now headed by the senior credit officer who, in turn,
reports to the vice chairman for finance, risk management and
administration.
credit risk policy formulates credit policies, limits, allowance adequacy
and guidelines. independently from the groups that approve and support the
firms credit activities, this group monitors and assesses risk profiles and
risk management processes at multiple levels  individual credits, industry
groups, product groups and entire business segments of the firm. credit risk
policy is also responsible for managing problem credits. credit risk policy
works jointly with market risk management to address country risk,
counterparty risk, risk measurement and capital allocation methodologies.
global credit management has three functions: credit risk management,
corporate banking and the credit portfolio group. the first two functions
participate in client coverage and are responsible for approving and
monitoring all credit exposures. experienced credit officers make decisions
to extend credit based on an evaluation of the counterpartys
creditworthiness and the type of credit arrangement. these officers consider
the current and projected financial condition of the counterparty. also
considered are the covenants, collateral and protection available should the
credit quality of the counterparty deteriorate. after credit is extended,
credit officers and industry analysts, in collaboration with senior business
managers, monitor the counterpartys credit quality. in addition to ongoing
review of counterparty financial data and documentation, the credit risk
management and corporate banking groups manage the formal client- and
industry-based portfolio review processes. senior credit officers regularly
review current and potential exposure and compliance with limits on both
individual counterparties and portfolios. the credit portfolio group manages
the firms credit exposures resulting from both traditional lending and
derivative trading activities.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
credit portfolio
jpmorgan chases managed credit-related assets (including $30.7billion of
securitized credit cards) totaled $330billion at december31, 2002, an
increase of 7% over year-end 2001. the growth reflects a 16% increase in
managed consumer loans, offset by a 13% decline in commercial loans, and a 17% increase in derivative
receivables. at december31, 2002, managed consumer loans represented 47% of
total managed credit-related assets, compared with 43% at december31, 2001.
the following table presents a summary of managed credit-related information
for the dates indicated:
nonperforming
past due 90 days and
average annual
as of or for the year ended
credit exposure
assets(f)
net charge-offs
over and accruing
net charge-off rate
december 31,
(in millions, except ratios)
commercial
loans
$
91,548
$
104,864
$
3,672
$
1,997
$
1,881
$
$
$
1.93
%
0.87
%
derivative receivables(a)
83,102
71,157
1,300
na
na
na
na
other receivables(b)
na
na
na
na
na
na
total commercial credit-related assets
174,758
176,021
4,069
3,297
1,881
1.93
0.87
lending-related commitments
238,120
247,711
na
na
(3
)
na
na
0.09
total commercial credit exposure
$
412,878
$
423,732
$
4,069
$
3,297
$
2,093
$
$
$
0.62
%
0.27
%
consumer
loans  reported
$
124,816
$
112,580
$
$
$
1,795
$
1,353
$
$
1.57
%
1.27
%
loans  securitized(c)
30,722
21,424
1,439
1,048
5.43
5.83
total managed consumer loans
$
155,538
$
134,004
$
$
$
3,234
$
2,401
$
1,103
$
2.30
%
1.92
%
total credit portfolio
managed loans
$
247,086
$
238,868
$
4,193
$
2,496
$
5,115
$
3,383
$
1,160
$
2.15
%
1.42
%
derivative receivables(a)
83,102
71,157
1,300
na
na
na
na
other receivables(b)
na
na
na
na
na
na
total managed credit-related assets
330,296
310,025
4,590
3,796
5,115
3,383
1,160
2.15
1.42
commercial lending-related commitments
238,120
247,711
na
na
(3
)
na
na
0.09
assets acquired in loan satisfactions
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
total credit portfolio
$
568,416
$
557,736
$
4,780
$
3,920
$
5,327
$
3,380
$
1,160
$
1.11
%
0.69
%
credit derivative hedges notional(d)
$
(33,767
)
$
(39,271
)
$
(66
)
$
(42
)
na
na
$
$
na
na
collateral held against derivatives(e)
(30,410
)
(17,536
)
na
na
na
na
(a)
credit exposure and nonperforming assets include amounts related to the
enron surety receivables and letter of credit, which were the subject of
litigation in 2001 and 2002. see page 50 for a further discussion.
(b)
other receivables at december31, 2002 represents the enron-related letter
of credit, which continues to be the subject of litigation and was classified
in other assets.
(c)
represents securitized credit cards. for a further discussion of credit
card securitizations, see page 23.
(d)
represents hedges of commercial credit exposure that do not qualify for
hedge accounting under sfas 133.
(e)
represents eligible collateral. excludes credit enhancements in the form of
letters of credit and surety receivables.
(f)
nonperforming assets exclude nonaccrual loans held for sale (hfs) of $43
million and $138million at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively. hfs loans
are carried at the lower of cost or market and declines in value are recorded
in other revenue.
na-not applicable.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
commercial portfolio
management of commercial credit risk begins with the individual client
selection and evaluation process. the firm monitors and evaluates industry risk
profiles globally. exposures in industries deemed to have increasing risk are
more closely managed, both individually and in the aggregate. the firms global
strategy, particularly in emerging markets, is to focus on large, leading firms
with cross-border financing needs.
concentration management continues to be key in managing commercial credit
risk. from the perspective of aggregate portfolio risk management,
concentration management is addressed partly by the firms established strategy
of loan origination for distribution, and partly by the purchase of credit
protection through credit derivatives and secondary market loan sales. the firm
manages concentrations by obligor, risk rating, industry, product and
geography. as a result of a particularly difficult credit environment in 2002,
the firm placed increased emphasis on the management and further reduction of
industry and single-name concentrations. the firm established an exposure and
capital threshold review process for single-name concentrations and enhanced
its procedures to reduce single-name and industry concentrations. the firm will
continue to refine these credit risk management processes in 2003.
the firms business strategy for its commercial portfolio remains one of
origination for distribution, primarily for large corporate obligors. the
majority of the firms wholesale loan originations in ib continue to be
distributed into the marketplace, with residual holds by the firm averaging
less than 10%. the commercial loan portfolio declined 13% in 2002, reflecting a
combination of continued weak loan demand and charge-offs, as well as the
firms ongoing goal of reducing commercial credit exposure. in addition, the
firms sva discipline discourages the retention of loan assets that do not
generate a positive return above the cost of risk-adjusted capital. sva remains
a critical discipline in making loans and commitments, particularly when
combined with other credit and capital management disciplines.
markets for traditional credit products have become more liquid, with increased
opportunities for risk management using credit derivatives and secondary market
loan sales. the firm will begin in 2003 to derive more of its assessment of
credit risk capital from these market-based parameters which will, in turn,
affect sva. see the discussion on capital allocation on page 57.
total commercial exposure (loans, derivatives and unfunded lending-related
commitments) was $413billion at december31, 2002, compared with $424billion
at december31, 2001. at year-end 2002, 80% of the firms commercial credit
exposure was considered investment-grade; only 1% of the total commercial
credit exposure was nonperforming. this compares with 77% investment-grade
exposure at year-end 2001; 0.8% of the total commercial credit exposure was
nonperforming at that date.
total commercial nonperforming assets were $4.1billion at december31, 2002
which included $337million related to enron. this represented an increase of
$772million from year-end 2001 and equaled 2% of the total commercial
credit-related assets. the increase in nonperforming assets in 2002 was largely
driven by loans in the telecommunications and related, cable and merchant
energy and related sectors. nonperforming assets related to enron declined by
$936million, primarily as a result of the settlement of the firms litigation
with the surety providers.
commercial loan net charge-offs in 2002 were $1.9billion, compared with $1.0
billion in 2001. charge-offs of commercial lending-related commitments were
$212million in 2002, compared with a net recovery of $3million in 2001. the
charge-off ratio for commercial loans was 1.93% in 2002 and 0.87% in 2001.
while the economic and associated credit environments are expected to remain
challenging in 2003, the firm does not anticipate commercial charge-offs in
2003 to reach 2002 levels.
below are summaries of the maturity and risk profiles of the commercial
portfolio as of december31, 2002. the ratings scale is based on the firms
internal risk ratings and is presented on an s&p-equivalent basis.
commercial exposure
maturity profile (a)
risk profile
investment-grade
noninvestment-grade
total % of
at december 31, 2002
aaa
a+
bbb+
bb+
ccc+
investment-
(in billions, except ratios)
<1 year
1-5 years
> 5 years
total
to aa-
to a-
to bbb-
to b-
& below
total
grade
loans
%
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
derivative receivables
lending-related commitments
total exposure (b)
%
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
credit derivative hedges notional
%
%
%
%
$
(9
)
$
(10
)
$
(10
)
$
(4
)
$
(1
)
$
(34
)
%
(a)
the maturity profile of loans and lending-related commitments is based upon
remaining contractual maturity. the maturity profile of derivative receivables
is based upon the estimated expected maturity profile net of the benefit of
collateral.
(b)
includes enron-related letter of credit, which is the subject of litigation
and was classified in other assets.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
commercial exposure  selected industry concentrations
the firm remains highly focused on diversifying its commercial exposure. the
following table sets forth certain information related to the firms commercial
credit exposure (loans, derivatives and lending-related commitments):
risk profile of credit exposure
noninvestment-grade
credit
as of or for the year ended december 31, 2002
credit
% of
investment-
criticized
criticized
net
derivative
(in millions, except ratios)
exposure(a)
total portfolio
grade
noncriticized
performing
nonperforming(b)
charge-offs(c)
hedges(d)
top 10 industries
commercial banking
$
44,494
10.8
%
%
$
2,214
$
$
$
$
(8,275
)
finance companies
24,194
5.9
(1,950
)
investment management and private banking
18,041
4.4
4,617
securities brokers, dealers, exchanges
17,913
4.3
1,528
(434
)
telecom and related industries
16,770
4.1
5,076
1,487
(1,319
)
investment and pension funds
14,164
3.4
2,603
state and municipal government
11,278
2.7
(671
)
central government
10,242
2.5
(2
)
(1,926
)
oil and gas exploration and production
8,816
2.1
1,520
(946
)
general merchants and retailers
8,553
2.1
2,720
(1,373
)
other selected industries
automotive
8,402
2.0
2,120
(2
)
(1,232
)
merchant energy and related industries
6,230
1.5
1,849
(830
)
cable
5,982
1.4
1,096
1,673
(367
)
airlines
2,955
0.7
(207
)
all other(e)
214,844
52.1
39,179
6,404
1,976
(14,237
)
total
$
412,878
100.0
%
%
$
64,981
$
12,509
$
4,069
$
2,093
$
(33,767
)
risk profile of credit exposure
noninvestment-grade
credit
as of or for the year ended december 31, 2001
credit
% of
investment-
criticized
criticized
net
derivative
(in millions, except ratios)
exposure(a)
total portfolio
grade
noncriticized
performing
nonperforming(b)
charge-offs(c)
hedges(d)
top 10 industries
commercial banking
$
36,007
8.5
%
%
$
3,470
$
$
$
(2
)
$
(7,396
)
finance companies
23,550
5.6
(1,959
)
investment management and private banking
18,948
4.5
3,065
securities brokers, dealers, exchanges
19,969
4.7
1,726
(1
)
(524
)
telecom and related industries
20,430
4.8
7,047
1,906
(1,640
)
investment and pension funds
17,219
4.1
2,139
(4
)
(290
)
state and municipal government
10,339
2.4
(1,051
)
central government
9,581
2.3
(1,702
)
oil and gas exploration and production
8,824
2.1
2,575
(866
)
general merchants and retailers
6,354
1.5
2,587
(1,123
)
other selected industries
automotive
9,353
2.2
1,800
(1,151
)
merchant energy and related industries
5,609
1.3
1,669
(743
)
cable
5,017
1.2
2,893
(229
)
airlines
4,096
1.0
1,103
(373
)
all other
228,436
53.8
52,559
6,848
2,810
(20,224
)
total
$
423,732
100.0
%
%
$
84,329
$
9,914
$
3,297
$
$
(39,271
)
(a)
credit exposure excludes risk participations and does not reflect the
benefit of credit derivative hedges.
(b)
nonperforming assets exclude nonaccrual hfs loans of $18million and $96
million at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively. hfs loans are carried at
the lower of cost or market and declines in value are recorded in other
revenue.
(c)
represents net charge-offs on loans and lending-related commitments. the
amounts in parentheses represent net recoveries.
(d)
represents notional
amounts only; these hedges do not qualify for hedge accounting under sfas 133.
(e)
criticized exposure includes $1.17billion of emerging-markets criticized
performing exposure attributable to country risk and not industry or
single-name risk. this exposure was included in noninvestment-grade
noncriticized for industry reporting.
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
selected industry discussion
financial institutions  this group of industries includes commercial
banking, finance companies and securities brokers, dealers and exchanges,
which are traditionally among the largest industry groups. the firm is a
market-leader in structuring derivatives for and lending to these sectors.
in addition, at december31, 2002, financial institutions represented 54%
of the firms derivatives counterparties in its trading transactions.
commercial exposure to this group of industries continues to be
predominantly high-investment-grade. of the approximately $30billion in
aggregate liquid collateral held by the firm against all its derivatives
contracts, approximately $18billion supports contracts with the
commercial banking industry.
telecom and related industries  in 2002, the telecommunications
industry worldwide was adversely affected by severe capital and liquidity
constraints, and the firm saw a concurrent deterioration in the risk
profile of its credit portfolio in this sector, particularly in the third
quarter. this resulted in exposures migrating to risk ratings deemed by
the firm to be criticized, and a higher level of nonperforming loans and
charge-offs. during the year, the firm reduced its exposure to this sector
by 18% as a result of charge-offs of $909million and by $2.75billion of
selective reductions in exposures. at year-end 2002, 56% of the firms
exposure to this sector was considered investment-grade; 5% of the total
exposure was nonperforming. this compares with 55% investment-grade
exposure at year-end 2001.
general merchants and retailers  the firms larger exposures in this
segment are to industry leaders. while exposure increased 35% in 2002, the
increase was primarily to investment-grade obligors, with 65% of the total
portfolio investment-grade as of year-end 2002.
automotive  the firm has historically viewed the automotive industry as
cyclical and capital-intensive. in 2001, automotive companies began to
experience cyclical pressure, exacerbated by the events of september11,
2001. however, in 2002, auto sales remained strong, and these companies
took the opportunity to access capital markets to supplement liquidity and
strengthen their balance sheets. while total exposure to this industry is
significant, a material portion of the exposure is to the largest
automotive companies and is 80% undrawn. this portfolio was 71%
investment-grade at december31, 2002.
merchant energy and related industries  the firm experienced an
acceleration in criticized loans in the merchant energy sector beginning
in the third quarter of 2002 and accelerating into the fourth quarter. the
firm may experience an increase in nonperforming loans in this sector in
2003. at december31, 2002, credit exposure in this sector was $6.2
billion (or approximately 1.5% of total commercial credit exposure), with
57% investment-grade.
cable  the cable industry, particularly in europe, was also adversely
affected by severe capital and liquidity constraints in 2002. as a result,
there was a concurrent deterioration in the risk profile of the firms
credit portfolio in this sector, evidenced by an increase in exposure
deemed criticized and a higher level of nonperforming loans and
charge-offs, which largely represented a migration within
noninvestment-grade exposures. at december31, 2002, 45% of the portfolio
was investment-grade.
airlines  this segment includes passenger airlines, airport
authorities, courier services and other support activities related to air
transportation. both prior to and particularly in the aftermath of
september11, 2001, the airline industry experienced performance and
financial deterioration. in response, the firm reduced, and increasingly
collateralized, its exposure to this sector. credit exposure to this
industry was reduced from $4.1billion to $3.0billion during 2002. at
december31, 2002, 70% of this portfolio was investment-grade.
all other  all other at december31, 2002 included $45billion of
credit exposure to holding and investment companies, which was 91%
investment-grade and comprised of exposures that are not highly
correlated. liquidity back-up facilities represented 35% of total credit
exposure to the sector. this group includes trusts and estates, as well as
special-purpose entities providing secured financing of accounts
receivable originated by companies in a diverse group of industries. the
remaining $170billion of credit exposure is well diversified across over
50 other industries, with none comprising more than 2% of exposure; 74% of
the $170billion of credit exposure was investment-grade at december31,
2002. nonperforming assets comprised 0.9% of total all other exposure at
december31, 2002.
commercial criticized exposure
trends(a):
(in billions)
12/31/01
3/31/02
6/30/02
9/30/02
12/31/02
emergingmarkets
$
$
$
0.1
$
1.2
$
1.2
merchantenergy
0.1
0.1
0.4
1.6
2.2
cable
0.1
0.3
1.3
2.1
2.2
telecom&related
2.1
2.7
2.4
3.2
2.3
all other
9.8
9.3
8.6
8.6
8.4
total
12.1
12.4
12.8
16.7
16.3
(a)enron-related surety receivables and a letter of credit were
excluded for all periods to present a normalized trend.
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
exposures deemed criticized generally represent a risk profile similar to a
rating of ccc+/caa1 or lower. of the total $16.6billion in criticized exposure
as of year-end 2002, representing 4% of total commercial credit exposure, $4.1
billion was non-performing. the telecom and related, cable and merchant energy
and related sectors represented, in the aggregate, $6.8billion, or 41%, of
total criticized exposure, but only 1.6% of total commercial credit exposure.
the balance of the criticized exposure represented exposures diversified across
a large number of customers, with limited industry concentration.
enron-related exposure
the firms exposure to enron and enron-related entities was reduced by $1.38
billion during 2002, from $2.06billion at december31, 2001 to $688million at
december31, 2002. in january 2003, the firm settled its surety-bond litigation
with 11 insurance companies for 60% of the principal amount of the bonds and
received a cash payment of $502million and unsecured claims valued at $75
million (or 13% of face value). in connection with the settlement, the firm
charged off an aggregate $395million relating to the remaining exposure on the
prepaid forward contracts and on a prepaid forward contract that is backed by a
letter of credit that is the subject of continuing litigation. the firm has
reclassified the remaining value of the derivative contracts covered by the
surety bonds and the $75million in unsecured claims as trading assets. in
addition to these write-downs and charge-offs, during 2002, $76million of
other enron-related exposure was charged-off or written-down and $402million
of enron-related assets were sold or matured, including $125million of
debtor-in-possession financing exposure which matured without being drawn.
at december31, 2002, the firms enron-related exposure was as follows:
enron-related exposure (a)
december 31, 2002 (in
millions)
secured
unsecured
total
trading assets
$
$
$
loans
other assets
lending-related commitments
total exposure
$
$
$
(a)
enron-related exposure at december31, 2002 takes into account the surety
settlement on january2, 2003.
of the $131million in lending-related commitments, $125million relates to
debtor-in-possession financing. the $108million in other assets relates to the
enron-related letter of credit that is the subject of litigation. trading
assets (both performing and nonperforming) are carried at fair value. secured
loans are performing and are reported on an amortized cost basis. all unsecured
amounts are nonperforming; nonperforming loans have been written down to
reflect managements estimate of current recoverable value, and nonperforming
other assets are being carried at their current estimated realizable value in
accordance with sfas 5.
derivative contracts
in the normal course of business, the firm utilizes derivative instruments to
meet the needs of customers, generate revenues through trading activities,
manage exposure to fluctuations in interest and currency rates and manage its
own credit risk. the firm uses the same credit risk management procedures to
assess and approve potential credit exposures when entering into derivative
transactions as those used for traditional lending.
the following table summarizes the aggregate notional amounts and derivative
receivables (i.e., the mark-to-market or fair value of the derivative contract
after taking into account the effects of legally enforceable master netting
agreements) at each of the dates indicated:
notional amounts and derivative receivables
notional
amounts (a)
derivative receivables (b)
december 31, (in billions)
interest rate contracts (c)
$
23,591
$
19,085
$
$
foreign exchange contracts (c)
1,505
1,636
equity
credit derivatives
commodity (d)
total notional and credit exposures
$
25,805
$
21,303
$
$
(a)
the notional amounts represent the gross sum of long and short third-party
notional derivative contracts.
(b)
represents the amount of derivative receivables on the balance sheet after
the impact of master netting agreements.
(c)
gold bullion notional amounts were
$41billion and $42billion at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively. the corresponding derivative receivables
(before the impact of master netting agreements) were
$2.6billion and $5.3billion at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively. the corresponding
derivative payables were $2.0billion and $5.1billion at december31, 2002 and
2001, respectively. at december31, 2002, the var related to the firms gold
trading position was $1.4million.
(d)
energy-related notional amounts, including written options, were $39
billion and $41billion at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively. the
corresponding derivative receivables (before the impact of master netting
agreements) were $2.8billion and $4.3billion at december31, 2002 and 2001,
respectively. the corresponding derivative payables were $1.9billion and $2.8
billion at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively. at
december31, 2002, the var
related to the firms energy-related trading positions was $1.4million.
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
the $26 trillion of notional principal of the firms derivative contracts
outstanding at december31, 2002, significantly exceeds the possible credit
losses that could arise from such transactions. for most derivative
transactions, the notional principal amount does not change hands; it is simply
used as a reference to calculate payments. in terms of current credit risk
exposure, the appropriate measure of risk is the mark-to-market (mtm) value
of the contract. the mtm exposure represents the cost to replace the contracts
at current market rates should the counterparty default. when jpmorgan chase
has more than one transaction outstanding with a counterparty, and a legally
enforceable master netting agreement exists with the counterparty, the net mtm
exposure, less collateral held, represents, in the firms view, the appropriate
measure of current credit risk with that counterparty as of the reporting date.
at december31, 2002, the mtm value of derivatives receivables (after taking
into account the effects of master netting agreements) was $83billion.
further, after taking into account $30billion of collateral held by the firm,
the net current credit exposure was $53billion.
while useful as a current view of credit exposure, the net mtm value of the
derivatives receivable does not capture the potential future variability of
that credit exposure. to capture the potential future variability of credit
exposure, the firm measures, on a client-by-client basis, both the worst-case,
or peak, future credit risk (at a 97.5% confidence level), as well as the
expected credit risk. however, the total potential future credit risk embedded
in the firms derivatives portfolio is not the simple sum of all peak or
expected client credit risks. this is because, at the portfolio level, credit
risk is reduced by the fact that when offsetting transactions are done with
separate counterparties, only one of the two trades can generate a credit loss
even if both counterparties were to default simultaneously. the firm refers to
this effect as market diversification.
the firm defines the market-diversified peak as the maximum loss (estimated
at the 97.5% confidence level) that would occur if all counterparties were to
default over a one-year time horizon without any recovery. the
market-diversified peak, after taking into account both collateral and netting,
was approximately $57billion at december31, 2002. since, generally, all
counterparties will not default at once nor all default when their exposures
are at peak levels, this is a conservative measure, in the firms view, of its
potential future derivatives credit risk.
the mtm value of the firms derivative receivables incorporates an adjustment to
reflect the credit quality of counterparties. this is called the credit
valuation adjustment (cva) and was $1.3billion as of december31, 2002,
compared with $1.2billion at december31, 2001. the cva is based on the
expected future exposure (incorporating netting and collateral) to a
counterparty, and on the counterpartys credit spread in the credit derivatives
market. the primary components of changes in cva are credit spreads, new deal
activity, deal unwinds and changes in the interest rate, equity, foreign
exchange or commodity environment. the cva increase in 2002 was primarily due
to derivative receivables, which increased as a result of a drop in u.s.
interest rates, increased interest rate volatility and widening of credit
spreads during the year.
the firm believes that dynamic risk management is essential to controlling the
credit risk in the derivatives portfolio. the firm hedges components of the cva
change by entering into credit derivative transactions as well as interest
rate, foreign exchange, equity and commodity derivatives transactions when
client deals are originated. these hedges are rebalanced as market conditions
dictate, driven primarily by changes in the counterparties credit quality. if
counterparty credit risk increases, the cva increases to reflect the increased
likelihood that the client will not perform. correspondingly, the required
market hedges to protect against subsequent credit-quality deterioration
increase. the net impact of the change in cva, plus the result of all forms of
related hedging activity, is accounted for in trading revenue and was not
material to the overall trading results of the firm for the year.
at december31, 2002, 52% of the firms counterparties in derivative
transactions were investment-grade financial institutions, most of which are
dealers in these products. the investment-grade portion of the derivative
receivables was 87% at december31, 2002. nonperforming derivative receivables
at december31, 2002, were $289million, compared with $1.3billion at december
31, 2001. this decrease of $1.0billion primarily related to the settlement of
the enron surety litigation.
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the table below summarizes the risk profile, as of december31, 2002, of the
firms balance sheet exposure to derivative contracts, net of cash and other
highly liquid collateral:
rating equivalent
exposure net
% of exposure
(in millions)
of
collateral (a)
net of collateral
aaa to aa-
$
25,560
%
a+ to a-
8,668
bbb+ to bbb-
9,467
bb+ to b-
7,440
ccc+ and below
1,557
total
$
52,692
%
(a)
total derivative receivables exposure and collateral held by the firm
against this exposure were $83billion and $30billion, respectively. the $30
billion excludes $2.7billion of collateral delivered by clients at the
initiation of transactions; this collateral secures exposure that could arise
in the existing portfolio of derivatives should the mtm of the clients
transactions move in the firms favor. the $30billion also excludes credit
enhancements in the form of letters of credit and surety receivables.
approximately two-thirds of the firms derivatives transactions have associated
collateral agreements, and collateralization as a primary form of credit risk
mitigation continues to increase. the firm held $30billion of collateral as of
december31, 2002, compared with $20billion as of december31, 2001. the firm
posted $19billion of collateral at year-end 2002, compared with $11billion at
the end of 2001. the increases were driven largely by the drop in u.s. interest
rates and by new collateral agreements. in addition, derivative and collateral
agreements include provisions that require both the firm and the counterparty,
upon specified downgrades in their respective credit ratings, to post
collateral for the benefit of the other party. the impact on required
collateral of a single-notch ratings downgrade to jpmorgan chase bank from its
current rating of aa- to a+ would have been an additional $1.2billion of
collateral as of december31, 2002. the impact of a six-notch ratings downgrade
to jpmorgan chase bank (from aa- to bbb-) would have been $3.7billion of
additional collateral from current levels as of december31, 2002. the amount
of additional collateral required upon downgrade moves in tandem with the
mark-to-market value of the derivatives portfolio and ranged from $2.6billion
to $3.8billion through 2002 (related to a six-notch downgrade), as the level
of u.s. interest rates changed. moreover, certain derivatives contracts also provide for termination of the
contract, generally upon jpmorgan chase bank being downgraded, at the
then-existing mark-to-market value of the derivative receivables.
use of credit derivatives
the following table presents the notional amounts of credit derivatives
protection bought and sold at december31, 2002:
credit derivatives activity
portfolio management
dealer/client
notional amount
notional amount
protection
protection
protection
protection
(in millions)
bought
sold
bought
sold
total
$
34,262
(a)
$
$
158,794
$
172,494
$
366,045
(a)
includes $10.1billion of portfolio credit derivatives, of which $8billion
matures by june30, 2003.
jpmorgan chase has limited counterparty exposure as a result of credit
derivatives transactions. of the $83billion of total derivative receivables at
december31, 2002, approximately $5.5billion, or 7%, was associated with
credit derivatives, before the benefit of collateral. the use of derivatives to
manage exposures does not reduce the reported level of assets on the balance
sheet or the level of reported off-balance sheet commitments.
portfolio management activity
jpmorgan chases commercial credit portfolio is composed of credit exposures to
clients arising from both lending and derivatives activities. in managing this
portfolio, single-name and portfolio credit derivatives are purchased by the
credit portfolio group to hedge these exposures. as of december31, 2002, the
notional outstanding of protection purchased via single-name and portfolio
credit derivatives was $24billion and $10billion, respectively. the firm also
diversifies its exposures by providing (i.e., selling) small amounts of credit
protection, which increases exposure to industries or clients where the firm
has little or no client-related exposure. this activity is not material to the
firms overall credit exposure, and credit protection sold totaled less than
$500million in notional exposure at december31, 2002.
single-name and portfolio credit derivatives
notional amount of
december 31, 2002 (in millions)
protection bought
loans and lending-related commitments
$
25,222
derivative receivables
9,040
total
$
34,262
jpmorgan chases utilization of credit derivatives for its portfolio management
activities related to loans and lending-related commitments does not qualify
for hedge accounting under sfas 133. these derivatives are marked-to-market in
trading revenue, whereas the loans and lending-related commitments being hedged
are accounted for on an accrual basis in net interest income. this asymmetry in
accounting treatment between loans and lending-related commitments and the
derivatives utilized
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
in the portfolio management activities causes earnings volatility that is not
representative of the true changes in value of the firms overall credit
exposures. the mark-to-market treatment of both the firms derivatives hedges
(short credit positions) and derivatives counterparty exposure (long credit
positions) provide some natural offset of each other. included in trading
revenue are gains of $127million in 2002 related to credit derivatives that
were used to hedge the firms credit exposure. of the $127million,
approximately $94million was associated with credit derivatives used to hedge
accrual lending activities. trading revenues incorporate both the cost of hedge
premiums and changes in value due to spread movements and credit events.
dealer/client activity
jpmorgan chases dealer activity in credit derivatives is client-driven. the
business acts as a market maker in single-name credit derivatives and also
structures more complex transactions for clients investment or risk management
purposes. the credit derivatives trading function operates within the same
framework as other market-making desks. risk limits are established and closely
monitored.
as of december31, 2002, the total notional amounts of protection purchased and
sold by the dealer business were $159billion and $172billion, respectively.
the mismatch between these notional amounts is attributable to the firm selling
protection on large, diversified, predominantly investment-grade portfolios
(including the most senior tranches), and then hedging these positions by
buying protection on the more subordinated tranches of the same portfolios. in
addition, the firm may use securities to hedge certain derivative
positions. consequently, while there is a mismatch in notional amounts of credit
derivatives, the risk positions are largely matched. the amount of credit risk
contributed by the firms credit derivatives dealer activity is immaterial in
the context of jpmorgan chases overall credit exposures.
country exposure
the firm has a comprehensive process for measuring and managing its country
exposures and risk. exposures to a country include all credit-related lending,
trading and investment activities, whether cross-border or locally funded.
the table below presents jpmorgan chases exposure to selected countries. this
disclosure is based on managements view of country exposure. exposure amounts
are adjusted for credit enhancements (e.g., guarantees and letters of credit)
provided by third parties located outside the country if the enhancements fully
cover the country risk, as well as the commercial risk. total exposure includes
exposure to both government and private-sector entities in a country.
while exposure to mexico fluctuates as a result of trading activities, the
decrease over the prior year was primarily due to loan maturities and
reductions in counterparty exposure on derivatives. the decrease in exposure to
brazil over the prior year-end was due to reductions in loans and derivative
exposures, as well as reductions in local government trading positions.
reductions in argentina were due to a combination of maturities and
write-downs. exposure to venezuela increased modestly as a result of trading
positions.
selected country exposure
at december 31, 2002
at december 31,
cross-border
total
total
total
(in billions)
lending (a)
trading (b)
other (c)
total
local (d)
exposure
exposure
mexico
$
1.0
$
0.6
$
0.2
$
1.8
$
0.4
$
2.2
$
2.6
brazil
0.5
0.3
1.2
2.0
0.1
2.1
3.3
argentina (e)
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.4
0.6
venezuela
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.4
0.3
japan
2.5
2.3
0.7
5.5
3.9
9.4
10.7
south korea
0.9
0.6
0.3
1.8
0.9
2.7
3.1
hong kong
0.7
0.3
1.2
2.2
2.2
2.1
indonesia
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.4
0.6
south africa
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.6
0.6
0.7
saudi arabia
0.6
0.2
0.8
0.8
0.7
(a)
lending includes loans and accrued interest receivable, interest-bearing
deposits with banks, acceptances, other monetary assets, issued letters of
credit, and undrawn commitments to extend credit.
(b)
trading includes (1)
issuer exposure on cross-border debt and equity instruments, held in both
trading and investment accounts, adjusted for the impact of issuer hedges,
including credit derivatives; and (2)counterparty exposure on derivative and
foreign exchange contracts as well as security financing trades (resale
agreements and securities borrowed).
(c)
other represents mainly local exposure funded cross-border.
(d)
local exposure is defined as exposure to a country denominated in local
currency, booked and funded locally.
(e)
trading exposure at december31,2002 to argentina is net of credit
protection provided by third-party insurers in the form of surety bonds valued
at $157million against performing derivative trades.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
consumer portfolio
consumer credit risk management uses sophisticated portfolio modeling, credit
scoring and decision-support tools to project credit risks and establish
underwriting standards. risk parameters are established in the early stages of
product development, and the cost of credit risk is an integral part of product
pricing and evaluating profit dynamics. consumer portfolios are monitored to
identify deviations from expected performance and shifts in patterns of
consumer behavior.
jpmorgan chases consumer portfolio consists primarily of mortgages, credit
cards and auto financings. this portfolio is predominantly u.s.-based and
continues to be geographically well-diversified. the firms managed consumer
portfolio totaled $156billion at december31, 2002, an increase of $22
billion, or 16%, from 2001. the pie graph to the right provides a summary of
the consumer portfolio by loan type at year-end 2002 and each loan types
charge-off rate. the firms largest component, residential mortgage loans,
comprised 41% of the total consumer portfolio and is primarily secured by first
mortgages.
charge-off rate:
consumer
managed loan portfolio:
residential mortgage
%
0.10
%
0.09
%
credit card managed
%
5.87
%
5.45
%
auto
%
0.57
%
0.59
%
other consumer
%
2.41
%
2.17
%
the following table presents managed consumer credit-related information for
the dates indicated:
credit-related
nonperforming
past due 90 days and
average annual
as of or for the year ended
loans
assets (c)
net charge-offs
over and accruing
net charge-off rate
december 31,
(in millions, except ratios)
consumer:
u.s. consumer:
14 family residential mortgages-
first liens
$
49,357
$
47,786
$
$
$
$
$
$
0.11
%
0.09
%
home equity
14,643
11,644
0.05
0.07
14 family residential mortgages
64,000
59,430
0.10
0.09
credit card  reported
19,677
19,387
1,389
6.42
5.09
credit card securitizations (a)
30,722
21,424
1,439
1,048
5.43
5.83
credit card  managed
50,399
40,811
2,828
2,038
1,081
5.87
5.45
auto financings
33,615
25,667
0.57
0.59
other consumer (b)
7,524
8,096
2.41
2.17
total managed consumer loans
$
155,538
$
134,004
$
$
$
3,234
$
2,401
$
1,103
$
2.30
%
1.92
%
(a)
represents the portion of jpmorgan chases credit card receivables that
have been securitized.
(b)
consists of installment loans (direct and indirect types of consumer
finance), student loans, unsecured revolving lines of credit and non-u.s.
consumer loans.
(c)
nonperforming assets exclude consumer nonaccrual loans hfs of $25million
and $42million at december31, 2002 and 2001,
respectively. hfs loans are carried
at the lower of cost or market, and declines in value are recorded in other
revenue.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual report
loans for 14 family residential mortgages increased 8% during 2002 on
increased originations. while net charge-offs for 2002 increased $6million, or
12%, over the prior year, the 2002 net charge-off rate remained low at 0.10%,
reflecting the continued strong credit quality of the portfolio. at december
31, 2002, the firm had $1.8billion of subprime residential mortgage loans, of
which $1.3billion were held for sale.
the firm analyzes its credit card portfolio on a managed basis, which
includes credit card receivables on the balance sheet and those that have been
securitized. managed credit card receivables increased by $9.6billion, or 23%
during 2002. approximately $6.9billion of this growth arose from the
acquisition of the providian master trust in february 2002. the managed net
charge-off ratio of 5.87% was 42 basis points higher than in 2001. the increase
in the net charge-off rate was a result of higher consumer bankruptcy levels as
well as higher contractual losses (i.e., losses on accounts not bankrupt), due,
in large part, to the credit characteristics of the providian portfolio; these
losses were therefore anticipated at the time of the portfolio acquisition.
auto finance receivables grew by 31% to approximately $34billion, while the
net charge-off rate improved slightly from 0.59% to 0.57% in 2002.
in the consumer sector, the firm currently anticipates higher charge-offs in
2003 resulting from increases in loans outstanding; charge-off rates are
anticipated to be similar to those experienced in 2002.
u.s. managed consumer loans by region(a):
southwest
4%
california
17%
northeast
17%
new york
16%
midwest
14%
texas
8%
southeast
17%
west
7%
(a)based on u.s. residential mortgage, managed credit card and auto
financing loans.
consumer loans by geographic region (a)
residential
managed credit
auto
mortgage loans
card loans
financings
december 31, (in millions)
new york city
$
12,026
$
6,638
$
3,007
$
2,431
$
2,801
$
2,244
new york (excluding new york city)
2,452
4,976
3,002
2,426
remaining northeast
10,053
8,954
8,817
7,143
7,206
5,651
total northeast
24,531
20,568
14,826
12,000
10,943
8,763
southeast
9,531
8,164
9,589
7,800
5,467
4,463
midwest
4,834
4,060
9,654
7,901
5,839
3,668
texas
3,978
3,566
4,336
3,434
3,877
3,495
southwest (excluding texas)
1,661
1,428
2,399
1,952
1,181
california
14,501
16,820
6,229
5,065
4,748
3,370
west (excluding california)
4,964
4,824
3,366
2,659
1,560
non-u.s.
total
$
64,012
$
59,936
$
50,399
$
40,818
$
33,615
$
25,705
(a)
this table excludes other consumer loans of $7.51billion and $7.55billion
at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
allowance for credit losses
jpmorgan chases allowance for credit losses is intended to cover probable
credit losses, including those in which the asset is not specifically
identified or the size of the loss has not been fully determined. at least
quarterly, the firms risk management committee reviews the allowance for
credit losses relative to the risk profile of the firms credit portfolio and
current economic conditions. the allowance is adjusted based on that review if,
in managements judgment, changes are warranted. the allowance includes
specific and expected loss components and a residual component. for further
discussion of the components of the allowance for credit losses, see critical
accounting estimates used by the firm on pages 6566 and note 10 on page 82.
at december31, 2002, management deemed the allowance for credit losses to be
adequate to absorb losses that currently may exist but are not yet
identifiable.
loans
the commercial specific loss component of the allowance was $1.60billion at
december31, 2002, an increase of $547million, or 52%, from year-end 2001. the
increase was primarily attributable to the deterioration in commercial loans
related to the telecommunications and related industries and cable sectors,
which led to an increase in criticized and nonperforming loans.
the commercial expected loss component of the allowance was $613million at
december31, 2002, a decrease of $55million, or 8%, from year-end 2001. the
decrease reflected a reduction in the amount, and an improvement in the average
quality, of the noncriticized portion of the loan portfolio.
the consumer expected loss component of the allowance was $2.36billion at
december31, 2002, an increase of $255million, or 12%, from year-end 2001. the
increase was primarily attributable to the acquisition of the providian
portfolio by cardmember services. this increase was partially offset by a
reduction in the amount of retained credit card loans (excluding those in the
providian portfolio) and a reduction in expected loss rates in the auto finance
portfolio as a result of improved delinquency rates.
the residual component of the allowance was $774million at december31, 2002,
an increase of $79million, or 11%, from year-end 2001. management views the
residual component as necessary to address uncertainties at december31, 2002,
primarily in the commercial portfolio. at december31, 2002, the residual
component represented approximately 14% of the total allowance for loan losses,
within the firms target range of between 10% and 20%.
summary of changes in the allowance
(in millions)
commercial
consumer
residual
total
commercial
consumer
residual
total
loans:
beginning balance at january 1
$
1,724
$
2,105
$
$
4,524
$
1,521
$
1,444
$
$
3,665
net charge-offs
(1,881
)
(1,795
)
(3,676
)
(982
)
(1,353
)
(2,335
)
provision for loan losses
2,371
1,589
4,039
1,176
2,014
(5
)
3,185
other
ending balance at december 31
$
2,216
(a)
$
2,360
$
$
5,350
$
1,724
(a)
$
2,105
$
$
4,524
lending-related commitments:
beginning balance at january 1
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
net charge-offs
(212
)
(212
)
provision for lending-related commitments
(17
)
(26
)
(3
)
other
(1
)
(1
)
ending balance at december 31
$
(b)
$
$
$
$
(b)
$
$
$
(a)
includes $1.60billion and $613million of commercial specific and
commercial expected loss components, respectively, at december31, 2002.
includes $1.06billion and $668million of commercial specific and commercial
expected loss components, respectively, at december31, 2001.
(b)
includes $237million and $87million of commercial specific and commercial
expected loss components, respectively, at december31, 2002. includes $143
million and $83million of commercial specific and commercial expected loss
components, respectively, at december31, 2001.
credit costs
for the year ended december 31
(in millions)
commercial
consumer
residual
total
commercial
consumer
residual
total
provision for loan losses
$
2,371
$
1,589
$
$
4,039
$
1,176
$
2,014
$
(5
)
$
3,185
provision for lending-related commitments
(17
)
(26
)
(3
)
securitized credit losses
1,439
1,439
1,048
1,048
total managed credit costs
$
2,680
$
3,028
$
$
5,770
$
1,150
$
3,062
$
$
4,230
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
lending-related commitments
to provide for the risk of loss inherent in the credit-extension process,
management also computes specific and expected loss components as well as a
residual component for lending-related commitments. this is computed using a
methodology similar to that used for the loan portfolio, modified for expected
maturities and probabilities of drawdown. the allowance increased due to
deterioration in the criticized portion of the firms lending-related
commitments. in 2002, the firm charged-off $212million of a lending-related
commitment to one obligor in the telecommunications and related industry
segment.
capital allocation for credit risk
unexpected credit losses drive the allocation of credit risk capital by
portfolio segment. in the commercial portfolio, capital allocations are
differentiated by risk rating, loss severity, maturity and correlations. within
the consumer businesses, capital allocations are differentiated by product and
by product segment.
for the commercial portfolio, the firm in 2003 will begin aligning its
assessment of credit risk capital to correspond more closely to market
conditions, both at the time of the credit extension and on an ongoing basis.
this is intended to facilitate risk management, by taking advantage of the
growing market in credit derivatives and secondary market loan sales, and to
encourage earlier action in the event of market deterioration. in determining
the amount of credit risk capital that should be associated with credit
exposures, the firm will emphasize current, market-based estimates of default
likelihood and credit deterioration implied from credit spreads and equity
prices, rather than historical averages. concurrently, the firm will assess the
valuation impact of credit deterioration as well as anticipated losses
associated with default.
depending on market conditions, the assessment of credit risk capital is
expected to vary with changes in credit spreads in the market. the new
methodology is expected to increase the amount of credit risk capital allocated
to the commercial portfolio. this expected increase in credit risk capital will
be partially offset by methodology changes to operating risk capital (see the
discussion on capital allocation for operational and business risk on page 64).
the firm will also continue to refine in 2003 its processes for establishing
credit exposure limits for industry and single-name concentrations, including
investment-grade obligors.
for the consumer portfolio, consumer products are placed into categories with
homogenous credit characteristics, from which default rates and charge-offs can
be estimated. the credit risk capital to be allocated is based on the
unexpected loss inherent in those segments.
j.p. morgan chase& co./2002 annual
report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
market risk management
market risk represents the potential loss in value of portfolios and financial
instruments caused by movements in market variables, such as interest and
foreign-exchange rates, credit spreads, and equity and commodity prices.
jpmorgan chase employs comprehensive, rigorous processes intended to measure,
monitor, and control market risk.
risk management processes
market risk management is an independent corporate governance function that
identifies, measures, monitors and controls market risk. it seeks to facilitate
efficient risk/return decisions and to reduce volatility in operating
performance by making the firms market risk profile transparent to senior
management, the board of directors and regulators.
market risk management reports to the vice chairman for finance, risk
management, and administration. within the group, individual coverage teams are
assigned to particular businesses and have expertise in the types of risk
specific to those businesses. each team is responsible for measuring,
monitoring, and controlling market risk for its business.
in addition to the coverage teams, two groups are managed under a joint mandate
with credit risk policy. one group is responsible for country risk and
counterparty risk. the second group develops the methodologies for measuring
risk and allocating market and credit risk capital throughout the firm.
finally, the policy reporting and analysis group within market risk management
is responsible for developing the policies that control the market risk
management processes and for aggregating, interpreting, and distributing market
risk-related information throughout the firm.
there are other groups reporting to the vice chairman with some responsibility
for managing market risk. for example, within the finance area, the valuation
control group is responsible for ensuring the accuracy of the valuations of all
positions taken within ib.
management of market risk is not, however, confined to a central organization.
business units are expected to maintain strong risk discipline at all levels.
trading businesses, for example, have functions that act independently from
trading personnel and are responsible for verifying risk exposures taken within
their businesses. in addition, businesses are expected to report exposures
which may be unusually large or may not fit existing risk measurement
methodologies.
risk measurement
because no single measure can reflect all aspects of market risk, the firm uses
several measures, both statistical and nonstatistical, including:
statistical risk measures
value-at-risk (var)
risk identification for large exposures (rifle)
nonstatistical risk measures
economic value stress tests
net interest income stress tests
other measures of position size and sensitivity to market moves
value-at-risk
jpmorgan chases statistical risk measure, var, gauges the dollar amount of
potential loss from adverse market moves in an ordinary market environment and
provides a consistent cross-business measure of risk profiles and levels of
risk diversification. var is used to compare risks across businesses, to
monitor limits and to allocate economic capital. in a normal trading
environment, var provides risk transparency to senior management, business
heads, regulators and investors.
each business day, the firm undertakes a comprehensive var calculation that
includes its trading, investment, and asset/liability (a/l) management
activities. jpmorgan chases var calculation is highly granular, comprising
more than 500,000 positions and 200,000 pricing series (e.g., securities
prices, interest rates, foreign-exchange rates). for a large portion of its
exposure, the firm has implemented full-revaluation var, which, management
believes, generates more accurate results.
to calculate var, the firm uses historical simulation, which measures risk
across instruments and portfolios in a consistent, comparable way. this
approach assumes that historical changes in market values are representative of
future changes. the simulation is based on data for the previous 12months.
key terms:
var: worst-case loss expected within the confidence level; while larger
losses are possible, they have a correspondingly low probability of
actually occurring
full-revaluation var: method that prices each financial instrument
separately, based on the actual pricing models used by the lines of
business; compared with sensitivity-based var, which only approximates the
impact of market moves on financial instrument prices
back-testing: validating a model by comparing its predictions with actual
results
confidence level: the probability that actual losses will not exceed
estimated var; the greater the confidence level, the higher the var
j.p. morgan chase& co./2002 annual report
all statistical models involve a degree of uncertainty, depending on the
assumptions they employ. the firm prefers historical simulation because it
involves fewer assumptions about the distribution of portfolio losses than
parameter-based methodologies. in addition, the firm regularly assesses the
quality of the market data, since their accuracy is critical to computing var.
nevertheless, to the extent that var is largely based on historical market
data, it may not accurately reflect future risk during environments in which
market volatility is changing. in addition, the var measure on any particular
day is not indicative of future risk levels, since positions and market
conditions may both change over time.
aggregate portfolio
for the year 2002
for the year 2001
average
minimum
maximum
at
average
minimum
maximum
at
(in millions)
var
var
var
december 31
var
var
var
december 31
trading portfolio:
interest rate
$
67.7
$
50.5
$
97.9
$
64.2
$
51.1
$
26.1
$
97.1
$
85.3
foreign exchange
11.6
4.4
21.2
18.4
7.4
3.9
16.9
8.7
equities
14.4
5.4
32.7
8.4
21.6
8.9
36.9
10.7
commodities
3.6
1.6
13.3
1.9
5.2
2.5
13.9
13.7
fund investment
3.2
2.5
3.6
3.2
3.1
2.5
4.2
3.5
less: portfolio diversification
(28.9
)
nm
nm
(32.3
)
(21.0
)
nm
nm
(28.6
)
total trading var
71.6
56.9
99.3
63.8
67.4
48.1
103.8
93.3
investment portfolio and
a/l activities(a)
97.1
68.3
139.0
107.5
107.2
79.8
143.9
130.7
less: portfolio diversification
(48.4
)
nm
nm
(60.0
)
(45.4
)
nm
nm
(84.2
)
total var(b)
$
120.3
$
87.6
$
160.2
$
111.3
$
129.2
$
98.2
$
174.0
$
139.8
(a)
substantially all of the risk is interest rate-related.
(b)
amounts exclude var related to the
firms private equity business. for a
discussion of private equity risk management, see page 65.
nm-
because the minimum and maximum may occur on different days for different
risk components, it is not meaningful to compute a portfolio diversification
effect. in addition, jpmorgan chases average and period-end
vars are less than
the sum of the vars of its market risk components due to risk offsets resulting
from portfolio diversification.
the firm calculated the var numbers reported above using a one-day time horizon
and a 99% confidence level. this means the firm would expect to incur losses
greater than predicted by var estimates only once in every 100 trading days, or
about 2.5 times a year. in 2002, there were no days on which actual firm-wide
market risk-related losses exceeded corporate var, a result which does not
differ significantly from the 99% confidence level.
although no single risk statistic can reflect all aspects of market risk, the
table above provides a meaningful overview of the firms market risk exposure
arising from trading activities and the investment and a/l portfolios. vars for
the investment portfolio and a/l activities measure the amount of potential
change in their economic value; however, they are not measures of reported
revenues since those activities are not marked-to-market through earnings.
the daily average trading var for the 12months of 2002 was $71.6million. the
largest contributor was interest rate risk, which includes credit spread risk;
before portfolio diversification, interest rate risk accounted for roughly
two-thirds of the average var. the diversification effect, which averaged
$(28.9) million in 2002, reflects the fact that the largest losses for
different positions and risks do not typically occur at the same time. the risk
of a portfolio of positions is therefore usually less than the sum of the risks
of the positions themselves. the degree of diversification is determined both
by the extent to which different market variables tend to move together, and by
the extent to which different businesses have similar positions.
the reduction in trading var between year-end 2002 and 2001 was driven
primarily by declines in market volatilities, particularly in interest rates
and energy prices. in general, over the course of a year, var exposures can
vary significantly as trading positions change and market volatility
fluctuates.
the histogram on the following page illustrates the firms daily market
risk-related revenue, defined as the daily change in value of the
mark-to-market trading portfolios plus any trading-related net interest income,
brokerage commissions, underwriting fees or other revenue. the chart shows that
the firm posted positive daily market risk-related revenue for 226 out of 258
days in 2002, with 63days exceeding $50million. losses were sustained on 32
of the 258days; 17 of those days were in the third quarter. poor overall
trading results in that quarter accounted for the losses during those 17days.
no daily trading loss during the year was in excess of $64million.
j.p. morgan chase& co./2002 annual
report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the average daily market risk-related revenue during 2002 was $31.2million.
the weakest performance occurred during the third quarter, when it averaged
$18.0million. this lower revenue was not due to generally increased risk taken
during the quarter, but rather reflected the outcome of specific positioning
decisions. performance improved during the fourth quarter, as average daily
market risk-related revenue increased to $33.6million, while the average var
remained slightly below the average for all of 2002. thus, the improvement in
market risk-related revenues during the fourth quarter was not accompanied by
an overall increase in the level of risk taken.
to evaluate the soundness of its var model, the firm conducts daily
back-testing of var against actual financial results, based on daily market
risk-related revenue. the firms definition of market risk-related revenue is
consistent with the federal reserve boards implementation of the basle
committees market risk capital rules. the federal reserve boards guidelines
state that such revenue typically includes fee income and commissions
associated with trading activities, in addition to realized and unrealized
gains and losses on portfolio positions. the inset examines the 32days on
which jpmorgan chase posted trading losses and depicts the amount by which var
was greater than the actual loss on each day. no losses exceeded var on any of
these days, a performance statistically consistent with the firms 99%
confidence level.
stress testing
while var reflects the risk of loss due to unlikely events in normal markets,
stress testing captures the firms exposure to unlikely but plausible events in
abnormal markets. stress testing is equally important as var in measuring and
controlling risk. stress testing enhances the understanding of the firms risk
profile and loss potential and is used for limits monitoring, cross-business
risk measurement and economic capital allocation.
the firm stress tests its portfolios at least once a month, at both the
corporate and business segment levels, using multiple scenarios. scenarios are
continually reviewed and updated to reflect changes in the firms risk profile
and economic events. stress results, trends and explanations are provided each
month to the firms senior management to help them better measure and manage
risks to understand event risk-sensitive positions.
applying economic-value stress tests to the trading and investment portfolios
and a/l activities helps the firm understand how the economic value of its
balance sheet (not the amounts reported under gaap) would change under certain
scenarios.
j.p. morgan chase& co./2002 annual report
the following table represents the potential economic value stress-test loss
(pre-tax) in jpmorgan chases trading portfolio predicted by jpmorgan chases
stress-test scenarios:
largest monthly stress-test loss  pre-tax
for the year 2002
at
december 5,
(in millions)
average
minimum
maximum
stress-test loss  pre-tax
$
(422
)
$
(136
)
$
(727
)
$
(243
)
the firms stress-test methodology assumes that, during an actual stress event,
no action would be taken to change the risk profile of portfolios. this
captures the decreased liquidity that often occurs with abnormal markets and
results, in the firms view, in a conservative stress-test result.
economic-value stress tests are performed at varying dates each month; the
stress results at december5, 2002, were mostly driven by exposures sensitive
to a stress scenario where credit spreads widen significantly and, at the same
time, equity prices decline and interest rates fall in the major currencies.
var results cannot be directly correlated to stress-test loss results for three
reasons. first, stress-test losses are calculated at varying dates each month,
while var is performed daily and reported for the period-end date. second, var
and stress tests are two distinct risk measurements yielding very different
loss potentials. thus, although the same trading portfolios are used for both
tests, var is based on a distribution of one-day historical losses measured
over the most recent one year; in contrast, stress testing subjects the
portfolio to more extreme, larger moves over a longer time horizon (e.g., 2-3
weeks). third, as var and stress tests are distinct risk measurements, the
impact of portfolio diversification can vary greatly. for var, markets can
change in patterns over a one-year time horizon, moving from highly correlated
to less so; in stress testing, the focus is on a single event and the
associated correlations in an extreme market situation. as a result, while var
over a given time horizon can be lowered by a diversification benefit in the
portfolio, this benefit would not necessarily manifest itself in stress-test
scenarios, which assume large coherent moves across all markets.
the firm conducts both economic-value and nii stress tests on its investment
portfolios and a/l activities, which are not accounted for on a trading basis.
economic-value stress tests measure the potential change in the value of these
portfolios under the same scenarios used to evaluate the trading portfolios.
the largest potential stress-test loss of these portfolios as of december5,
2002, is under a scenario that assumes a sharp widening in credit spreads and
decreases in interest rates. if the wholesale loan portfolio is excluded, the
largest potential stress-test loss is associated with a scenario that assumes a
smaller widening in credit spreads but also assumes significant declines in
equity prices and increases in market volatilities. at present, the
economic-value stress tests do not include consumer loans, the value of which
is more difficult to relate to external market variables; this will be the
subject of continued research.
the more conventional nii stress test measures the potential change in the
firms nii over the next year. these stress tests highlight exposures to
various interest rate-sensitive factors, such as rates (e.g., the prime-lending
rate), pricing strategies on deposits and changes in product mix. nii stress
tests also take into account forecasted balance sheet changes, such as asset
sales and securitizations, as well as prepayment and reinvestment behavior.
at year-end 2002, jpmorgan chases largest potential nii stress loss was
estimated at $277million, primarily the result of potential compression in
deposit spreads associated with further rate declines from the current low-rate
environment.
other statistical and nonstatistical risk measures
in addition to var, jpmorgan chase employs the risk identification for large
exposures (rifle) methodology as another statistical risk measure. the firm
requires that all market risk-taking businesses self assess their risks to
unusual and specific events. individuals who manage risk positions,
particularly complex positions, identify potential worst-case losses that
could arise from an unusual or specific event, such as a potential tax change,
and estimate the probabilities of such losses. through the firms rifle system,
this information is then directed to the appropriate level of management,
thereby permitting the firm to identify further earnings vulnerabilities not
adequately covered by var and stress testing.
nonstatistical risk measures other than stress testing include net open
positions, basis point values, option sensitivities, position concentrations
and position turnover. these measures provide additional information on an
exposures size and the direction in which it is moving. nonstatistical
measures are used for limit monitoring, one-off approvals and tactical control.
capital allocation for market risk
the firm allocates market risk capital guided by the principle that capital
should reflect the extent to which risks are present in businesses. daily var,
monthly stress results and other factors determine appropriate capital charges
for major business lines. the var measure captures a large number of one-day
price moves, while stress tests capture a smaller number of very large price
moves. the firm allocates market risk capital to each division according to a
formula that weights that divisions var and stress-test exposures.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
risk monitoring and control
limits
the firm controls market risk primarily through a series of limits. the sizes
of limits reflect the firms risk appetite after extensive analyses of the
market environment and business strategy. the analyses examine factors such as
market volatility, product liquidity, business track record, and management
experience and depth.
the firm maintains different levels of limits. corporate-level limits encompass
var calculations and stress-test loss advisories. similarly, business segment
levels include limits on var calculations, nonstatistical measurements, and p&l
loss advisories. businesses are responsible for adhering to established limits,
against which exposures are monitored and reported daily. exceeded limits are
reported immediately to senior management, and the affected business unit must
take appropriate action to reduce trading positions. if the business cannot do
this within an acceptable timeframe, senior management is consulted on the
appropriate action.
market risk management regularly reviews and updates risk limits, and the
firms risk management committee reviews and approves the risk limits at least
twice a year. market risk management further controls the firms exposure by
specifically designating approved financial instruments for each business unit.
qualitative risk assessment
the firms market risk management group also performs periodic reviews of both
businesses and products with exposure to market risk, in order to assess the
ability of the businesses to control market risk. the business managements
strategy, market conditions, product details and effectiveness of risk controls
are reviewed. specific recommendations for improvements are made to management.
model review
many of the firms financial instruments cannot be valued based on quoted
market prices, but are instead valued using pricing models. such models are
used for management of risk positions, such as reporting risk against limits,
as well as for valuation. the firm reviews the models it uses to assess model
appropriateness and consistency across businesses. the model reviews consider a
number of issues: appropriateness of the model, assessing the extent to which
it accurately reflects the characteristics of the transaction and captures its
significant risks; independence and reliability of data sources;
appropriateness and adequacy of numerical algorithms; and sensitivity to input
parameters or other assumptions which cannot be priced from the market.
reviews are conducted for new or changed models, as well as previously accepted
models. re-reviews assess whether there have been any material changes to the
accepted models; whether there have been any changes in the product or market
that may impact the validity of the model; and whether there have been new
theoretical or competitive developments that may require a reassessment of the
models adequacy. for a summary of valuations based on models, see critical
accounting estimates used by the firm on pages 65-67.
policies and procedures
jpmorgan chase maintains policies and procedures surrounding market risk
management practices. the goal is to specify a clear set of objectives,
responsibilities and procedures throughout the market risk management
infrastructure to produce a consistent approach to risk measurement, monitoring
and control across business lines.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
operational risk management
operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed
processes or systems, human factors, or external events.
operational risk management is a principal risk discipline within the firm
business managers are responsible for maintaining an effective system of internal controls to manage operational risk
the firm is executing a multi-year plan for an integrated approach to measuring, analyzing, and managing operational risk
reputation risk arises when the firm does not adequately manage its
credit, market and operational risks, or does not maintain business
practices of the highest ethical quality
overview
operational risk is inherent in each of the firms businesses and support
activities. operational risk can manifest itself in various ways, including
errors, business interruptions, inappropriate behavior of employees, and
vendors not performing in accordance with outsourcing arrangements. these
events can potentially result in financial losses and other damage to the firm,
including causing it reputational harm.
to monitor and control operational risk, the firm maintains a system of
comprehensive policies and a control framework designed to provide a sound and
well-controlled operational environment. the goal is to keep operational risk
at appropriate levels, in light of the firms financial strength, the
characteristics of its businesses, the markets in which it operates, and the
competitive and regulatory environment to which it is subject.
notwithstanding these control measures, the firm incurs operational losses. the
firms approach to operational risk management is intended to mitigate such
losses.
operational risk management practices
governance structure
operational risk policies and procedures
operational risk committee
business control committees
self-assessment process
focused on business-specific key risks and controls
automated using horizon software application
develop and monitor action plans
operational risk event monitoring
internal error and loss data reported and analyzed to determine causal factors
enables comparative analysis with external data (where available)
alignment with internal audit activities
new capital allocation methodology (2003 implementation)
operational risk management practices
throughout 2002, the firm continued to execute a multi-year plan, begun in
2001, for an integrated approach that emphasizes active management of
operational risk throughout the firm. the objective of this effort is to
supplement the traditional control-based approach to operational risk with risk
measures, tools and disciplines that are risk-specific, consistently applied
and utilized firm-wide. key themes for this effort are transparency of
information, escalation of key issues, and accountability for issue resolution.
ultimate responsibility for the firms operational risk management practices
resides with the vice chairman for finance, risk management and administration.
the components are:
governance structure: the governance structure provides the framework for the
firms operational risk management activities. primary responsibility for
managing operational risk rests with business managers. these individuals are
responsible for establishing and maintaining appropriate internal control
procedures for their respective businesses.
the operational risk committee is comprised of senior operational risk and
finance managers from each of the businesses. this committee meets quarterly to
discuss key operational risk issues of importance to the firm. in addition,
each of the businesses must maintain business control committees to oversee
their operational risk management practices.
self-assessment process: in 2002, the firm continued to refine its firm-wide
self-assessment process. the focus of the process is for each business to
identify the key operational risks specific to its environment, and assess the
degree to which it is maintaining appropriate controls. action plans are
developed for control issues identified, and businesses are held accountable
for tracking and resolving these issues on a timely basis.
self-assessments are completed by the businesses utilizing horizon, a software
application developed by the firm. with the aid of horizon, the firm moved in
2002 from an annual, yearend self-assessment process to one performed
semiannually. going forward, the firm plans to utilize this self-assessment
process as an ongoing, dynamic risk management tool.
operational risk-event monitoring: the firm has a process for reporting
operational risk-event data, permitting analyses of errors and losses as well
as trends. such analyses, performed both at a line-of-business level and by
risk-event type, enables identification of root causes associated with risk
events faced by the businesses. where available, the internal data can be
supplemented with external data for comparative analysis with industry
patterns. the data reported will also enable the firm to back-test against
self-assessment results.
audit alignment: in addition to conducting independent internal audits, the
firms internal audit department has provided guidance on the design and
implementation of the operational risk framework. this guidance has helped
further the firm-wide
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
implementation of the framework, which in turn has led to a stronger overall
control environment. the department utilizes output such as business
self-assessment results to help focus allocation of its resources, thereby
maximizing the efficiencies of its internal audit responsibilities. the
department also reviews the effectiveness and accuracy of the self-assessment
process during the conduct of audits.
capital allocation for operational and business risk
historically, a combined capital amount for operational risk and business risk
(collectively referred to as operating risk capital) was derived through
top-down benchmarking, by business, against comparable financial institutions.
in 2003, a new risk-based capital allocation methodology will replace the
existing approach. the new methodology will separate operating risk capital
into its two discrete components, operational risk and business risk. the new
approach will estimate these risks independently and allocate capital to each
component. it is estimated that this new approach will result in a lower amount
of capital than previously calculated.
operational risk: the new operational risk capital model is loss-based, with
adjustments to reflect changes in the quality of the control environment, and
with a potential offset for the use of risk-transfer products. the firm
believes that the model will be consistent with the proposed basle ii accord,
and expects to propose it eventually for qualification under the advanced
measurement approach for operational risk.
business risk: business risk capital represents the risk associated with the
volatility in the firms earnings due to factors not captured by other parts of
the firms economic capital framework. such volatility can arise from
ineffective design or execution of business strategies, volatile economic or
financial market activity, changing client expectations and demands, and
restructuring to adjust for changes in the competitive environment. capital
will be allocated to each business based on historical revenue volatility and
measures of fixed and variable expenses. earnings volatility arising from other
risk factors, such as credit or market risk, will be excluded from the
measurement of business risk capital, as these factors are captured under those
risk capital models.
reputation risk
a firms success depends not only on its prudent management of credit, market
and operational risks, but equally on the maintenance of its reputation among
many constituents  clients, investors, regulators, as well as the general
public  for business practices of the highest quality.
attention to its reputation has always been a key aspect of the firms
practices and maintenance of reputation is everyones responsibility. the firm
bolsters this individual responsibility in many ways: codes of ethics,
training, policies and oversight functions that approve transactions, including a conflicts office to examine
transactions with the potential to create conflicts of interest or roles for
the firm.
during 2002, the firm put in place an additional structure to take account of
the potential for adverse reputational impact of transactions with clients,
especially complex derivatives and structured finance transactions. the
structure reinforces the firms procedures for examining transactions in terms
of appropriateness, ethical issues and reputational risk and intensifies the
firms scrutiny of the purpose and effect of its transactions from the clients
point of view with the goal that these transactions are not used to deceive
investors or others. this new structure operates at three levels: as part of
every business transaction approval process, review by regional policy review
committees, and oversight by the policy review office.
business transaction approval
primary responsibility for adherence with the policies and procedures designed
to address reputation risk lies with the business units conducting the
transactions in question. this transaction approval process requires review and
sign-off from, among others, internal legal/compliance, conflicts, tax and
accounting policy groups. transactions involving an spe established by the firm
receive particular scrutiny and must comply with a special-purpose vehicle
policy, designed to ensure that every such entity is properly approved,
documented, monitored and controlled.
regional policy review committees
business units are also required to submit to regional policy review committees
proposed transactions that may raise reputation risk for any reason
including, where applicable, intended financial disclosure of the transaction
by the client  and the committees approve, reject or require further
clarification or changes. the members of these committees are senior
representatives of the business and support units in the region. the committees
may escalate transaction review to the policy review office.
policy review office
the policy review office is the most senior approval level for client
transactions involving reputation issues. the mandate of the office is to opine
on specific transactions brought by the regional committees and consider
changes in policies or practices relating to reputation risk. the head of the
office consults with the firms most senior executives on specific topics and
provides regular updates.
aside from governance and guidance on specific transactions, the objective of
the policy review process is to reinforce a culture, through a case-study
approach, which ensures that all employees, regardless of seniority, understand
the basic principles of reputation risk control and can recognize and address
issues as they arise.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual report
private equity risk management
risk management
jpmorgan partners employs processes for risk measurement and control that are
similar to those used for other businesses within the firm. the processes are
coordinated with the firms overall approach to market and concentration risk.
private equity risk is initially monitored through the use of industry and
geographic limits. additionally, to manage the pace of new investment, a
ceiling on the amount of annual private equity investment activity has been
set.
jpmorgan partners public equity holdings create a significant exposure to
general declines in the equity markets. to gauge that risk, var and stress-test
exposures are calculated in the same way as they are for the firms trading,
investment and asset/liability management portfolios. during the year, jpmp
management undertook frequent reviews of its public security holdings as part
of a disciplined approach to sales and hedging issues. hedging programs are
very limited, but are considered when practical and as circumstances dictate.
over time, the firm may change the nature and type of hedges it enters into, as
well as close a hedging position altogether.
capital allocation for private equity risk
internal capital is allocated to jpmps public equities portfolio based on
stress scenarios that are similar to those applied to other businesses, and
which reflects the potential loss inherent in the portfolio in the event of a
large equity market decline. capital is also allocated against illiquidity
risk, which results from the contractual sales restrictions to which some
holdings are subject. for private equities, capital is allocated based on a
long-term equity market stress scenario that is consistent with the investment
time horizons associated with these holdings. for these investments, additional
capital is allocated against the risk of an unexpectedly large number of
write-offs or write-downs. the overall internal capital allocation is
approximately 53% of the investments carrying value.
critical accounting estimates used by the firm
the firms accounting policies and use of estimates are integral to
understanding the results reported. the firms most complex accounting
estimates require managements judgment to ascertain the valuation of assets
and liabilities. the firm has established detailed policies and control
procedures that are intended to ensure valuation methods, including any
judgments made, are well controlled, independently reviewed and applied
consistently from period to period. in addition, the policies and procedures
are intended to ensure that the process for changing methodologies occurs in an
appropriate manner. the firm believes its estimates for determining the
valuation of its assets and liabilities are appropriate.
the following is a brief description of the firms critical accounting
estimates involving significant management valuation judgments.
allowance for credit losses
jpmorgan chases allowance for credit losses covers the commercial and consumer
loan portfolios as well as the firms portfolio of lending-related commitments.
the allowance for loan losses is intended to adjust the value of the firms
loan assets for probable credit losses as of the balance sheet date in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. management also
computes an allowance for lending-related commitments using a methodology
similar to that used for the commercial loan portfolio. for a further
discussion of the methodologies used in establishing the firms allowance for
credit losses, see note 10 on page 82.
commercial loans and lending-related commitments
the methodology for calculating both allowances involves significant judgment.
first and foremost, it involves the early identification of credits that are
deteriorating. second, it involves management judgment to derive loss factors.
the firm uses a risk rating system to determine the credit quality of its
loans. commercial loans are reviewed for information affecting the obligors
ability to fulfill its obligations. in assessing the risk rating of a
particular loan, among the factors considered include the obligors debt
capacity and financial flexibility, the level of the obligors earnings, the
amount and sources of repayment, the level and nature of contingencies,
management strength, and the industry and geography in which the obligor
operates. these factors are based on an evaluation of historical information,
as well as subjective assessment and interpretation. emphasizing one factor
over another or considering additional factors that may be relevant in
determining the risk rating of a particular loan, but which are not currently
an explicit part of the firms methodology, could impact the risk rating
assigned by the firm to that loan.
management also applies its judgment to derive loss factors associated with
each credit facility. these loss factors are determined by facility structure,
collateral and type of obligor. wherever possible, the firm uses independent,
verifiable data or the firms own historical loss experience in its models for
estimating these loss factors. many factors can affect managements estimates
of specific loss and expected loss, including volatility of default
probabilities, rating migrations and loss severity. for example, judgment is
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
required to determine how many years of data to include when estimating the
possible severity of the loss. if a full credit cycle is not captured in the
data, then estimates may be inaccurate. likewise, judgment is applied to
determine whether the loss severity factor should be calculated as an average
over the entire credit cycle or whether to apply the loss severity factor
implied at a particular point in the credit cycle. the application of different
loss severity factors would change the amount of the allowance for credit
losses determined appropriate by the firm. similarly, there are judgments as to
which external data on default probabilities should be used, and when they
should be used. choosing data that are not reflective of the firms specific
loan portfolio characteristics could affect loss estimates.
as noted above, the firms allowance for loan losses is sensitive to the risk
rating assigned to a loan. assuming, for all commercial loans, a one-notch
downgrade in the firms internal risk ratings, the allowance for loan losses
for commercial loans would increase by approximately $850million at december
31, 2002. this sensitivity analysis is hypothetical and should be used with
caution. the purpose of this analysis is to provide an indication of the impact
risk ratings have on the estimate of the allowance for loan losses for
commercial loans. it is not intended to imply managements expectation of
future deterioration in risk ratings. given the process the firm follows in
determining risk ratings of its loans, management believes the current risk
ratings assigned to commercial loans are appropriate and the likelihood of a
one-notch downgrade for all commercial loans is remote.
consumer loans
the consumer portfolio is segmented into three main business lines: chase home
finance, chase cardmember services and chase auto finance. for each major
portfolio segment within each line of business, there are three primary factors
that are considered in determining the expected loss component of the allowance
for loan losses: period-end outstandings, expected loss factor, and average
life. the various components of these factors, such as collateral, prepayment
rates, credit score distributions, collections, and the historical loss
experience of a business segment, differ across business lines. for example,
credit card revolving credit has significantly higher charge-off ratios than
fixed mortgage credit. determination of each factor is based primarily on
statistical data and macroeconomic assumptions.
residual component
managements judgments are also applied when considering uncertainties that
relate to current macroeconomic and political conditions, the impact of
currency devaluation on cross-border exposures, changes in underwriting
standards, unexpected correlations within the portfolio, or other factors. for
example, judgment as to political developments in a particular country will
affect managements assessment of potential loss in the credits that have
exposure to that country. a separate allowance component, the residual
component, is maintained to cover these uncertainties, principally, at december
31, 2002, in the commercial portfolio. it is anticipated that the residual
component will range between 10% and 20% of the total allowance for credit
losses.
fair value of financial instruments
a portion of jpmorgan chases assets and liabilities are carried at fair value,
including trading assets and liabilities, afs securities and private equity
investments. mortgage servicing rights are carried at the lower of fair value
or cost. at december31, 2002, approximately $369billion of the firms assets
were recorded at fair value.
fair value is defined as the value at which positions could be closed out or
sold in a transaction with a willing and knowledgeable counterparty over a
period of time consistent with jpmorgan chases trading or investment strategy.
the majority of the firms assets reported at fair value are based on quoted
market prices or on internally developed models that are based on independently
sourced market parameters, including interest rate yield curves, option
volatilities and currency rates. the valuation process takes into consideration
factors such as liquidity and concentration concerns and, for the derivative
portfolio, counterparty credit risk. see the discussion of cva on page 51.
management applies judgment in determining the factors used in the valuation
process. for example, there is often limited market data to rely on when
estimating the fair value of a large or aged position. similarly, judgment must
be applied in estimating prices for less readily observable external
parameters. finally, other factors such as model assumptions, market
dislocations and unexpected correlations can affect estimates of fair value.
imprecision in estimating these factors can impact the amount of revenue or
loss recorded for a particular position.
trading and available-for-sale portfolios
substantially all of the firms securities held for trading and investment
purposes (long positions) and securities that the firm has sold to other
parties but does not own (short positions) are valued based on quoted market
prices. however, certain of the securities, for example high yield instruments,
are less actively traded. the determination of their fair value requires
management judgment, as this determination may require benchmarking to similar
instruments or analyzing default and recovery rates.
as few derivative contracts are listed on an exchange, the majority of the
firms derivative positions are valued using internally developed models that
use as their basis readily observable market parameters  that is, parameters
that are actively quoted and can be validated to external sources, including
industry-pricing
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual report
services. certain derivatives, however, are valued based on models with
significant unobservable market parameters  that is, parameters that may be
estimated and are, therefore, subject to management judgment to substantiate
the model valuation. these instruments are less actively traded and could
include, for example, long-dated interest rate or currency swaps, where swap
rates may be unobservable for longer maturities.
management judgment includes recording fair value adjustments (i.e.,
reductions) to model valuations to account for parameter uncertainty when
valuing complex or less actively traded derivative transactions.
the following table summarizes the firms trading and available-for-sale
portfolios by valuation methodology at december31, 2002:
trading assets
trading liabilities
securities
securities
afs
purchased(a)
derivatives (b)
sold (a)
derivatives (b)
securities
fair value based on:
quoted market prices
%
%
%
%
%
internal models
with significant
observable market
parameters
internal models
with significant
unobservable market
parameters
total
%
%
%
%
%
(a)
reflected as debt and equity instruments on the firms consolidated balance
sheet.
(b)
based on valuations of the firms derivative portfolio prior to fin 39
netting,as cross-product netting is not relevant to a discussion on valuation
methodologies. therefore,the analysis is based on gross mark-to-market values.
to ensure that the valuations are appropriate, the firm has various controls in
place. these include: an independent review and approval of valuation models;
detailed review and explanation for profit and loss analyzed daily and through
time; decomposing the model valuations for certain structured derivative
instruments into their components and benchmarking valuations where possible to
similar products; and validating valuation estimates through actual cash
settlement. as markets and products develop and the pricing for certain
derivative products becomes more transparent, the firm refines its valuation
methodologies. the valuation control group within the finance area is
responsible for reviewing the accuracy of the valuations of all positions taken
within the investment bank.
for a discussion of market risk management, including the model review process,
see pages 5862. for a discussion of the developments affecting the
accounting for trading derivatives, see page 68. for further details on the
trading and afs portfolios, see note 3 and note 7, respectively.
private equity investments
valuation of private investments held by jpmorgan partners requires significant
management judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, inherent lack
of liquidity and long-term nature of such assets. private investments are
initially valued based on cost. the carrying values of private investments are
adjusted from cost to reflect both positive and negative changes evidenced by
financing events with third-party capital providers. in addition, these
investments are subject to ongoing impairment reviews by jpmps senior
investment professionals. a variety of factors are reviewed and monitored to
assess impairment, including but not limited to, operating performance and
future expectations, comparable industry valuations of public companies,
changes in market outlook, and third-party financing environment over time. for
additional information about private equity investments, see the private equity
risk management discussion on page 65 and note 13 on page 88.
msrs and certain other retained interests
msrs and certain other retained interests from securitization activities do not
trade in an active open market with readily observable prices. for example,
sales of msrs do occur, but the precise terms and conditions are typically not
readily available. as such, the firm estimates the fair value of msrs and
certain other retained interests using a discounted future cash flow model. the
model considers portfolio characteristics, contractually specified servicing
fees and prepayment assumptions, delinquent rates, late charges, other
ancillary revenues, costs to service and other economic factors. the firm
compares its fair value estimates and assumptions to observable market data
where available and to recent market activity and actual portfolio experience.
management believes that the fair values and related assumptions are comparable
to those used by other market participants. for a further discussion of the
most significant assumptions used to value these retained interests, as well as
the applicable stress tests for those assumptions, see notes 11 and 12 on pages
8387 and 8788, respectively.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual report
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
accounting and reporting developments
accounting for stock-based compensation
in august 2002, jpmorgan chase announced its decision to adopt sfas 123,
beginning january 2003. sfas 123 establishes accounting for stock-based
compensation that requires all such transactions, including stock options, to
be accounted for at fair value and such amounts to be recognized in earnings.
the firm adopted the fair value provisions of sfas 123 effective january1,
2003, using the prospective transition method. under this method, all new
awards granted to employees on or after january1, 2003 will be accounted for
at fair value. awards outstanding as of december31, 2002, if not subsequently
modified, continue to be accounted for under apb 25. it is estimated that the
adoption of sfas 123, with respect to employee stock-based compensation awards
granted in february 2003, will reduce the firms net income by approximately
$0.08 per share in 2003.
consolidation of variable interest entities
in january 2003, the fasb issued fin 46. the entities that would be assessed
for consolidation under fin 46 are typically referred to as special-purpose
entities (spes), although other non-spe-type entities may also be subject to
the guidance. fin 46 requires a variable interest entity to be consolidated by
a company if that company is subject to a majority of the risk of loss from the
variable interest entitys activities or entitled to receive a majority of the
entitys residual returns, or both. the provisions are effective for any new
entities that are originated subsequent to january31, 2003. for entities that
were originated prior to february1, 2003, the provisions of fin 46 are
effective july1, 2003.
the firm is assessing the impact of fin 46 on all variable interest entities
with which it is involved, including the multi-seller conduit transactions that
are further described in note 11 on pages 8387. in their current form, these conduits would be required to be
consolidated on the firms balance sheet when fin 46 is implemented. the firm
is assessing restructuring alternatives associated with the multi-seller
conduits. managements assessment of possible consolidations of other entities
that could be deemed variable interest entities is ongoing as well. however, at
this time, the firm does not believe that the implementation of fin 46 will
have a material impact on the firms consolidated balance sheet, earnings or
capital resources.
guarantor disclosures
in november 2002, the fasb issued interpretation no.45, which requires a
guarantor to recognize, at inception of a guarantee, a liability for the fair
value of the obligation undertaken in issuing the guarantee. fin 45 also
requires certain disclosures to be made by a guarantor in its interim and
annual financial statements about its obligations under certain guarantees that
it has issued. the disclosure requirements of this interpretation are effective
for financial statements ending december31, 2002. the initial recognition and
measurement provisions of this interpretation are applicable on a prospective
basis to guarantees issued or modified after december31, 2002. the application
of fin 45 will not have a material impact on the firms consolidated statement
of income or consolidated balance sheet. see note 29 on pages
102103 for fin
45 disclosures.
accounting for trading derivatives
in october 2002, the emerging issues
task force concluded on issue 0203,
which precludes mark-to-market accounting for energy-related contracts that do
not meet the definition of a derivative under sfas 133 (e.g., transportation,
storage, or capacity contracts) effective january1, 2003. this decision will
not have a material impact on the firms consolidated statement of income. in
november 2002, as part of the discussion of issue 0203, the fasb staff
further confirmed their view that an entity should not recognize profit at the
inception of a trade involving a derivative financial instrument in the absence
of: (a)quoted market prices in an active market, (b)observable prices of
other current market transactions, or (c)other observable data supporting a
valuation technique. this clarification did not have a material impact on the
firms consolidated statement of income in 2002. the fasb intends in 2003 to
continue its focus on issues relating to the fair value of financial
instruments.
impairment of long-lived assets
in august 2001, the fasb issued sfas 144, which addresses financial accounting
and reporting for the impairment and/or disposal of long-lived assets. sfas 144
supersedes and resolves certain implementation issues of sfas 121, but retains
its fundamental provisions for (a)the recognition and measurement of the
impairment of long-lived assets to be held and used and (b)the measurement of
long-lived assets to be disposed of by sale. sfas 144 also supersedes the
business segment disposal provisions of apb 30, but retains its requirement to
report discontinued operations separately from continuing operations and
broadens its definition of discontinued operations from segment of a business
(activities that represent a major line of business or customer) to component
of an entity (operations and cash flows that can clearly be distinguished,
operationally and for financial reporting purposes, from the rest of the
entity). sfas 144 does not significantly affect the firms operating results.
the firm performs periodic impairment reviews of its long-lived assets in
accordance with sfas 144, and there are no discontinued operations to report in
2002.
accounting for costs associated with exit or disposal activities
in june 2002, the fasb issued sfas 146, which establishes new accounting for
costs associated with exit or disposal activities initiated after december31,
2002. sfas 146 requires a liability for a cost associated with an exit or
disposal activity to be recorded when that liability is incurred and can be
measured at fair value. under the previous rules, if management approved an
exit plan in one quarter, the costs of that plan generally would have been
recorded in the same quarter even if the costs were not incurred until a later
quarter. in
j.p. morgan chase &
co./2002annualreport
contrast, under sfas 146, some costs may qualify for immediate recognition,
while other costs may be incurred over one or more quarters. the impact of sfas
146 will be to spread out the timing of the recognition of costs associated
with exit or disposal activities.
allowance for loan losses
in 1999, the accounting standards executive committee of the american institute
of certified public accountants formed the allowance for loan losses task force
(task force) to research current accounting guidance and practices as they
relate to loan losses. it is currently expected that the task force will issue
an exposure draft of a statement of position in 2003 that will provide
additional accounting and reporting guidance and clarification of the factors
to consider in determining the allowance for loan losses.
goodwill and other intangible assets
effective january1, 2002, the firm adopted sfas 142 which establishes the
accounting for intangible assets (other than those acquired in a business
combination). it also addresses the accounting for goodwill and other
intangible assets subsequent to an acquisition. for a further discussion on the
adoption of sfas 142, see note 14.
comparison between 2001 and 2000
jpmorgan chase reported 2001 net income of $1.7billion, compared with net
income of $5.7billion in 2000. reported net income per share was $0.80 in
2001, compared with $2.86 in 2000.
total reported revenues for 2001 of $29.3billion were down 12% from the prior
year. these results reflected losses on private equity investments and, to a
lesser degree, lower investment banking fees and trading revenues, which
included $359million of losses related to exposure to enron and argentina.
also contributing to the decline were net gains on sales of nonstrategic assets
of $1.3billion in 2000. the revenue declines were partially offset by higher
net interest income, primarily from higher volumes of interest-earning assets
(particularly credit card receivables and residential mortgages), and security
gains from sales of afs securities that had been positioned to benefit from
2001s low interest rate environment.
the firms business segments reported mixed revenue results in 2001. in ib,
revenues were lower than the prior year, reflecting the overall market decline
in equity underwriting and m&a activities; record fees from bond underwriting
due to lower interest rates partially offset these declines. trading-related
revenues in 2001 were also lower than in 2000, primarily driven by thinner
margins on sales of equity securities and a reduced demand for equity
derivatives. impbs revenues declined from the prior year reflecting the lower
value of assets under supervision, a lower volume of international retail fund
flows and a reduction in the number of brokerage transactions. there was also a
decrease in fees driven by clients shifting from higher-margin equity to
lower-margin fixed-income products. jpmp recognized private equity losses of
$1.2billion in 2001, compared with gains of $1.0billion in 2000, attributable
to unfavorable valuation adjustments on both publicly- and privately-held
investments  particularly in the telecommunications, media and technology
sectors. offsetting these revenue declines was a slight increase in revenue at
t&ss, reflecting revenue growth at institutional trust services and treasury
services, partially offset by a decline at investor services resulting from
depressed market prices for equity securities and lower interest rates. cfs had
solid revenue growth, driven by greater consumer loan originations and higher
fees from increased utilization of consumer banking and insurance products in
2001. while revenue was reduced by the negative effects of increased levels of
mortgage loan prepayments due to lower interest rates, these declines were
substantially offset by increased securities gains and record mortgage sales
activity.
the firms total reported noninterest expense was $23.6billion in 2001, up 2%
from 2000, reflecting higher merger and restructuring costs, partly offset by
lower compensation expense. merger and restructuring costs increased to $2.5
billion in 2001 from $1.4billion in 2000. the increase was primarily related
to costs associated with the merger of j.p. morgan and chase, including systems
integration, realignment of facilities and retention or severance payments.
compensation expense fell 6%, driven by staff reductions and lower incentive
compensation as a result of the decline in earnings.
at the business-segment level, ib, impb and jpmp all reported lower noninterest
expense largely driven by reductions in head-count related to the merger and
lower incentive compensation. t&ss expenses rose slightly as a result of
strategic investments across its three businesses, offset by expense-control
initiatives. cfs also reported higher expenses in 2001, stemming from higher
mortgage loan servicing costs, the acquisition of advanta corp.s mortgage
business and higher credit card marketing costs; these costs were partially
offset by savings achieved through restructuring, productivity and quality
programs.
the provision for credit losses in 2001 rose to $3.2billion from $1.4billion
in 2000. the increase reflected the impact of higher net charge-offs in both
the commercial and consumer loan portfolios, as well as an increase in the loan
loss allowance by $850million (due to provisions in excess of net
charge-offs). the increase in commercial charge-offs was primarily the result
of higher domestic commercial net charge-offs, particularly in the telecom and
related sector and for enron. the higher charge-offs in the consumer loan
portfolio were due to higher consumer bankruptcy levels, as well as higher
nonbankruptcy-related losses.
income tax expense in 2001 was $847million, compared with $3.0billion in
2000. the effective tax rate was 33% for 2001, compared with 34% for 2000. the
decrease in the effective tax rate was principally the result of the decrease
in reported pre-tax income.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
managements report on responsibility for financial reporting and report of
independent accountants j.p. morgan chase & co.
to our stockholders:
the management of j.p. morgan chase & co. has the responsibility for preparing
the accompanying consolidated financial statements and for their integrity and
objectivity. the statements were prepared in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the united states of america. the consolidated
financial statements include amounts that are based on managements best
estimates and judgments. management also prepared the other information in the
annual report and is responsible for its accuracy and consistency with the
consolidated financial statements.
management maintains a comprehensive system of internal control to provide
reasonable assurance of the proper authorization of transactions, the
safeguarding of assets and the reliability of the financial records. the system
of internal control provides for appropriate division of responsibility and is
documented by written policies and procedures that are communicated to
employees. j.p. morgan chase & co. maintains a strong internal auditing program
that independently assesses the effectiveness of the system of internal control
and recommends possible improvements.
management believes that at december31, 2002, j.p. morgan chase & co.
maintained an effective system of internal control.
the audit committee of the board of directors reviews the systems of internal
control and financial reporting. the committee, which is comprised of directors
who are independent from j.p. morgan chase & co., meets and consults regularly
with management, the internal auditors and the independent accountants to
review the scope and results of their work.
the accounting firm of pricewaterhousecoopers llp has performed an independent
audit of j.p. morgan chase & co.s financial statements. management has made
available to pricewaterhousecoopers llp all of j.p. morgan chase & co.s
financial records and related data, as well as the minutes of stockholders and
directors meetings. furthermore, management believes that all representations
made to pricewaterhousecoopers llp during its audit were valid and appropriate.
the accounting firms report appears below.
william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer
marc j. shapiro
vice chairman
finance, risk management and administration
dina dublon
executive vice president and chief financial officer
january21, 2003
to the board of directors and stockholders of j.p. morgan chase & co.:
in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and the related
consolidated statements of income, of changes in stockholders equity and of
cash flows present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
j.p. morgan chase & co. and its subsidiaries at december31, 2002 and december
31, 2001, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of
the three years in the period ended december31, 2002, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. these
financial statements are the responsibility of j.p. morgan chase & co.s
management; our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements based on our audits. we conducted our audits of these statements in
accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the united states of
america, which require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing
the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management,
and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that
our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
as noted in note 14 to the financial statements, j.p. morgan chase & co.
adopted, as of january1, 2002, statement of financial accounting standards no.
142, goodwill and other intangible assets.
january21, 2003
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual
report70
consolidated statement of income
j.p. morgan chase & co.
year ended december 31,(in millions, except per share data)
revenue
investment banking fees
$
2,763
$
3,612
$
4,362
trading revenue
2,594
4,918
6,298
fees and commissions
10,756
9,481
9,466
private equity  realized gains (losses)
(105
)
2,051
private equity  unrealized gains (losses)
(641
)
(1,884
)
(1,036
)
securities gains
1,563
other revenue
1,158
2,304
total noninterest revenue
18,088
18,542
23,674
interest income
25,284
32,181
36,643
interest expense
13,758
21,379
27,131
net interest income
11,526
10,802
9,512
revenue before provision for credit losses
29,614
29,344
33,186
provision for credit losses
4,331
3,182
1,380
total net revenue
25,283
26,162
31,806
expense
compensation expense
10,983
11,844
12,639
occupancy expense
1,606
1,348
1,294
technology and communications expense
2,554
2,631
2,454
amortization of intangibles
other expense
4,788
4,521
4,727
surety settlement and litigation reserve
1,300
merger and restructuring costs
1,210
2,523
1,431
total noninterest expense
22,764
23,596
23,073
income before income tax expense and effect of accounting change
2,519
2,566
8,733
income tax expense
3,006
income before effect of accounting change
1,663
1,719
5,727
net effect of change in accounting principle
(25
)
net income
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
net income applicable to common stock
$
1,612
$
1,628
$
5,631
average common shares outstanding
basic
1,984
1,972
1,884
diluted
2,009
2,024
1,969
net income per common share (a)
basic
$
0.81
$
0.83
$
2.99
diluted
0.80
0.80
2.86
cash dividends per common share
1.36
1.36
1.28
(a)
basic and diluted earnings per share have been reduced by $0.01 in 2001
because of the impact of the adoption of sfas 133 relating to the accounting
for derivative instruments and hedging activities.
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these
statements.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
consolidated balance sheet
j.p. morgan chase & co.
december 31, (in millions, except share data)
assets
cash and due from banks
$
19,218
$
22,600
deposits with banks
8,942
12,743
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
65,809
63,727
securities borrowed
34,143
36,580
trading assets:
debt and equity instruments (including assets pledged of $88,900 in 2002 and $48,570 in 2001)
165,199
118,248
derivative receivables
83,102
71,157
securities:
available-for-sale (including assets pledged of $50,468 in 2002 and $30,178 in 2001)
84,032
59,284
held-to-maturity (fair value: $455 in 2002 and $490 in 2001)
loans (net of allowance for loan losses of $5,350 in 2002 and $4,524 in 2001)
211,014
212,920
private equity investments
8,228
9,197
accrued interest and accounts receivable
14,137
14,799
premises and equipment
6,829
6,292
goodwill
8,096
8,336
mortgage servicing rights
3,230
6,579
other intangibles:
purchased credit card relationships
1,269
all other intangibles
other assets
44,814
50,074
total assets
$
758,800
$
693,575
liabilities
deposits:
u.s.:
noninterest-bearing
$
74,664
$
69,364
interest-bearing
109,743
105,058
non-u.s.:
noninterest-bearing
7,365
7,610
interest-bearing
112,981
111,618
total deposits
304,753
293,650
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
169,483
128,445
commercial paper
16,591
18,510
other borrowed funds
8,946
10,835
trading liabilities:
debt and equity instruments
66,864
52,988
derivative payables
66,227
56,063
accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities (including the
allowance for lending-related commitments of $363 in 2002 and $282 in 2001)
38,440
47,813
long-term debt
39,751
39,183
guaranteed preferred beneficial interests in the firms junior
subordinated deferrable interest debentures
5,439
4,439
total liabilities
716,494
651,926
commitments and contingencies (see note 27)
preferred stock of subsidiary
stockholders equity
preferred stock
1,009
1,009
common stock (authorized 4,500,000,000 shares,
issued 2,023,566,387 shares in 2002 and 1,996,929,012 shares in 2001)
2,024
1,997
capital surplus
13,222
12,495
retained earnings
25,851
26,993
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
1,227
(442
)
treasury stock, at cost (24,859,844 shares in 2002 and 23,545,702 shares in 2001)
(1,027
)
(953
)
total stockholders equity
42,306
41,099
total liabilities, preferred stock of subsidiary and stockholders equity
$
758,800
$
693,575
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these
statements.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
consolidated statement of changes in stockholders equity
j.p. morgan chase & co.
year ended december 31, (in millions, except per share data)
preferred stock
balance at beginning of year
$
1,009
$
1,520
$
1,622
redemption of stock
(450
)
(100
)
retirement of treasury stock
(2
)
purchase of treasury stock
(61
)
balance at end of year
1,009
1,009
1,520
common stock
balance at beginning of year
1,997
1,940
1,625
issuance of common stock for a three-for-two stock split
issuance of common stock
issuance of common stock for purchase accounting acquisitions
retirement of treasury stock
(126
)
balance at end of year
2,024
1,997
1,940
capital surplus
balance at beginning of year
12,495
11,598
12,724
issuance of common stock and options for purchase accounting acquisitions
retirement of treasury stock
(237
)
issuance of common stock for a three-for-two stock split
(441
)
shares issued and commitments to issue common stock for
employee stock-based awards and related tax effects
(584
)
balance at end of year
13,222
12,495
11,598
retained earnings
balance at beginning of year
26,993
28,096
28,455
net income
1,663
1,694
5,727
retirement of treasury stock
(3,636
)
cash dividends declared:
preferred stock
(51
)
(66
)
(96
)
common stock ($1.36, $1.36 and $1.28 per share)
(2,754
)
(2,731
)
(2,354
)
balance at end of year
25,851
26,993
28,096
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
balance at beginning of year
(442
)
(241
)
(1,428
)
other comprehensive income (loss)
1,669
(201
)
1,187
balance at end of year
1,227
(442
)
(241
)
treasury stock, at cost
balance at beginning of year
(953
)
(575
)
(7,942
)
retirement of treasury stock
4,001
purchase of treasury stock
(871
)
(2,950
)
reissuance from treasury stock
3,039
reissuance from treasury stock for purchase accounting acquisitions
3,415
forfeitures to treasury stock
(181
)
(217
)
(138
)
balance at end of year
(1,027
)
(953
)
(575
)
total stockholders equity
$
42,306
$
41,099
$
42,338
comprehensive income
net income
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
other comprehensive income (loss)
1,669
(201
)
1,187
comprehensive income
$
3,332
$
1,493
$
6,914
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these
statements.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
consolidated statement of cash flows
j.p. morgan chase & co.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
operating activities
net income
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
operating activities:
provision for credit losses
4,331
3,182
1,380
depreciation and amortization
3,426
2,891
2,545
deferred tax provision (benefit)
1,636
(638
)
(550
)
surety settlement and litigation reserve
1,300
private equity unrealized losses and write-offs
1,884
1,036
net change in:
trading assets
(58,183
)
26,217
(34,761
)
securities borrowed
2,437
(4,209
)
3,157
accrued interest and accounts receivable
5,819
(64
)
other assets
5,735
(26,756
)
(4,110
)
trading liabilities
25,402
(20,143
)
9,684
accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities
(12,964
)
7,472
5,956
other, net
(1,235
)
(520
)
(3,676
)
net cash used in operating activities
(25,134
)
(3,107
)
(13,676
)
investing activities
net change in:
deposits with banks
3,801
(4,410
)
22,088
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
(2,082
)
5,747
(10,493
)
loans due to sales and securitizations
97,004
69,575
33,062
other loans, net
(98,695
)
(72,149
)
(47,672
)
other, net
(3,398
)
3,431
(2,210
)
held-to-maturity securities: proceeds
purchases
(40
)
(2
)
(114
)
available-for-sale securities: proceeds from maturities
5,094
7,980
9,393
proceeds from sales
219,385
186,434
104,322
purchases
(244,547
)
(182,920
)
(109,051
)
cash used in acquisitions
(72
)
(1,677
)
(2,195
)
proceeds from divestitures of nonstrategic businesses and assets
1,469
net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
(23,344
)
12,318
(986
)
financing activities
net change in:
u.s. deposits
9,985
29,119
10,596
non-u.s. deposits
1,118
(14,834
)
(18,295
)
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
41,038
(3,293
)
21,897
commercial paper and other borrowed funds
(4,675
)
(15,346
)
8,925
other, net
(91
)
(436
)
proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt and capital securities
11,971
8,986
14,861
repayments of long-term debt
(12,185
)
(12,574
)
(14,442
)
proceeds from the net issuance of stock and stock-related awards
1,429
2,278
redemption of preferred stock
(511
)
(100
)
redemption of preferred stock of subsidiary
(550
)
treasury stock purchased
(871
)
(2,950
)
cash dividends paid
(2,784
)
(2,697
)
(2,282
)
net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
44,643
(10,683
)
20,052
effect of exchange rate changes on cash and due from banks
(110
)
net (decrease)increase in cash and due from banks
(3,382
)
(1,372
)
5,280
cash and due from banks at the beginning of the year
22,600
23,972
18,692
cash and due from banks at the end of the year
$
19,218
$
22,600
$
23,972
cash interest paid
$
13,534
$
22,987
$
27,217
taxes paid
$
1,253
$
$
3,396
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these
statements.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 1 basis of presentation
consolidation
j.p. morgan chase & co. (jpmorgan chase or the firm) is a financial holding
company for a group of subsidiaries that provide a wide range of services to a
global client base that includes corporations, governments, institutions and
individuals. for a discussion of the firms business segment information, see
note 33 on page 108.
on december31, 2000, j.p. morgan & co. incorporated (j.p. morgan) merged
with and into the chase manhattan corporation (chase). upon consummation of
the merger, chase changed its name to j.p. morgan chase & co. the merger was
accounted for as a pooling of interests. accordingly, the information included
in the consolidated financial statements and notes of jpmorgan chase reflects
the combined results of chase and j.p. morgan as if the merger had been in
effect for all periods presented.
the accounting and financial reporting policies of jpmorgan chase and its
subsidiaries conform to u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (gaap)
and prevailing industry practices. additionally, where applicable, the policies
conform to the accounting and reporting guidelines prescribed by bank
regulatory authorities.
the consolidated financial statements include accounts of jpmorgan chase and
its majority-owned subsidiaries after eliminating intercompany balances and
transactions.
investments in companies in which the firm has significant influence over
operating and financing decisions (generally defined as owning a voting or
economic interest of 20% to 50%) are accounted for in accordance with the
equity method of accounting. these investments are generally included in other
assets, and the firms share of income or loss is included in other revenue.
for a discussion of private equity investments, see note 13 on page 88.
assets held in an agency or fiduciary capacity by the firm are not assets of
jpmorgan chase and are not included in the consolidated balance sheet.
certain amounts in prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation. effective january1, 2002, the firm implemented eitf
issue no.01-14 which requires reimbursements received for out-of-pocket
expenses incurred to be characterized as revenue in the consolidated statement
of income. the adoption resulted in reclassifications of previously disclosed
amounts.
use of estimates in the preparation of consolidated financial statements
the preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to
make estimates and assumptions that affect reported revenues, expenses, assets,
liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. actual results
could be different from these estimates.
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into
u.s. dollars using applicable rates of exchange. jpmorgan chase translates
revenues and expenses using exchange rates at the transaction date.
gains and losses from translating the financial statements of a non-u.s.
operation where the functional currency is not the u.s. dollar are included in
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)within stockholders equity. for
non-u.s. operations where the functional currency is the u.s. dollar, including
operations in highly inflationary environments, transaction gains and losses
are reported in the consolidated statement of income.
statement of cash flows
for jpmorgan chases consolidated statement of cash flows, cash and cash
equivalents are defined as those amounts included in cash and due from banks.
significant accounting policies
the following table identifies jpmorgan chases significant accounting policies
and the note and page where a detailed description of each policy can be found:
trading assets and liabilities, including derivatives
note 3
page 76
fee revenue
note 4
page 77
securities
note 7
page 79
securities financing activities
note 8
page 80
loans
note 9
page 80
allowance for credit losses
note 10
page 82
special-purpose entities
note 11
page 83
mortgage servicing rights
note 12
page 87
private equity investments
note 13
page 88
goodwill and other intangibles
note 14
page 89
premises and equipment
note 15
page 89
income taxes
note 22
page 93
postretirement employee benefit plans
note 23
page 94
employee stock-based incentives
note 24
page 96
derivative instruments and hedging activities
note 28
page 101
off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments
and guarantees
note 29
page 102
fair value of financial instruments
note 31
page 104
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 2 business changes and developments
merger with j.p. morgan on december31, 2000
under the terms of the merger agreement, 617million shares of jpmorgan chases
common stock were issued in exchange for all of the outstanding shares of j.p.
morgans common stock (based on an exchange ratio of 3.7 shares of jpmorgan
chases common stock for each share of j.p. morgans common stock). each series
of preferred stock of j.p. morgan was exchanged on a one-for-one basis for a
corresponding series of preferred stock of jpmorgan chase having substantially
the same terms.
acquisition of the providian master trust
on february5, 2002, jpmorgan chase acquired the providian master trust from
providian national bank. the acquisition consisted of credit card receivables
of approximately $7.9billion and related relationships. the acquired portfolio
consisted of approximately 3.3million credit card accounts.
acquisition of the mortgage business of advanta corp.
in the first quarter of 2001, chase manhattan mortgage
corporation, an indirect subsidiary of jpmorgan chase, acquired all of the
mortgage business of advanta corp. the acquisition included advantas
origination capability, loan servicing and sub-servicing portfolios and related
securitization residual interests.
sale of hong kong retail banking business
during the fourth quarter of 2000, chase completed the sale of its hong
kong-based retail banking business, including chase manhattan card company
limited, to standard chartered plc for $1.3billion in cash. the sale resulted
in a pre-tax gain of $827million ($537million after-tax).
transfer of euroclear-related business
on december31, 2000, j.p. morgan and the boards of euroclear clearance system
plc and euroclear clearance system socit cooperative consummated their
agreement and created a european-based bank in brussels, known as euroclear
bank, which assumed the operations of the euroclear system from j.p. morgan.
the transfer resulted in a gain of $399million ($267million after-tax) in
2000, which reflected the minimum proceeds to be received from the euroclear
bank during the following two years. under the agreement, the firm could
receive additional proceeds of up to $100million per year for each of 2001 and
2002 based on the financial performance of the euroclear bank during those
periods. the firm received $16million of additional proceeds in 2001. there
were no additional proceeds in 2002.
acquisition of flemings
on august1, 2000, chase acquired robert fleming holdings limited (flemings).
the consideration issued to flemings shareholders consisted of 2.6billion in
cash and notes and 65.3million shares of chase common stock. chase also
established retention arrangements for key flemings employees that totaled
approximately $220million (after-tax) and were expensed over the two years
following the acquisition. the transaction was accounted for under the purchase
method.
note 3 trading activities
trading assets include debt and equity securities held for trading purposes
that jpmorgan chase owns (long positions). trading liabilities include debt
and equity securities that the firm has sold to other parties but does not own
(short positions). the firm is obligated to purchase securities at a future
date to cover the short position. also included in trading liabilities are
structured notes that the firm sells as part of its trading activities.
included in trading assets and trading liabilities are the reported receivables
(unrealized gains) and payables (unrealized losses) related to derivatives.
these amounts include the effect of master netting agreements as permitted
under fin 39. trading positions are carried at fair value on the consolidated
balance sheet.
trading revenue
the following table sets forth the components of total trading revenue:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
equities (a)
$
$
1,541
$
1,762
fixed income and other (b)
2,263
3,377
4,536
total
$
2,594
$
4,918
$
6,298
(a)
includes equity securities and equity derivatives.
(b)
includes bonds and commercial
paper, various types of interest rate
derivatives (including credit derivatives), as well as foreign exchange and
commodities.
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
trading assets and liabilities
the following table presents the fair value of trading assets and trading
liabilities for the dates indicated:
december 31, (in millions)
trading assets
debt and equity instruments:
u.s. government, federal agencies and
municipal securities
$
68,906
$
41,666
certificates of deposit, bankers acceptances
and commercial paper
4,545
8,492
debt securities issued by non-u.s. governments
29,709
22,465
corporate securities and other
62,039
45,625
total trading assets  debt and equity instruments
$
165,199
$
118,248
derivative receivables:
interest rate contracts
$
60,771
$
44,732
foreign exchange contracts
7,487
9,815
debt, equity, commodity and other contracts
14,844
16,610
total trading assets  derivative receivables
$
83,102
$
71,157
trading liabilities
debt and equity instruments(a)
$
66,864
$
52,988
derivative payables:
interest rate contracts
$
46,639
$
33,066
foreign exchange contracts
8,036
9,410
debt, equity, commodity and other contracts
11,552
13,587
total trading liabilities  derivative payables
$
66,227
$
56,063
(a)
primarily represents securities
sold, not yet purchased.
average trading assets and liabilities were as follows for the periods
indicated:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
trading assets  debt and equity instruments
$
149,173
$
145,364
trading assets  derivative receivables
73,641
78,461
trading liabilities  debt and equity instruments(a)
$
64,725
$
53,976
trading liabilities  derivative payables
57,607
69,676
(a)
primarily represents securities
sold, not yet
purchased.
note 4 other noninterest revenue
investment banking fees
investment banking fees include advisory, and equity and debt underwriting
fees. advisory fees are recognized as revenue when related services are
performed. underwriting fees are recognized as revenue when the firm has
rendered all services to the issuer and is entitled to collect the fee from the
issuer, as long as there are no other contingencies associated with the fee
(e.g., not contingent on the customer obtaining financing). underwriting fees
are presented net of syndicate expenses. in addition, jpmorgan chase recognizes
credit arrangement and syndication fees as revenue after satisfying certain
retention, timing and yield criteria.
the following table presents the components of investment banking fees:
year
ended december 31, (in millions)
advisory
$
$
1,248
$
1,739
underwriting:
equity
debt
1,543
1,839
1,764
total
$
2,763
$
3,612
$
4,362
fees and commissions
fees and commissions primarily include fees from investment management, custody
and processing services, deposit accounts, brokerage services, mortgage
servicing (net of amortization, write-downs and derivatives hedging), loan
commitments, standby letters of credit and financial guarantees, compensating
balances, insurance products and other financial service-related products.
these fees are recognized over the period that the related service is provided.
also included are credit card revenues, which primarily include interchange
income (transaction-processing fees), late fees, cash advance, annual and
overlimit fees, and servicing fees earned in connection with securitization
activities. credit card revenues are recognized as billed, except for annual
fees, which are recognized over a 12-month period.
details of fees and commissions were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
investment management, custody and
processing services
$
3,759
$
3,951
$
3,775
credit card revenue
2,869
2,108
1,771
brokerage and investment services
1,231
1,244
1,228
mortgage servicing fees, net of amortization,
write-downs and derivatives hedging
(230
)
other lending-related service fees
deposit service fees
1,128
1,023
other fees
total fees and commissions
$
10,756
$
9,481
$
9,466
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
other revenue
details of other revenue were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
other revenue
gains on sales of nonstrategic assets
$
$
$
1,307
residential mortgage
origination/sales activities
loss on economic hedge
of the flemings purchase price
(176
)
all other revenue
total other revenue
$
1,158
$
$
2,304
note 5 interest income and interest expense
details of interest income and expense were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
interest income
loans
$
12,057
$
15,544
$
17,243
securities
3,367
3,647
4,422
trading assets
6,798
7,390
7,160
federal funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements
2,061
3,805
4,751
securities borrowed
1,343
2,294
deposits with banks
total interest income
$
25,284
$
32,181
$
36,643
interest expense
deposits
$
5,253
$
7,998
$
10,835
short-term and other liabilities
7,038
11,098
13,105
long-term debt
1,467
2,283
3,191
total interest expense
$
13,758
$
21,379
$
27,131
net interest income
$
11,526
$
10,802
$
9,512
provision for credit losses (a)
4,331
3,182
1,380
net interest income after
provision for credit losses
$
7,195
$
7,620
$
8,132
(a)
includes the provision for
lending-related commitments of $292million, $(3)million
and $3million for the years ended december31, 2002, 2001
and 2000, respectively.
note 6 noninterest expense
merger and restructuring costs
the following table shows the components of merger and restructuring costs
associated with various programs announced prior to january1, 2002:
year
ended december 31, (in millions)
merger and restructuring costs
merger, right-sizing, and other restructuring costs:
severance and stay bonuses
$
$
1,665
$
facilities and equipment write-offs
technology and consulting
other
total merger, right-sizing, and
other restructuring costs
1,062
2,322
1,323
relocation costs:
severance and stay bonuses
facilities and equipment write-offs
technology and consulting
dual salary, occupancy and equipment
other
total relocation costs
total merger and restructuring costs
$
1,210
$
2,523
(a)
$
1,431
(b)
(a)
includes $300million right-sizing liability recorded in the 2001 third
quarter.
(b)
includes $1.25billion merger liability recorded in the 2000
fourth quarter.
the firm recorded liabilities of $1.25billion in the fourth quarter of 2000
and $300million in the third quarter of 2001 in connection with, respectively,
the merger of j.p. morgan and chase and with the right-sizing of employee
levels beyond that planned at the time of the merger. in addition to these
charges, the firm incurred additional expenses in 2000, 2001, and 2002 relating
to the merger, right-sizing, relocation and other restructuring initiatives.
these additional costs were expensed as incurred. with the exception of
facility and equipment write-offs, all of the costs in the table above required
the expenditure of cash.
the table below shows the utilization of the $1.25billion merger-related
charge and the $300million right-sizing charge. at december31, 2002, these
liabilities had been fully utilized.
(in millions)
merger
right-sizing
liability balance at january1, 2000
$
$
merger charge
1,250
liability utilized during year 2000
(333
)
liability balance at december31, 2000
right-sizing charge
liability utilized during year 2001
(763
)
(259
)
liability balance at december31, 2001
liability utilized during year 2002
(154
)
(41
)
liability balance at december31, 2002
$
$
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
other expense
details of other expense were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
other expense
professional services
$
1,303
$
1,139
$
1,203
outside services
marketing
travel and entertainment
all other
1,391
1,440
1,599
total other expense
$
4,788
$
4,521
$
4,727
note 7 securities
securities are classified as available-for-sale (afs), held-to-maturity
(htm) or trading. trading securities are discussed within note 3 on pages
7677. securities are classified as afs when, in managements judgment, they
may be sold in response to or in anticipation of changes in market conditions.
afs securities are carried at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet.
unrealized gains and losses after sfas 133 valuation adjustments are reported as
net increases or decreases to accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
the specific identification method is used to determine realized gains and
losses on afs securities, which are included in securities gains (losses)on
the consolidated statement of income. securities that the firm has the positive
intent and ability to hold to maturity are classified as htm and are carried at
amortized cost on the consolidated balance sheet.
the following table presents realized gains and losses from afs securities:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
2000(a)
realized gains
$
1,904
$
1,438
$
realized losses
(341
)
(572
)
(498
)
net realized gains (losses)
$
1,563
$
$
(a)
includes the impact of related
derivatives.
in calculating the effective yield for mortgage-backed securities (mbs) and
collateralized mortgage obligations (cmo), jpmorgan chase actively monitors
the likelihood of principal prepayment through its portfolio management
function. management regularly performs simulation testing to determine the
impact that market conditions would have on its mbs and cmo portfolios. mbss
and cmos that management believes have high prepayment risk are included in the
afs portfolio and are reported at fair value.
the amortized cost and estimated fair value of afs and htm securities were as
follows for the dates indicated:
gross
gross
gross
gross
amortized
unrealized
unrealized
fair
amortized
unrealized
unrealized
fair
december 31, (in millions)
cost
gains
losses
value
cost
gains
losses
value
available-for-sale securities
u.s. government and federal agency/corporation obligations:
mortgage-backed securities
$
40,148
$
$
$
40,456
$
30,192
$
$
$
29,890
collateralized mortgage obligations
3,271
3,313
2,295
2,297
u.s.treasuries
22,870
23,377
9,987
9,903
obligations of state and political subdivisions
1,744
1,875
2,429
2,500
debt securities issued by non-u.s. governments
11,873
11,912
11,636
11,677
corporate debt securities
equity securities
1,198
1,196
1,102
1,097
other, primarily asset-backed securities(a)
1,021
1,785
1,778
total available-for-sale securities
$
82,952
$
1,395
$
$
84,032
$
59,534
$
$
$
59,284
held-to-maturity securities
total held-to-maturity securities (b)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(a)
includes cmos of private issuers, which generally have underlying collateral
consisting of obligations of u.s. government and federal agencies and
corporations.
(b)
consists primarily of mortgage-backed securities.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the following table presents the amortized cost, estimated fair value and
average yield at december31, 2002, of jpmorgan chases afs and htm securities
by contractual maturity:
available-for-sale securities
held-to-maturity securities
maturity schedule of securities
amortized
fair
average
amortized
fair
average
december 31, 2002 (in millions)
cost
value
yield(a)
cost
value
yield(a)
due in one year or less
$
10,075
$
10,041
3.14
%
$
$
2.09
%
due after one year through five years
17,922
18,331
3.76
due after five years through 10years
9,445
9,728
4.48
due after 10years(b)
45,510
45,932
5.17
6.80
total securities
$
82,952
$
84,032
4.54
%
$
$
6.42
%
(a)
the average yield is based on
amortized cost balances at year-end. yields
are derived by dividing interest income (including the effect of related
derivatives on afs securities and the amortization of premiums and accretion of
discounts) by total amortized cost. taxable-equivalent yields are used where
applicable.
(b)
includes securities with no stated maturity. substantially all of jpmorgan
chases mbss and cmos are due in 10years or more based on contractual
maturity. the estimated duration, which reflects anticipated future prepayments
based on a consensus of dealers in the market, is approximately three years for
mbss and less than one year for cmos.
note 8 securities financing activities
jpmorgan chase enters into reverse repurchase agreements, repurchase
agreements, securities borrowed transactions and securities loaned transactions
primarily to finance the firms inventory positions, acquire securities to
cover short positions and settle other securities obligations and to
accommodate customers needs.
securities purchased under resale agreements (resale agreements) and
securities sold under repurchase agreements (repurchase agreements) are
generally treated as collateralized financing transactions and are carried on
the consolidated balance sheet at the amounts the securities will be
subsequently sold or repurchased, plus accrued interest. where appropriate,
resale and repurchase agreements with the same counterparty are reported on a
net basis in accordance with fin 41. jpmorgan chase takes possession of
securities purchased under resale agreements. on a daily basis, jpmorgan chase
monitors the market value of the underlying collateral received from its
counterparties, which consists primarily of u.s. and foreign government and
agency securities, and requests additional collateral from its counterparties
when necessary.
similar transactions that do not meet the sfas 140 definition of a repurchase
agreement are accounted for as buys and sells rather than financing
transactions. these transactions are accounted for as a purchase (sale)of the
underlying securities with a forward obligation to sell (purchase)the
securities. the forward purchase (sale)obligation, a derivative, is recorded
on the consolidated balance sheet at its fair value with changes in the fair
value recorded in trading revenue. notional amounts of transactions accounted
for as purchases under sfas 140 were $8billion and $6billion at december31,
2002 and 2001, respectively. notional amounts of transactions accounted for as
sales under sfas 140 were $13billion and $27billion at december31, 2002 and
2001, respectively. based on the short-term duration of these contracts, the
unrealized gain or loss is insignificant.
securities borrowed and securities lent are recorded at the amount of cash
collateral advanced or received. securities borrowed consist primarily of
government and equity securities. jpmorgan chase monitors the market value of
the securities borrowed and lent on a daily basis and calls for additional
collateral when appropriate. fees received or paid are recorded in interest
income or interest expense.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
securities purchased under resale agreements
$
57,645
$
61,519
securities borrowed
34,143
36,580
securities sold under repurchase agreements
$
161,394
$
117,684
securities loaned
1,661
1,413
jpmorgan chase pledges certain financial instruments it owns to collateralize
repurchase agreements and other securities financings. pledged securities that
can be sold or repledged by the secured party are identified as financial
instruments owned (pledged to various parties) on the consolidated balance
sheet.
at december31, 2002, the firm had received securities as collateral that can
be repledged, delivered or otherwise used with a fair value of approximately
$214billion. this collateral was generally obtained under reverse repurchase
or securities borrowing agreements. of these securities, approximately $199
billion were repledged, delivered or otherwise used, generally as collateral
under repurchase agreements, securities lending agreements, or to cover short
sales.
note 9 loans
loans are generally reported at the principal amount outstanding, net of the
allowance for loan losses, unearned income and any net deferred loan fees.
loans held for sale are carried at the lower of aggregate cost or fair value.
loans are classified as trading for secondary market trading activities where
positions are bought and sold to make profits from short-term
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
movements in price. loans held for trading purposes are included in trading
assets and are carried at fair value, with the gains and losses included in
trading revenue. interest income is recognized using the interest method or on
a basis approximating a level rate of return over the term of the loan.
nonaccrual loans are those on which the accrual of interest is discontinued.
loans (other than certain consumer loans discussed below) are placed on
nonaccrual status immediately if, in the opinion of management, full payment of
principal or interest is in doubt, or when principal or interest is 90days or
more past due and collateral, if any, is insufficient to cover principal and
interest. interest accrued but not collected at the date a loan is placed on
nonaccrual status is reversed against interest income. in addition, the
amortization of net deferred loan fees is suspended. interest income on
nonaccrual loans is recognized only to the extent it is received in cash.
however, where there is doubt regarding the ultimate collectibility of loan
principal, all cash thereafter received is applied to reduce the carrying value
of the loan. loans are restored to accrual status only when interest and
principal payments are brought current and future payments are reasonably
assured.
consumer loans are generally charged to the allowance for loan losses upon
reaching specified stages of delinquency, in accordance with the federal
financial institutions examination councils (ffiec) policy. for example,
credit card loans are charged off at the earlier of 180days past due or within
60days from receiving notification of the filing of bankruptcy. residential
mortgage products are generally charged off to net realizable value at 180days
past due. other consumer products are generally charged off (to net realizable
value if collateralized) at 120days past due. accrued interest on residential
mortgage products, auto financings and certain other consumer loans are
accounted for in accordance with the nonaccrual loan policy discussed above.
accrued interest on all other loans is generally reversed against interest
income when the consumer loan is charged off.
a collateralized loan is considered an in-substance foreclosure and is
reclassified to assets acquired as loan satisfactions, within other assets,
only when jpmorgan chase has taken physical possession of the collateral,
regardless of whether formal foreclosure proceedings have taken place.
the composition of the loan portfolio at each of the dates indicated was as
follows:
december 31, (in millions)
u.s.
non-u.s.
total
u.s.
non-u.s.
total
commercial loans:
commercial and industrial
$
49,205
$
31,446
$
80,651
$
56,680
$
33,530
$
90,210
commercial real estate:
commercial mortgage
3,176
3,178
3,533
3,549
construction
financial institutions
3,770
2,438
6,208
5,608
3,570
9,178
foreign governments
1,161
1,161
total commercial loans
56,667
34,881
91,548
66,436
38,428
104,864
consumer loans:
1-4 family residential mortgages:
first liens
49,357
49,369
47,786
48,292
home equity loans
14,643
14,643
11,644
11,644
credit card
19,677
19,677
19,387
19,394
auto financings
33,615
33,615
25,667
25,705
other consumer
7,395
7,512
7,366
7,545
total consumer loans
124,687
124,816
111,850
112,580
total
loans(a)(b)
$
181,354
$
35,010
$
216,364
$
178,286
$
39,158
$
217,444
(a)
loans are presented net of unearned income of $1.89billion and $1.83
billion at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively.
(b)
includes loans held for sale (principally mortgage-related loans) of $25.0
billion and $16.6billion at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively.
the following table reflects information about the firms loans held for sale,
principally mortgage-related:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
net gains on sales of loans held for sale
$
$
$
lower of cost or market adjustments
(36
)
(177
)
(4
)
impaired loans
jpmorgan chase accounts for and discloses nonaccrual commercial loans as
impaired loans and recognizes their interest income as discussed previously for
nonaccrual loans. the firm excludes from impaired loans its small-balance,
homogeneous consumer loans, loans carried at fair value or the lower of cost or
fair value, debt securities and leases.
the table below sets forth information about jpmorgan chases impaired loans.
the firm uses discounted cash flow as its primary method for valuing impaired
loans:
december 31, (in millions)
impaired loans with an allowance
$
3,250
$
1,523
impaired
loans without an allowance(a)
total impaired loans
$
3,662
$
1,980
allowance
for impaired loans under sfas 114(b)
$
1,106
$
average balance of impaired loans during the year
2,805
1,840
interest income recognized on impaired loans
during the year
$
$
(a)
when the discounted cash flows, collateral value or market price equals or
exceeds the carrying value of the loan, then the loan does not require an
allowance under sfas 114.
(b)
the allowance for impaired loans under sfas 114 is included in jpmorgan
chases allowance for loan losses.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 10 allowance for credit losses
jpmorgan chases allowance for loan losses is intended to cover probable credit
losses for which either the asset is not specifically identified or the size of
the loss has not been fully determined. within the allowance, there are
specific and expected loss components and a residual component.
the specific loss component covers those commercial loans deemed by the firm to
be criticized. the firm internally categorizes its criticized commercial loans
into three groups: doubtful, substandard and special mention.
criticized nonperforming commercial loans (excluding leases) are considered to
be impaired loans. the allowance for impaired loans is computed using the
methodology under sfas 114. an allowance is established when the discounted
cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of an impaired loan
are lower than the carrying value of that loan. to compute the specific loss
component of the allowance, larger impaired loans are evaluated individually,
and smaller impaired loans are evaluated as a pool using historical loss
experience for the respective class of assets. criticized but performing loans
also are evaluated as a pool, using historical loss rates.
the expected loss component covers performing commercial loans (except
criticized loans) and consumer loans.
expected losses are the product of default probability and loss severity. these
factors are differentiated by risk rating and maturity for commercial loans.
the expected loss estimates for each consumer loan portfolio are based
primarily on the firms historical loss experience for the applicable product
portfolio.
finally, a residual component is maintained to cover uncertainties that could
affect managements estimate of probable losses. the residual component of the
allowance reflects the margin of imprecision in the underlying assumptions used
for estimating specific losses and expected losses. it is anticipated that the
residual component of the allowance will range between 10% and 20% of the total
allowance for credit losses.
jpmorgan chases risk management committee reviews, at least quarterly, the
allowance for credit losses relative to the risk profile of the firms credit
portfolio and current economic conditions. the allowance is adjusted based on
that review if, in managements judgment, changes are warranted. as of december
31, 2002, jpmorgan chase deemed the allowance to be adequate (i.e., sufficient
to absorb losses that are inherent in the portfolio but are not yet
identifiable).
to provide for the risk of losses inherent in the credit extension process,
management also computes specific and expected loss components, as well as a
residual component, for lending-related commitments using a methodology similar
to that used for the loan portfolio.
jpmorgan chase maintains an allowance for credit losses as follows:
reported in:
allowance for
credit losses on:
balance sheet
income statement
loans
allowance for loan losses
provision for credit losses
lending-related commitments
other liabilities
provision for credit losses
the table below summarizes the changes in the allowance for loan losses:
year
ended december 31, (in millions)
allowance at january 1
$
4,524
$
3,665
$
3,738
provision for loan losses
4,039
3,185
1,377
charge-offs
(4,060
)
(2,582
)
(1,634
)
recoveries
net charge-offs
(3,676
)
(2,335
)
(1,400
)
charge to conform to ffiec revised policy
(80
)
allowance related to purchased portfolios
other
allowance at december 31
$
5,350
$
4,524
$
3,665
the table below summarizes the changes in the allowance for lending-related
commitments:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
allowance at january 1
$
$
$
provision for lending-related
commitments
(3
)
charge-offs
(212
)
(15
)
recoveries
net charge-offs
(212
)
(15
)
other
(1
)
allowance at december 31
$
$
$
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
note 11 special-purpose entities
the terms special-purpose entity (spe) and special-purpose vehicle (spv)
are used interchangeably in practice. spes are an important part of the
financial markets, providing market liquidity by facilitating investors access
to specific portfolios of assets and risks. they are, for example, critical to
the functioning of the mortgage- and asset-backed securities and commercial
paper markets. spes may be organized as trusts, partnerships or corporations
and are typically set up for a single, discrete purpose. spes are not operating
entities and usually have no employees and a limited life. the basic spe
structure involves a company selling assets to the spe. the spe funds the
purchase of those assets by issuing securities to investors. the legal
documents that govern the spe transaction describe how the cash earned on the
assets must be allocated to its investors and other parties that have rights to
those cash flows. spes can be structured to be bankruptcy remote, thereby
insulating investors from the impact of the creditors of other entities,
including the seller of the assets.
where jpmorgan chase is a transferor of financial assets to an spe, the assets
sold are derecognized and the spe is not consolidated on the firms balance
sheet when the assets are: (1)legally isolated from the firms creditors, (2)
the accounting criteria for a sale are met, and (3)the spe is a qualifying
special-purpose entity (qspe) under sfas 140. when an spe does not meet the
formal definition of a qspe, the decision whether or not to consolidate depends
on the applicable accounting principles for non-qspes, including a
determination regarding the nature and amount of investment made by third
parties in the spe. consideration is given to, among other factors, whether a third party has made
a substantive equity investment in the spe; which party has voting rights, if
any; who makes decisions about the assets in the spe; and who is at risk for
loss. the spe is consolidated if jpmorgan chase retains or acquires control
over the risks and rewards of the assets in the spe. all transactions and
retained interests between the firm and spes are reflected on jpmorgan chases
consolidated balance sheet or in the notes to the financial statements.
the firm has no commitments to issue its own stock to support an spe
transaction, and its policies require that transactions with spes be conducted
at arms length and reflect market pricing. consistent with this policy, no
jpmorgan chase employee is permitted to invest in spes with which the firm is
involved where such investment would violate the firms worldwide rules of
conduct. these rules prohibit employees from self-dealing and from acting on
behalf of the firm in transactions with which they or their family have any
significant financial interest.
jpmorgan chase is involved with spes in three broad categories of transactions:
loan securitizations, multi-seller conduits and client intermediation.
loan securitizations
jpmorgan chase securitizes, sells and services residential mortgage, credit
card, automobile and commercial loans. assets sold to spes as part of the
securitization process are not reflected in jpmorgan chases consolidated
balance sheet (except for retained interests as described below) but are
included on the balance sheet of the spe purchasing the assets. assets held by
securitization-related spes as of december31, 2002 and 2001, were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in billions)
credit card receivables
$
40.2
$
25.6
residential mortgage receivables
20.6
24.3
commercial loans
25.2
19.8
auto loans
4.5
3.4
other receivables
0.1
1.4
interests in securitized and sold loans are generally retained by the firm in
the form of senior or subordinated interest-only strips, subordinated tranches,
escrow accounts and servicing rights, and they are primarily recorded in other
assets. in addition, credit card securitization trusts require the firm to
maintain a minimum undivided interest in the trusts, which represents the
firms interests in the receivables transferred to the trust that have not been
securitized. these interests are not represented by security certificates. the
firms undivided interests are carried at historical cost and are classified in
loans.
jpmorgan chase retains servicing responsibilities for all residential mortgage,
credit card and automobile loan securitizations and for certain commercial loan
securitizations it establishes. the firm receives annual servicing fees based
on the securitized loan balance plus certain ancillary fees. it also retains
the right to service the residential mortgage loans it sells in connection with
mortgage-backed securities transactions with the government national mortgage
association (gnma), federal national mortgage association (fnma) and
federal home loan mortgage corporation (freddie mac). for a discussion of
mortgage servicing rights, see note 12.
gains or losses recorded on securitizations and sales depend, in part, on the
carrying amount of the assets sold and are allocated between the assets sold
and the retained interests based on their relative fair values at the date of
sale. since quoted market prices are generally not available, the firm usually
estimates fair value of these retained interests by determining the present
value of future expected cash flows using modeling techniques. such models
incorporate managements best estimates of key variables, such as expected
credit losses, prepayment speeds and discount rates appropriate for the risks
involved. gains on securitizations and sales are reported in other revenue.
retained interests that are subject to prepayment risk such that jpmorgan chase
may not recover substantially all of its investment are recorded at fair value
with subsequent adjustments reflected in
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
other comprehensive income or in earnings, if the fair value of the retained
interest has declined below its carrying amount and such decline has been
determined to be other-than-temporary.
during 2002, the firm securitized approximately $7.2billion of residential
mortgage loans, $9.4billion of credit card loans, $3.4billion of automobile
loans and $4.3billion of commercial loans, resulting in pre-tax gains on
securitizations of $214million, $45million, $6million and $53million,
respectively. during 2001, the firm securitized approximately $7.9billion of
residential mortgage loans, $6billion of credit card loans, $2.5billion of
automobile loans and $5.5billion of commercial loans, resulting in pre-tax
gains on securitizations of $242million, $42million, $17million and $40
million, respectively. in addition, the firm sold residential mortgage loans
totaling $62.2billion and $45.8billion during 2002 and 2001, respectively,
primarily as gnma, fnma and freddie mac mortgage-backed securities; these sales
resulted in gains of $388million in 2002 and $262million in 2001.
the following table summarizes certain cash flows received from securitization
trusts for sales that were completed during 2002 and 2001 and the key economic
assumptions used in measuring the retained interests as of the dates of such
sales:
($ in millions)
mortgage
credit card
auto
commercial
mortgage
credit card
auto
commercial
cash flow information:
proceeds from securitizations
$
7,403
$
9,350
$
3,386
$
4,284
$
7,932
$
6,038
$
2,496
$
5,543
servicing fees collected
other cash flows received
proceeds from collections reinvested in
previous revolving securitizations
44,645
31,191
2,164
key assumptions (rates per annum):
prepayment
rate (a)
10.1-25.0%cpr
14.6-14.9%
1.51-1.52%wac/wam
na(b)
8.5-34.0%
cpr
14.0-14.4%
1.47%wac/wam
na(b)
weighted-average life
3.0-7.7 years
7 months
1.8 years
7.3 years
2.6-8.5 years
7 months
1.8 years
1.1 years
expected credit losses
0-1.0%
(c)
5.4-5.9
%
0.5
%
na(d)
0.1-0.8
%
5.5-6.0
%
0.4-0.5
%
na(d)
discount rate
15.0-30.0
%
5.1-5.9
%
5.7-5.9
%
8.8
%
15.0-19.0
%
3.5-6.5
%
5.3-7.0
%
5.0
%
(a)
cpr: constant prepayment rate;
wac/wam: weighted-average
coupon/weighted-average maturity.
(b)
not applicable since these retained
interests are not subject to prepayment risk.
(c)
expected credit losses for prime mortgage securitizations are minimal and
are incorporated into other assumptions.
(d)
not applicable due to collateral
coverage on loans in commercial securitizations.
on february5, 2002, jpmorgan chase acquired the providian master trust,
consisting of credit card receivables of approximately $7.9billion and related
relationships. accounting principles required that all of the purchased
receivables, including those that had been securitized, be initially reflected
on the firms consolidated balance sheet, together with a related liability to
reflect the securities issued by the trust to third parties. this liability
totaled $6.3billion on february5, 2002, and was recorded in other borrowed
funds. as credit card receivables revolve, and new receivables are sold to
investors through the securitization trust, these newly sold receivables and
related liability are removed from the balance sheet as permitted by
securitization accounting principles. during the period from the acquisition
date to december31, 2002, $5.6billion of the liability had been removed from
the consolidated balance sheet, either through the revolving sales of new
receivables to investors or the maturing of investor securities. at december
31, 2002, $0.7billion of the originally purchased and securitized receivables,
and the related liability of $0.7billion, remained on the balance sheet. the
interest rate of the remaining liability is a combination of fixed and variable
rates, which reflects the coupon rates of the securities issued to third
parties. these rates ranged from 1.53% to 7.98% at december31, 2002. the
liability is expected to be substantially removed from the balance sheet by
june 2003. in addition, at december31, 2002, the firm had on its balance sheet
$2.7billion relating to its undivided interest in the providian master trust
and $117million related to its subordinated interest in accrued interest and
fees on securitized receivables.
at december31, 2002 and 2001, jpmorgan chase had $4.6billion and $3.9
billion, respectively, related to its undivided interest in its chase credit
card master trust, and $861million and $878million, respectively, in its
subordinated interest in accrued interest and fees on the securitized
receivables. the firm also maintains escrow accounts up to predetermined limits
for some of its residential mortgage, credit card and automobile
securitizations, in the unlikely event of deficiencies in cash flows owed to
investors. the amounts available in such escrow accounts are recorded in other
assets and, as of december31, 2002, amounted to $510million and $94million
for credit card and automobile securitizations, respectively; as of december
31, 2001, these amounts were $1million, $341million and $79million for
residential mortgage, credit card and automobile securitizations, respectively.
additionally, the firm had other retained securitization interests as of
december31, 2002 and 2001, of $684million and $1billion from residential
mortgages, $92million and $38million from credit cards, $151million and $141
million from auto loans, and $94million and $66million from commercial loans.
these retained interests are primarily subordinated or residual interests.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
the table below outlines the key economic assumptions and the sensitivity of
fair values at december31, 2002 of the remaining retained interests to
immediate 10% and 20% adverse changes in those assumptions:
($ in millions)
mortgage(a)
credit card
auto
commercial
carrying value / fair value of
retained interests(b)
$
$
$
$
weighted-average life
1.7-2.1 years
5-24 months
1.7 years
1-7.3 years
prepayment rate
28.7-43.7% cpr
14.9
%
1.64% wac/wam
na(c)
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(7
)
$
(5
)
$
(10
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(26
)
(5
)
(20
)
loss assumption
0-2.9
%(d)
5.9
%
0.55
%
na(e)
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(31
)
$
(6
)
$
(4
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(59
)
(11
)
(8
)
discount rate
13.0-30.0
%(f)
5.2-7.3
%
4.7
%
3.5-11.7
%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(18
)
$
(1
)
$
(1
)
$
(2
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(36
)
(2
)
(2
)
(5
)
(a)
includes approximately $345million of retained interests resulting from
the acquisition of advantas mortgage operations.
(b)
unrealized gains (losses)recorded in stockholders equity that relate to
these retained interests totaled $156million, $(1) million and $21million for
residential mortgage, credit card and automobile, respectively.
(c)
not
applicable since predominantly all of these retained interests are not subject
to prepayment risk.
(d)
expected credit losses for prime mortgage securitizations are minimal and
are incorporated into other assumptions.
(e)
not applicable as modeling assumptions for predominantly all of the
commercial retained interests consider overcollateralization coverage and cash
collateralized credit default swaps.
(f)
during 2002, the firm sold certain residual interests of approximately $244
million from sub-prime mortgage securitizations via net interest margin (nim)
securitizations. the firm retained residual interests in the nim securitizations
of approximately $58million that are valued using a 30% discount rate.
the sensitivity analysis in the preceding table is hypothetical. changes in
fair value based on a 10% variation in assumptions generally cannot be
extrapolated easily, because the relationship of the change in the assumptions
to the change in fair value may not be linear. also, in this table, the effect
that a change in a particular assumption may have on the fair value is
calculated without changing any other assumption. in reality, changes in one
factor may result in changes in another assumption, which might counteract or
magnify the sensitivities.
expected static pool net credit losses include actual incurred losses plus
projected net credit losses, divided by the original balance of the
outstandings comprising the securitization pool. the table below displays the
expected static pool net credit losses for 2002, 2001 and 2000 based on
securitizations occurring in that year:
loans securitized in: (a)(b)
mortgage
auto
mortgage
auto
mortgage
auto
december31, 2002
0.1-3.7
%
0.9
%
0.1-3.8
%
0.9
%
0.1-4.1
%(c)
1.1
%
december31, 2001
na
na
0.1-2.3
0.8
0.1-2.7
(c)
0.8
december31, 2000
na
na
na
na
0.1-2.3
0.7
(a)
no expected static pool net credit losses on commercial securitizations due
to collateral coverage on loans in commercial securitizations.
(b)
static pool losses not applicable to credit card securitizations due to
their revolving structure.
(c)
excludes expected static pool losses associated
with the acquisition of advantas mortgage operations. expected static pool
losses, as of december31, 2002 and 2001, would be 11.1% and
8.2%, respectively for the three securitization transactions
completed by advanta corp. during 2000.
na-
not applicable.
the table below presents information about delinquencies, net credit losses and
components of reported and securitized financial assets at december31, 2002:
loans 90 days or
net
total loans
more past due
charge-offs
type of loan
(in millions)
mortgage(a)(b)
$
81,570
$
82,546
$
$
$
$
credit card
50,399
40,811
1,096
2,828
2,038
auto
37,980
28,950
other(c)
7,524
8,096
consumer loans
177,473
160,403
2,280
2,105
3,473
2,615
commercial loans
92,866
107,468
3,749
2,046
1,881
total loans reported
and securitized(d)
270,339
267,871
6,029
4,151
5,354
3,597
less: loans
securitized(a)(b)
(53,975
)
(50,427
)
(1,306
)
(1,134
)
(1,678
)
(1,262
)
reported
$
216,364
$
217,444
$
4,723
$
3,017
$
3,676
$
2,335
(a)
includes $12.2billion of outstanding principal balances on securitized
sub-prime 1-4 family residential mortgage loans as of
december31, 2002, of which
$3.5billion relates to advantas mortgage operations acquired in 2001.
(b)
delinquency information for securitized mortgage loans has been adjusted to
reflect the inclusion of loans in bankruptcy and foreclosure.
(c)
includes non-u.s. consumer loans.
(d)
represents both loans on the consolidated balance sheet and loans that have
been securitized, but excludes loans for which the firms only continuing
involvement is servicing of the assets.
total assets held in securitization-related spes, as of december31, 2002, were
$90.6billion (see table on page 83). the $54.0billion of loans securitized at
december31, 2002 shown in the table above excludes: $26.9billion of
securitized loans in which the firms only continuing involvement is the
servicing of the assets; $8.2billion of sellers interests in credit card
master trusts and subordinated accrued interest and fees; $0.7billion of
providian master trust receivables (which are reflected as receivables on the
firms consolidated balance sheet until paid off or revolve into new
receivables sold to investors); and $0.8billion of escrow accounts and other
assets.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
multi-seller conduits
jpmorgan chase serves as the administrator and provides contingent liquidity
support and limited credit enhancement for several commercial paper conduits.
these conduits provide clients access to liquidity in the commercial paper
markets by allowing them to sell assets to the conduit, which then issues
commercial paper to investors to fund the purchases. the firm does not sell
assets to these commercial paper conduits. commercial paper issued by conduits
for which the firm acts as administrator aggregated $17.5billion at december
31, 2002. the commercial paper issued is backed by sufficient collateral,
credit enhancements and commitments to provide liquidity to support receiving
at least an a-1, p-1 and, in certain cases, an f-1 rating.
jpmorgan chase bank has commitments to provide liquidity to these vehicles in
an amount up to $23.5billion. the firm would be required to provide funding
under the liquidity commitments in the event that funding for such spes became
unavailable in the commercial paper market. in addition, if jpmorgan chase bank
were downgraded below a-1, p-1 and, in certain cases, f-1, the firm could also
be required to provide funding under these commitments, since commercial paper
rated below a-1, p-1 or f-1 would generally not be issuable by the vehicle.
under these circumstances, jpmorgan chase bank could either replace itself as
liquidity provider or facilitate the sale or refinancing of the assets held in
the spe in other markets. jpmorgan chase applies the same underwriting
standards in making liquidity commitments to conduits as the firm would with
other extensions of credit.
for certain multi-seller conduits, jpmorgan chase also provides limited credit
enhancement, primarily through the issuance of letters of credit. under the
letters of credit, the firm could be required to fund the difference between
the commercial paper outstanding and amounts drawn under the liquidity
commitment, if any. as of december31, 2002, commitments under these letters of
credit totaled $3.4billion.
the firm has limited credit exposure to multi-seller conduit transactions. this
is because, for the most part, the firm is not required to fund under the
liquidity facilities if the assets in the spe are in default. additionally, the
firms obligations under the letters of credit are secondary to the risk of
first loss provided by the client or other third parties  for example, by the
overcollateralization of the spe with the assets sold to it.
client intermediation
as a financial intermediary, the firm is involved in structuring spe
transactions to meet investor and client needs. the firm intermediates various
types of risks (including, for example, fixed income, equity and credit)
typically using derivative instruments. in certain circumstances, the firm also
provides liquidity and other support to the spes to facilitate the transaction.
each of the firms relationships with the spes is reflected on the firms
consolidated balance sheet or in the notes to the financial statements. the
risks inherent in derivative instruments or liquidity commitments are managed
similar to other credit, market and liquidity risks to which the firm is
exposed.
in its capacity as a financial intermediary, the firm has created structured
commercial loan vehicles managed by third parties in which loans are purchased
from third parties or through the firms syndication and trading functions and
funded by issuing commercial paper. investors provide collateral and have a
first risk of loss up to the amount of collateral pledged. the firm retains a
second risk of loss position for these vehicles. the documentation includes
provisions intended, subject to certain conditions, to enable jpmorgan chase to
terminate the transactions related to a particular loan vehicle if the value of
the relevant portfolio declines below a specified level. the amount of the
commercial paper issued by these vehicles, as of december31, 2002, totaled
$7.2billion. jpmorgan chase bank has a commitment to provide liquidity to
these spes in an amount up to $12.0billion.
jpmorgan chase also structures spes to modify the cash flows of third-party
assets to create investments with specific risk profiles, or to assist clients
in the efficient management of other risks. for example, the firm structures
credit-linked notes in which the spe purchases highly-rated assets (such as
asset-backed securities) and enters into a credit derivative contract with the
firm to obtain exposure to a referenced credit not held by the spe.
credit-linked notes are issued by the spe to transfer the risk of the
referenced credit to the investors in the spe. as of december31, 2002, the
aggregate assets held by the credit-linked note vehicles were $7.9billion.
additionally, jpmorgan chase structures, on behalf of clients, vehicles in
which the firm transfers the risks and returns of the assets held by the spe,
typically debt and equity instruments, to clients through derivative contracts.
the firms net exposure arising from these intermediation transactions is not
significant. the aggregate assets held by these client intermediation vehicles
were $7.4billion at december31, 2002. the firms current exposure to all of
these vehicles is reflected in its consolidated financial statements as the
fair value of the derivative contracts are recorded in trading assets or
trading liabilities and changes in fair value are recognized in trading
revenue.
finally, the firm may enter into transactions with spes structured by other
parties. these transactions can include, for example, acting as derivative
counterparty, liquidity provider, investor, underwriter, trustee or custodian.
these transactions are conducted at arms length and individual credit
decisions are based upon the analysis of the specific spe, taking into
consideration the quality of the underlying assets. typically, the firm would
not be the sole liquidity provider to a third-party spe. jpmorgan chase records
and reports these positions similar to any other third-party transaction. for
example, derivative contracts are recorded at fair value and reported in note
3, whereas liquidity facilities are included within the firms lending-related
commitments described in more detail in note 29. fees received when the firm
operates in an administrative capacity, such as underwriter, trustee or
custodian, are recorded in fees and commissions.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
variable interest entities
in january 2003, the fasb issued fin 46. entities that would be assessed for
consolidation under fin 46 are typically spes, although other non-spe-type
entities may also be subject to the guidance. fin 46 requires a variable
interest entity to be consolidated by a company if that company will absorb a
majority of the expected losses, will receive a majority of the expected
residual returns, or both. transferors to a qspe, which represent a majority of
the firms loan securitization transactions discussed above, and certain other
interests in a qspe, are not subject to the requirements of fin 46. the firm is
required to apply fin 46 for variable interest entities created or modified
after january31, 2003, in which the firm has an interest. for variable
interest entities created prior to february1, 2003, the provisions of fin 46
are effective july1, 2003.
variable interest entities with which the firm is involved that do not meet the
qspe criteria primarily include the multi-seller conduits and the client
intermediation vehicles described above. the firm is also involved with other
entities that could be deemed variable interest entities and, therefore, could
be subject to fin 46. these entities would include certain majority-owned
subsidiaries reported in the firms consolidated financial statements.
the firm is assessing the impact of fin 46 on all variable interest entities
with which it is involved. the multi-seller conduits, which have $17.5billion
of commercial paper outstanding as of december31, 2002, would, in their
current form, be required to be consolidated on the firms balance sheet when
fin 46 is implemented. the firm is analyzing restructuring options for the
multi-seller conduits. based upon its current interpretation of fin 46, the
firm does not believe that it would be required to consolidate the vehicles
related to the credit-linked notes or the client intermediation transactions
(with assets of $7.9billion and $7.4billion, respectively, as of december31,
2002). management is continuing to assess the possible consolidation of other
entities that could be deemed variable interest entities, including the
structured commercial loan vehicles. at this time, management does not believe
that the implementation of fin 46 will have a material impact on the firms
consolidated balance sheet, earnings or capital resources.
note 12 mortgage servicing rights
jpmorgan chase recognizes as intangible assets mortgage servicing rights
(msrs),which represent the right to perform specified residential mortgage
servicing activities for others. servicing activities include collecting
principal, interest, and escrow payments from borrowers; making tax and
insurance payments on behalf of the borrowers; monitoring delinquencies and
executing foreclosure proceedings; and accounting for and remitting principal
and interest payments to the investors of the mortgage-backed securities. msrs
are either purchased from third parties or retained upon sale or securitization
of mortgage loans.
the amount capitalized as msrs represents the current fair value of future net
cash flows expected to be realized for performing the servicing activities. msr
fair values are estimated using a discounted future cash flow model that
considers portfolio characteristics, contractually specified servicing fees and
managements assumptions regarding prepayment speeds, delinquency rates, late
charges, other ancillary revenues, the cost to service the mortgage loans, as
well as other economic factors. management uses its best judgment to estimate
fair value. since many economic factors can affect the estimate of the fair
value of msrs, the firm periodically assesses the assumptions and modeling
techniques used to estimate the fair value of its msrs.
msrs are amortized as a reduction of the actual servicing income received in
proportion to, and over the period of, the estimated future net servicing
income stream of the underlying mortgage loans. for purposes of evaluating and
measuring impairment of msrs, the firm stratifies its portfolio on the basis of
the predominant risk characteristics: loan type and interest rate. any
indicated impairment is recognized as a reduction in revenue through a
valuation allowance to the extent that the carrying value of an individual
stratum exceeds its estimated fair value.
the carrying value of msrs is sensitive to changes in interest rates, including
their effect on prepayment speeds. the firm offsets this interest rate risk by
designating certain interest rate derivatives (e.g., a combination of swaps,
swaptions and floors that produces an interest rate profile opposite to the
msrs) as fair value hedges of specified msrs under sfas 133. sfas 133 hedge
accounting allows the carrying value of the hedged msrs to be adjusted through
earnings in the same period that the change in value of the hedging derivatives
is recognized through earnings. both of these valuation adjustments are
recorded in the mortgage servicing fees component within fees and commissions.
for a further discussion on derivative instruments and hedging activities, see
note 28 on pages 101 and 102.
afs securities and certain nonhedge derivatives are also used to manage the
risk exposure of msrs. these instruments are accounted for as stand-alone
instruments because afs securities do not qualify as hedges under sfas 133, and
the derivatives have not been designated by management as hedging derivatives.
accordingly, the securities are accounted for as afs securities under sfas 115
and the nonhedge derivatives are accounted for as trading derivatives.
realized gains and losses on the afs securities are recognized in earnings in
securities gains (losses); gains and losses on the nonhedge derivatives are
recognized in earnings in trading revenue. unrealized gains and losses on afs
securities are reported in other comprehensive income. for a further discussion
of the risk management activities regarding msrs, see the chase financial
services segment discussion on pages 35 and 36.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the following table summarizes mortgage servicing rights activity and related
amortization for the dates indicated. it also includes the key assumptions and
the sensitivity of the fair value of msrs at december31, 2002 to immediate 10%
and 20% adverse changes in each of those assumptions:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
balance at beginning of year
$
7,749
$
6,461
$
5,187
additions
2,071
3,394
2,194
sales
(103
)
(290
)
sfas 133 hedge valuation adjustments
(3,589
)
(880
)
pre-sfas 133 hedging activities
amortization
(1,367
)
(1,123
)
(708
)
balance at end of year
4,864
7,749
6,461
less:valuation allowance
(1,634
)
(1,170
)
(99
)
balance at end of year, after
valuation allowance
$
3,230
$
6,579
$
6,362
estimated fair value at year-end
$
3,230
$
6,579
$
6,411
weighted-average prepayment speed assumption (cpr)
28.5
%
impact on fair value with 10% adverse change
$
(256
)
impact on fair value with 20% adverse change
$
(479
)
weighted-average discount rate
7.7
%
impact on fair value with 10% adverse change
$
(55
)
impact on fair value with 20% adverse change
$
(108
)
cpr: constant prepayment rate.
the sensitivity analysis in the preceding table is hypothetical and should be
used with caution. as the figures indicate, changes in fair value based on a
10% and 20% variation in assumptions generally cannot be easily extrapolated
because the relationship of the change in the assumptions to the change in fair
value may not be linear. also, in this table, the effect that a change in a
particular assumption may have on the fair value is calculated without changing
any other assumption. in reality, changes in one factor may result in changes
in another, which might magnify or counteract the sensitivities.
the valuation allowance represents the extent to which the carrying value of
msrs exceeds its estimated fair value. changes in the valuation allowance are
the result of the recognition of impairment or the recovery of previously
recognized impairment charges due to changes in market conditions during the
period. the changes in the valuation allowance for msrs for the dates indicated
were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
balance at beginning of year
$
1,170
$
$
impairment adjustment
1,071
balance at end of year
$
1,634
$
1,170
$
note 13 private equity investments
private equity investments are primarily held by jpmorgan partners (jpmp),
the firms global private equity investment business segment. these investments
include public and private investments that are made in the normal course of
jpmps business. private equity investments are accounted for under investment
company guidelines. accordingly, these investments, irrespective of the
percentage of equity ownership interest held by jpmp, are carried on the
consolidated balance sheet at fair value.
the fair value of public investments held by jpmp are marked-to-market at the
quoted public value. to determine the carrying values of these investments,
jpmp incorporates the use of liquidity discounts to take into account the fact
that it cannot immediately realize or hedge the quoted public values as a
result of regulatory, corporate and/or contractual sales restrictions imposed
on these holdings. private investments are initially valued based on cost. the
carrying values of private investments are adjusted from cost to reflect both
positive and negative changes evidenced by financing events with third-party
capital providers. in addition, these investments are subject to ongoing
impairment reviews by jpmps senior investment professionals. a variety of
factors are reviewed and monitored to assess impairment including, but not
limited to, operating performance and future expectations, comparable industry
valuations of public companies, changes in market outlook and changes in the
third-party financing environment.
realized and unrealized gains and losses arising from changes in value are
reported in private equity realized gains (losses)and private equity
unrealized gains (losses), respectively, in the consolidated statement of
income in the period that the gain or loss occurs.
the following table presents the carrying value and cost of the private equity
investment portfolio for the dates indicated:
carrying
carrying
december 31, (in millions)
value
cost
value
cost
total investment portfolio
$
8,228
$
10,312
$
9,197
$
10,528
the following table presents private equity investment realized and unrealized
gains and losses for the periods indicated:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
realized gains (losses)
$
(105
)
$
$
2,051
unrealized gains (losses)
(641
)
(1,884
)
(1,036
)
private equity gains (losses)(a)
$
(746
)
$
(1,233
)
$
1,015
(a)
includes the impact of portfolio hedging activities.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
note 14 goodwill and other intangibles
effective january1, 2002, the firm adopted sfas 142, reclassifying certain
intangible assets from goodwill to other intangible assets. there was no
impairment of goodwill upon adoption of sfas 142.
goodwill is not amortized, but instead tested for impairment at the reporting
unit segment (which is one level below the five major business segments as
described in note 33 on page 108). goodwill is tested annually (during the
fourth quarter) or more often if events or circumstances, such as adverse
changes in the business climate, indicate that there may be impairment. other
acquired intangible assets determined to have finite lives, such as core
deposits and credit card relationships, are amortized over their estimated
useful lives in a manner that best reflects the economic benefits of the
intangible asset. in addition, impairment testing is performed periodically on
these amortizing intangible assets. for a discussion of capitalized msrs, see
note 12 on page 87.
the following table presents the impact of sfas 142 on net income and earnings
per share had the accounting standard been in effect for 2001 and 2000:
pro forma
pro forma
(in millions, except earnings per share)
net income
income before effect of accounting change
$
1,663
$
1,719
$
5,727
net effect of change in accounting principle
(25
)
net income
1,663
1,694
5,727
goodwill amortization, net of taxes
adjusted net income
$
1,663
$
2,087
$
5,976
basic earnings per share
reported basic earnings per share (a)
$
0.81
$
0.83
$
2.99
goodwill amortization
0.19
0.13
adjusted basic earnings per share
$
0.81
$
1.02
$
3.12
diluted earnings per share
reported diluted earnings per share (a)
$
0.80
$
0.80
$
2.86
goodwill amortization
0.19
0.13
adjusted diluted earnings per share
$
0.80
$
0.99
$
2.99
(a)
based on net income.
goodwill
after giving effect to the adoption of sfas 142, goodwill increased during 2002
by $63million, principally in connection with acquisitions of businesses by
treasury & securities services. goodwill was also reduced during the year by
purchase accounting adjustments. goodwill was not impaired at december31,
2002, nor was any goodwill written off during 2002. as of december31, 2002,
the firm had goodwill of $8,096million. goodwill by business segment is as
follows: investment bank, $2,051million; investment management & private
banking, $4,165million; treasury & securities services, $996million; jpmorgan
partners, $377million and chase financial services, $507million.
other intangible assets
for the year ended december31, 2002, purchased credit card relationship
intangibles increased by approximately $1,030million, primarily due to the
acquisition of providian intangibles, which have an estimated life of seven
years. in addition, other intangibles, primarily customer relationships other
than credit card, increased by $72million. all of the firms acquired
intangible assets are subject to amortization. for the year ended december31,
2002, intangible assets amortization expense was $323million. this amount
included a $12million impairment write-down on purchased credit card
relationships related to a small credit card portfolio that had been acquired
previously.
the components of other intangible assets were as follows:
december 31, 2002
2002 full year
gross
accumulated
net carrying
amortization
(in millions)
amount
amortization
value
expense
purchased credit card relationships
$
1,884
$
$
1,269
$
all other intangibles
amortization expense for the net carrying amount of intangible assets is
estimated to be $302million in 2003, $285million in 2004, $270million in
2005, $255million in 2006 and $219million in 2007.
the other intangible assets above do not include mortgage servicing rights;
amortization of mortgage servicing rights is recorded as a reduction of
mortgage servicing revenues within fees and commissions. see note 12 for a
discussion of mortgage servicing rights.
note 15 premises and equipment
premises and equipment, including leasehold improvements, are carried at cost
less accumulated depreciation and amortization. jpmorgan chase generally
computes depreciation using the straight-line method over the estimated useful
life of an asset. for leasehold improvements, the firm uses the straight-line
method over the lesser of the remaining term of the leased facility or the
estimated economic life of the improvement. jpmorgan chase capitalizes certain
costs associated with the acquisition or development of internal-use software.
once the software is ready for its intended use, these costs are amortized on a
straight-line basis over the softwares expected useful life.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 16 long-term debt
jpmorgan chase issues long-term debt denominated in various currencies,
although predominately u.s. dollars, with both fixed and variable interest
rates. the following table is a summary of long-term debt (net of unamortized
original issue debt discount and sfas 133 valuation adjustments):
by remaining contractual maturity at
december 31,
under
after
(in millions)
1 year
1-5 years
5 years
total
total
parent company
senior debt:
fixed rate
$
$
9,938
$
1,225
$
11,516
$
6,679
variable rate
4,736
3,540
8,657
11,777
interest rates(a)
1.47%-5.50
%
1.22%-7.50
%
0.96%-6.63
%
0.96%-7.50
%
0.20%-8.00
%
subordinated debt:
fixed rate
$
$
3,604
$
9,618
$
13,839
$
12,451
variable rate
1,083
2,325
interest rates(a)
4.35%-8.50
%
4.78%-7.88
%
5.75%-8.25
%
4.35%-8.50
%
2.56%-8.63
%
subtotal
$
6,147
$
17,394
$
11,554
$
35,095
$
33,232
subsidiaries
senior debt:
fixed rate
$
$
1,344
$
1,008
$
2,848
$
2,407
variable rate
1,930
interest rates(a)
1.55%-10.23
%
3.63%-10.95
%
3.55%-27.39
%
1.55%-27.39
%
1.06%-26.97
%
subordinated debt:
fixed rate
$
$
$
$
$
1,149
variable rate
interest rates(a)
4.20%-4.55
%
6.63%-7.00
%
6.13%-6.70
%
4.20%- 7.00
%
4.12%-7.38
%
subtotal
$
$
1,919
$
1,831
$
4,656
$
5,951
total long-term debt
$
7,053
$
19,313
$
13,385
$
39,751
(b)(c)(d)
$
39,183
(a)
the interest rates shown are the range of contractual rates in effect at
year-end, including non-u.s. dollar fixed and variable rate issuances which
excludes the effects of related derivative instruments. the use of these
derivative instruments modifies jpmorgan chases exposure to the contractual
interest rates disclosed in the table above. including the effects of
derivatives, the range of modified rates in effect at december31, 2002, for
total long-term debt was 0.15% to 10.95%,versus the contractual range of 0.96%
to 27.39% presented in the table above.
(b)
at december31, 2002, long-term debt aggregating $2.5billion was redeemable
at the option of jpmorgan chase, in whole or in part, prior to maturity, based
on the terms specified in the respective notes.
(c)
the aggregate principal amount of debt that matures in each of the five
years subsequent to 2002 is $7.1billion in 2003, $6.3billion in 2004, $3.8
billion in 2005, $2.8billion in 2006 and $6.4billion in 2007.
(d)
includes $1.1billion of outstanding zero-coupon notes at december
31, 2002. the aggregate principal amount of these notes at their respective
maturities is $4.1billion.
the weighted-average contractual interest rate for total long-term debt was
5.51% and 5.12% as of december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively. in order to
modify exposure to interest rate and currency exchange rate movements, jpmorgan
chase utilizes derivative instruments, primarily interest rate and
cross-currency interest rate swaps, in conjunction with some of its debt
issues. the use of these instruments modifies the firms interest expense on
the associated debt. the modified weighted-average interest rate for total
long-term debt, including the effects of related derivative instruments, was
3.42% and 4.64% as of december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively.
jpmorgan chase has guaranteed certain debt of its subsidiaries, including both
long-term debt and structured notes sold as part of the firms trading
activities. these guarantees rank on a parity with all other unsecured and
unsubordinated indebtedness of jpmorgan chase. guaranteed liabilities totaled
$1.5billion and $805million at december31, 2002 and 2001, respectively.
guaranteed preferred beneficial interests in the firms junior subordinated
deferrable interest debentures
at december31, 2002, 12 wholly owned delaware statutory business trusts
established by jpmorgan chase had issued an aggregate $5.4billion in capital
securities, net of discount. the capital securities qualify as tier 1 capital
of the firm. the proceeds from each issuance were invested in a corresponding
series of junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures of jpmorgan chase.
the sole asset of each statutory business trust is the relevant debenture. the
firm has fully and unconditionally guaranteed each of the business trusts
obligations under each trusts capital securities to the extent set forth in
the guarantee. each trusts capital securities are subject to mandatory
redemption, in whole or in part, upon repayment of the debentures at their
stated maturity or earlier redemption.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2002 annual report
the following is a summary of the outstanding capital securities, net of
discount, issued by each trust and the junior subordinated deferrable interest
debenture issued by jpmorgan chase to each trust as of december31, 2002:
($ in millions)
amount of capital
principal amount
stated maturity of
earliest
interest rate of
interest
securities, net of discount
of debenture,
issue
capital securities
redemption
capital securities
payment/distribution
name of trust
issued by
trust (a)
held by
trust (b)
date
and debentures
date
and debentures
dates
chase capital i
$
$
7.67
%
semiannually - commencing 1997
chase capital ii
libor + 0.50%
quarterly - commencing 1997
chase capital iii
libor + 0.55%
quarterly - commencing 1997
chase capital iv
anytime
7.34
%
quarterly - commencing 1998
chase capital v
7.03
%
quarterly - commencing 1998
chase capital vi
libor + 0.625%
quarterly - commencing 1998
chase capital vii
7.00
%
quarterly - commencing 1999
chase capital viii
8.25
%
quarterly - commencing 2000
jpm capital trust i
7.54
%
semiannually - commencing 1997
jpm capital trust ii
7.95
%
semiannually - commencing 1997
jpmorgan chase capital ix
7.50
%
quarterly - commencing 2001
jpmorgan chase capital x
1,000
1,031
7.00
%
quarterly - commencing 2002
total
$
5,439
$
5,619
(a)
represents the amount of capital securities issued to the public by each
trust. these amounts are reflected as liabilities of jpmorgan chase.
(b)
represents the principal amount of jpmorgan chase debentures held as assets
by each trust. these amounts represent intercompany transactions and are
eliminated in jpmorgan chases consolidated financial statements.
note 17 preferred stock of subsidiary
chase preferred capital corporation (chase preferred capital), a wholly owned
subsidiary of jpmorgan chase bank, a bank subsidiary of jpmorgan chase, is a
real estate investment trust (reit) established for the purpose of acquiring,
holding and managing real estate mortgage assets. at december31, 2001, there
were 22million shares of 8.10% cumulative preferred stock,
seriesa (seriesa preferred shares) issued and outstanding
(liquidation preference, $25 per share), or $550million. the seriesa
preferred shares qualified as tier 1 capital of the parent holding company. on
february28, 2002, chase preferred capital redeemed all 22million outstanding
shares at a redemption price per share of $25 plus accrued and unpaid
dividends.
note 18 preferred stock
jpmorgan chase is authorized to issue 200million shares of preferred stock, in
one or more series, with a par value of $1 per share. outstanding preferred
stock at both december31, 2002 and 2001 was 17.8million shares. the firm did
not redeem or repurchase any preferred stock during 2002. during 2001, the firm
redeemed its 10.84% cumulative preferred stock, its variable cumulative
preferred stock, seriesb, c, d, e and f, and repurchased 119,567 shares of its
6.63% seriesh cumulative preferred stock.
dividends on shares of each outstanding series of preferred stock are payable
quarterly. all the preferred stock outstanding have preference over jpmorgan
chases common stock for the payment of dividends and the distribution of
assets in the event of a liquidation or dissolution of jpmorgan chase.
the following is a summary of jpmorgan chases preferred stock outstanding:
stated value and
shares
outstanding at december 31,
earliest
rate in effect at
redemption price per share (a)
(in millions)
2002 (in millions) 2001
redemption date
december 31, 2002
adjustable rate, seriesa cumulative
$
100.00
2.42
$
$
see note (b)
5.00
%(c)
adjustable rate, seriesl cumulative
100.00
2.00
see note (b)
4.50
(c)
adjustable rate, seriesn cumulative
25.00
9.10
see note (b)
4.50
(c)
fixed/adjustable rate, noncumulative
50.00
4.00
6/30/2003
4.96
(c)
6.63% seriesh cumulative
500.00
0.28
3/31/2006
6.63
total preferred stock
$
1,009
$
1,009
(a)
redemption price includes amount shown in the table plus any accrued but
unpaid dividends.
(b)
the shares are redeemable at any time with not less than 30 nor more than
60days notice.
(c)
floating rates are based on
certain u.s. treasury rates. the minimum and
maximum rates for seriesa are 5.00% and 11.50% and for seriesl and seriesn
are 4.50% and 10.50%, respectively. the fixed/adjustable rate preferred stock
remains fixed at 4.96% through june30, 2003; thereafter, the minimum and maximum
rates are 5.46% and 11.46%, respectively.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 19 common stock
jpmorgan chase is authorized to issue 4.5billion shares of common stock, with
a $1 par value per share. the number of shares of common stock issued and
outstanding at each of the dates indicated were as follows:
december 31, (in millions)
issued
2,023.6
1,996.9
1,940.1
(a)
held in treasury
(24.9
)
(23.5
)
(11.6
)(a)
outstanding
1,998.7
1,973.4
1,928.5
(a)
under the terms of the merger
agreement, on december31, 2000, all 126.4
million treasury shares of j.p. morgan were canceled and retired.
the firm did not repurchase shares of its common stock during 2002. during
2001, the firm repurchased 21.9million shares of common stock under a plan
which began on july19, 2001.
during 2002, approximately 25.3million shares were issued under various
employee stock option and other stock-based plans. during 2001, approximately
65.0million shares were issued under various employee stock option and other
stock-based plans, and approximately 1.8million shares were issued in
connection with acquisitions accounted by the purchase method.
jpmorgan chase shareholders approved a three-for-two stock split at their
annual meeting on may16, 2000. the additional shares of the firms common
stock issued as a result of the split were distributed on june9, 2000.
as of december31, 2002, approximately 424million unissued shares of common
stock were reserved for issuance under various employee incentive, option and
stock purchase plans.
common shares issued (newly issued or distributed from treasury) by jpmorgan
chase during 2002, 2001 and 2000 were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
employee benefit and compensation plans (a)
24.1
64.4
79.4
dividend reinvestment and stock purchase plans
1.2
0.6
2.4
purchase accounting acquisitions and other
1.8
69.0
total shares newly issued or
distributed from treasury (b)
25.3
66.8
150.8
(a)
see note 24 for a discussion of jpmorgan chases employee stock option
plans.
(b)
shares distributed from treasury
were 2.5million in 2002, 15.8million in
2001 and 153.2million in 2000. shares forfeited to treasury were 3.9million in
2002, 5.8million in 2001 and 2.4million in 2000.
note 20 earnings per share
sfas 128 requires the presentation of basic and diluted earnings per share
(eps) in the income statement. basic eps is computed by dividing net income
applicable to common stock by the weighted-average number of common shares
outstanding for the period. diluted eps is computed using the same method as
basic eps, but, in the denominator, common shares outstanding reflect the
potential dilution that could occur if convertible securities or other
contracts to issue common stock were converted or exercised into common stock.
net income available for common stock is the same computation for basic eps and
diluted eps as jpmorgan chase had no convertible securities, and, therefore, no
adjustments to net income available for common stock were necessary.
basic and diluted earnings per share were as follows for the dates indicated:
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except per share data)
basic earnings per share
net income
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
less: preferred stock dividends
net income applicable to common stock
$
1,612
$
1,628
$
5,631
weighted-average basic shares outstanding
1,984.3
1,972.4
1,884.1
net income per share
$
0.81
$
0.83
$
2.99
diluted earnings per share
net income applicable to common stock
$
1,612
$
1,628
$
5,631
weighted-average basic shares outstanding
1,984.3
1,972.4
1,884.1
add: broad-based options
2.8
6.6
10.1
key employee options
22.0
44.6
74.8
weighted-average diluted shares outstanding
2,009.1
2,023.6
1,969.0
net income per share (a)
$
0.80
$
0.80
$
2.86
(a)
options issued under employee
benefit plans to purchase 362million, 190
million and 36million shares of common stock were outstanding for the years
ended 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively, but were not included in the computation
of diluted eps because the options exercise prices were greater than the
average market price of the common shares.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2002 annual report
note 21 comprehensive income
comprehensive income is composed of net income and other comprehensive income,
which includes the after-tax change in unrealized gains and losses on afs
securities, cash flow hedging activities and foreign currency translation
adjustments (including the impact of related derivatives).
the following table presents other comprehensive income (oci) balances:
accumulated
year ended
unrealized
cash
other
december 31,
gains (losses)
translation
flow
comprehensive
(in millions)
on afs
securities (a)
adjustments
hedges
income (loss)
balance december
31, 1999
$
(1,427
)
$
(1
)
na
$
(1,428
)
net change
1,183
na
1,187
balance december
31, 2000
(244
)
na
(241
)
net change
(5
)
$
(305
)
(201
)
balance december
31, 2001
(135
)
(2
)
(305
)
(442
)
net change
(4)
(b)
(d)
1,669
balance december
31, 2002
$
$
(6)
(c)
$
$
1,227
(a)
primarily represents the after-tax difference between the fair value and
amortized cost of the afs securities portfolio. the net change for 2000
includes unrealized gains and losses on related hedges.
(b)
includes $195million of after-tax gains on foreign currency translation
from operations for which the functional currency is other than the u.s. dollar,
which was offset by $199million of after-tax losses on hedges.
(c)
includes after-tax gains and losses on foreign currency translation
including related hedge results from operations for which the functional
currency is other than the u.s. dollar.
(d)
includes $144million of after-tax losses recognized in income and $663
million of after-tax gains representing the net change in derivative fair
values that were recorded in other comprehensive income.
na-not applicable as sfas 133 was adopted effective january1,2001.
the net change amount, in the following table, represents the sum of net
unrealized holding gains (losses)and reclassification adjustments of afs
securities. reclassification adjustments include amounts recognized in net
income during the current year that had been part of other comprehensive income
in previous years.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
net unrealized holdings gains (losses)
arising during the period, net of taxes (a)
$
1,090
$
$
1,212
reclassification adjustment for (gains)losses
included in net income, net of taxes (b)
(224
)
(334
)
(29
)
net change
$
$
$
1,183
(a)
net of tax expense of $758million for 2002, $308million for 2001 and $808
million for 2000.
(b)
net of tax expense of $156million for 2002, $232million
for 2001 and $20million in 2000.
note 22 income taxes
jpmorgan chase and its eligible subsidiaries file a consolidated u.s. federal
income tax return. jpmorgan chase uses the asset and liability method required
by sfas 109 to provide income taxes on all transactions recorded in the
consolidated financial statements. this requires that income taxes reflect the
expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying
amounts of assets or liabilities for book and tax purposes. accordingly, a
deferred tax liability or asset for each temporary difference is determined
based on the tax rates that jpmorgan chase expects to be in effect when the
underlying items of income and expense are to be realized. jpmorgan chases
expense for income taxes includes the current and deferred portions of that
expense. a valuation allowance is established to reduce deferred tax assets to
the amount jpmorgan chase expects to be realized.
deferred income tax expense (benefit)results from differences between assets
and liabilities measured for financial reporting and for income tax return
purposes. the significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities are
reflected in the following table:
december 31, (in millions)
deferred tax assets
allowance for loan losses
$
1,675
$
1,502
employee benefits
1,621
2,748
allowance for other than loan losses
1,251
non-u.s. operations
fair value adjustments
foreign tax credit carryforward
(a)
gross deferred tax assets
$
5,224
$
6,134
deferred tax liabilities
leasing transactions
$
3,175
$
2,700
fair value adjustments
1,107
depreciation and amortization
other
gross deferred tax liabilities
$
5,518
$
3,728
valuation allowance
$
$
net deferred tax asset (liability)
$
(459
)
$
2,241
(a)
includes $20million, $2million, and $3million expiring in 2005, 2006 and
2007, respectively.
a valuation allowance has been recorded in accordance with sfas 109, primarily
relating to tax benefits associated with non-u.s. operations and with u.s.
state and local deferred tax assets.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the components of income tax expense included in the consolidated statement of
income were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
current income tax expense (benefit)
u.s. federal
$
(1,334
)
$
$
1,976
non-u.s.
1,224
u.s. state and local
total current expense (benefit)
(780
)
1,485
3,556
deferred income tax expense (benefit)
u.s. federal
1,630
(618
)
(695
)
non-u.s.
(352
)
(73
)
u.s. state and local
(a)
(42
)
total deferred expense (benefit)
1,636
(638
)
(550
)
total income tax expense
$
$
$
3,006
(a)
the increase in 2002 is principally attributable to the level of income in
certain state and local tax jurisdictions in 2002.
the preceding table does not reflect the tax effects of unrealized gains and
losses on afs securities, sfas 133 hedge transactions and certain tax benefits
associated with jpmorgan chases employee stock plans. the tax effect of these
items is recorded directly in stockholders equity. stockholders equity
decreased by $1.1billion and $281million in 2002 and 2000, respectively, and
increased by $541million in 2001 as a result of these tax effects.
u.s. federal income taxes have not been provided on the undistributed earnings
of certain non-u.s. subsidiaries to the extent such earnings have been
reinvested abroad for an indefinite period of time. for 2002, such earnings
approximated $274million on a pretax basis. at december31, 2002, the
cumulative amount of undistributed earnings in these subsidiaries approximated
$1.9billion. it is not practicable at this time to determine the income tax
liability that would result upon repatriation of these earnings.
the tax expense applicable to securities gains and losses for the years 2002,
2001 and 2000 was $531million, $286million and $78million, respectively.
a reconciliation of the applicable statutory u.s. income tax rate to the
effective tax rate for the past three years is shown in the following table:
year ended december 31,
statutory u.s. federal tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
increase (decrease)in tax rate resulting from:
u.s. state and local income taxes, net of
federal income tax benefit
11.6
(a)
3.0
2.3
tax-exempt income
(6.8
)
(5.8
)
(2.1
)
non-u.s. subsidiary earnings
(3.2
)
(3.1
)
(1.1
)
general business credits
(3.5
)
(1.8
)
(0.4
)
other, net
0.9
5.7
0.7
effective tax rate
34.0
%
33.0
%
34.4
%
(a)
the increase in 2002 is principally attributable to the level of income in
certain state and local tax jurisdictions in 2002.
the following table presents the u.s. and non-u.s. components of income before
income tax expense:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
u.s.
$
1,834
$
1,258
$
5,844
non-u.s. (a)
1,308
2,889
income before income tax expense
$
2,519
$
2,566
$
8,733
(a)
for purposes of this table, non-u.s. income is defined as income generated
from operations located outside the united states.
note 23 postretirement employee benefit plans
defined benefit pension plans and postretirement medical and life insurance
jpmorgan chase has a qualified noncontributory u.s. pension plan that provides
defined benefits to substantially all u.s. employees. the u.s. plan employs a
cash balance defined benefit formula in the form of service and interest
credits in determining the benefits to be provided at retirement based on
eligible compensation and years of service. employees begin to accrue plan
benefits after completing one year of service and benefits vest after five
years of service.
the prior plans of chase and j.p. morgan were merged as of december31, 2001.
for j.p. morgan employees who were earning benefits under a prior plan formula
as of december31, 1998, the plan also provides a minimum benefit based on
eligible compensation and years of service through december31, 2003. the firm
also offers defined benefits to qualifying employees in certain non-u.s.
locations based on eligible compensation and years of service. the firms
defined benefit pension plans are accounted for in accordance with sfas 87 and
sfas 88.
it is jpmorgan chases policy to fund its pension plans in amounts sufficient
to meet the requirements under applicable employee benefit and local tax laws.
in 2002, the firm made cash contributions totaling $1.2billion to fund fully
the accumulated benefit obligations of the u.s. and certain non-u.s. defined
benefit pension plans at december31, 2002. on february10, 2003, the firm made
an additional cash contribution of $127million to fund fully the u.s. defined
benefit pension plan to its projected benefit obligation at december31, 2002.
these contributions were made following the decline in value of plan assets
resulting from adverse capital market conditions. the firms u.s. pension
assets are held in a trust and are invested in equity, fixed income, cash
equivalent and other securities. u.s. pension assets do not include jpmorgan
chase common stock except in connection with investments in third-party
stock-index funds.
the firm offers postretirement medical and life insurance benefits to
qualifying u.s. employees. these benefits vary with length of service and date
of hire and provide for limits on jpmorgan chases share of covered medical
benefits. the medical benefits are contributory, while the life insurance
benefits are noncontributory. postretirement medical benefits are also offered
to qualifying u.k. employees. the firms postretirement benefit plans are
accounted for in accordance with sfas 106.
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
the following tables present the funded status and amounts reported on the
consolidated balance sheet and the components of net periodic benefit costs
reported in the consolidated statement of income for the firms u.s. and
non-u.s. defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans:
defined benefit pension plans
postretirement
u.s.
non-u.s.
benefit
plans (a)
as of december 31, (in millions)
change in benefit obligation
benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
(4,007
)
$
(3,898
)
$
(1,100
)
$
(1,135
)
$
(1,056
)
$
(941
)
benefits earned during the year
(174
)
(202
)
(16
)
(46
)
(12
)
(16
)
interest cost on benefit obligations
(275
)
(285
)
(62
)
(65
)
(69
)
(71
)
plan amendments
(4
)
employee contributions
(1
)
(1
)
(14
)
(13
)
actuarial gain (loss)
(226
)
(92
)
(50
)
(102
)
benefits paid
curtailment gain
settlement gain
special termination benefits
(3
)
(57
)
foreign exchange impact and other
(130
)
(4
)
(1
)
benefit obligation at end of year
$
(4,241
)
$
(4,007
)
$
(1,329
)
$
(1,100
)
$
(1,126
)
$
(1,056
)
change in plan assets
fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
4,048
$
4,314
$
1,058
$
1,055
$
1,089
$
actual return on plan assets
(406
)
(240
)
(150
)
(83
)
(74
)
(15
)
firm contributions
settlement payments
(6
)
benefits paid
(377
)
(352
)
(47
)
(64
)
(11
)
(14
)
foreign exchange impact and other
(38
)
fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
4,114
(b)
$
4,048
(b)
$
1,281
$
1,058
$
1,020
$
1,089
reconciliation of prepaid (accrued)benefit cost
and total amounts recognized
funded status
$
(127)
(c)
$
$
(48
)
$
(42
)
$
(106
)
$
unrecognized amounts:
net transition asset
(1
)
(1
)
prior service cost
net actuarial (gain)loss
1,224
(132
)
prepaid (accrued)benefit cost reported in other assets
and accrued expenses, respectively
$
1,153
$
$
(d)
$
(d)
$
(10
)
$
(72
)
(a)
includes postretirement benefit obligation of $38million and $37million
and postretirement benefit liability (included in accrued expenses)
of $49million and $44million at december31, 2002
and 2001, respectively, for the u.k.
plans, which are unfunded.
(b)
at december31, 2002 and
2001, approximately $295million and $307million,
respectively, of u.s. plan assets relate to surplus assets of group annuity
contracts.
(c)
on february10, 2003, the firm made an additional cash
contribution of $127million to fund fully the projected benefit obligation as
of december31, 2002.
(d)
at december31, 2002 and
2001, the liability (included in accrued expenses)
related to non-u.s. defined benefit pension plans that jpmorgan chase elected
not to prefund fully totaled $81million and $73million, respectively.
defined benefit pension plans
postretirement
u.s.
non-u.s.
benefit
plans (a)
for the year ended december 31, (in millions)
components of net periodic benefit costs
benefits earned during the year
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest cost on benefit obligations
expected return on plan assets
(358
)
(379
)
(385
)
(76
)
(78
)
(46
)
(98
)
(48
)
(27
)
amortization of unrecognized amounts:
prior service cost
(3
)
net actuarial (gain)loss
(5
)
(14
)
(1
)
(1
)
(10
)
(12
)
(18
)
curtailment (gain)loss (b)
(3
)
(8
)
settlement gain
(2
)
special termination benefits (b)
net periodic benefit costs reported in
compensation expense
$
$
$
$
(c)
$
$
$
$
$
(a)
includes net periodic
postretirement benefit costs of $2million in 2002, $2
million in 2001, and $0.6million in 2000 for the u.k. plans.
(b)
reflects
expense recognized in 2002 due to management-initiated and outsourcing-related
employee terminations.
(c)
decrease in net periodic pension benefit costs resulted from conversion of
certain non-u.s. defined benefit pension plans to defined contribution plans.
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
jpmorgan chases u.s. postretirement benefit obligation is partially funded
with corporate-owned life insurance (coli)purchased on the lives of eligible
employees and retirees. assets of the coli policies are held in separate
accounts with an insurance company and are invested in equities, bonds and
other debt securities. while jpmorgan chase owns the coli policies, coli
proceeds (death benefits, withdrawals and other distributions) may be used only
to reimburse the firm for its net postretirement benefit claim payments and
related administrative expenses.
the following table presents the weighted-average annualized actuarial
assumptions for the firms u.s. and non-u.s. defined benefit pension and
postretirement benefit plans as of december31:
u.s.
non-u.s.
discount rate
6.50
%
7.25
%
1.50%-5.60
%
2.50%-6.00
%
assumed rate of long-term
return on plan assets:
pension
8.00
%
9.25
%
2.70%-6.50
%
3.25%-7.25
%
postretirement benefit
8.00
%
9.00
%
na
na
rate of increase in
future compensation
4.50
%
4.50
%
1.25%-3.00
%
2.00%-4.00
%
na-not applicable
with all other assumptions held constant, a 25-basis point decline in the
assumed long-term rate of return on u.s. plan assets would result in an
increase of approximately $13million in 2003 u.s. pension and other
postretirement benefit expenses. a 25basis point decline in the discount rate
for the u.s. plans would result in an increase in 2003 u.s. pension and other
postretirement benefit expenses of approximately $10million and an increase in
the related benefit obligation of approximately $122million. these increases
would be mostly offset by the effect of a similar reduction in the assumed
interest rate used for crediting participant balances.
jpmorgan chase has a number of other defined benefit pension plans (i.e., u.s.
plans not subject to title iv of the employee retirement income security act).
the most significant of these plans is the excess retirement plan, where
certain employees earn service credits on compensation amounts above the
maximum limitation stipulated by law. this plan is a nonqualified
noncontributory u.s. pension plan and is unfunded. compensation expense related
to the firms other defined benefit pension plans totaled $15million in 2002,
$22million in 2001 and $22million in 2000.
at december31, 2002, jpmorgan chases assumed weighted-average medical
benefits cost trend rate used to measure the expected cost of benefits covered
was 10.0% for 2002, declining gradually over eight years to a floor of 5.0%.
the effect of a 1% change in the assumed medical cost trend rate would result
in a corresponding change in the december31, 2002 benefit obligation and 2002
periodic expense by up to 4.4%.
defined contribution plans
jpmorgan chase offers several defined contribution plans in the u.s. and
certain non-u.s. locations. the most significant of these plans is the 401(k)
savings plan covering substantially all u.s. employees. this plan allows
employees to make pre-tax contributions to tax-deferred investment portfolios.
the firm matches the employees contributions dollar for dollar up to a certain
percentage of eligible compensation per pay period, subject to plan and legal
limits. employees begin to receive matching contributions after completing one
year of service and benefits vest after three years of service. the firms
defined contribution plans are administered in accordance with applicable local
laws and regulations. compensation expense related to these plans totaled $251
million in 2002, $208million in 2001 and $213million in 2000.
note 24 employee stock-based incentives
through december31, 2002, jpmorgan chase accounted for its employee
stock-based compensation plans under the intrinsic value method in accordance
with apb 25. there is no expense recognized for stock options as they were
granted at the stock price on the grant date and, therefore, they have no
intrinsic value. compensation expense for restricted stock and restricted stock units (rsus)
is measured based on the number of shares granted and the stock price at the
grant date and recognized over the required service period. effective january
1, 2003, jpmorgan chase will adopt sfas 123 using the prospective transition
method. sfas 123 requires all stock-based compensation awards, including stock
options, to be accounted for at fair value. under the prospective transition
method, all new awards granted to employees on or after january1, 2003 will be
accounted for at fair value. awards outstanding as of december31, 2002, if not
subsequently modified, continue to be accounted for under apb 25. fair value
will be based on a black-scholes valuation model with compensation expense
recognized in earnings over the required service period. it is estimated that
the adoption of sfas123, with respect to employee stock-based compensation
awards granted in february 2003, will reduce the firms net income by
approximately $0.08 per share in 2003.
the following table details the total number of shares available for issuance
under jpmorgan chase employee stock-based incentive plans (including shares
available for issuance to nonemployee directors). the firm is not authorized to
grant stock-based incentive awards to nonemployees other than to nonemployee
directors.
number of shares to be
weighted-average
number of
shares remaining
december 31, 2002
issued upon exercise of
exercise price of
available for future issuance under
(shares in thousands)
outstanding options
outstanding options
equity compensation plans
employee stock-based incentive plans approved by shareholders
221,353
$
38.54
248,800
(a)
employee stock-based incentive plans not approved by shareholders
189,442
43.37
162,000
total
410,795
$
40.77
410,800
(a)
includes 101million shares of restricted stock/rsus
available for grant in lieu of cash.
j.p. morgan
chase & co./2002 annual report
key employee stock-based awards
jpmorgan chase grants long-term stock-based incentive awards to certain key
employees under two plans (the lti plans): the long-term incentive plan,
approved by shareholders in may 2000, provides for grants of stock options,
stock appreciation rights (sars), restricted stock and rsu awards, and the
stock option plan, a nonshareholder-approved plan, provides for grants of stock
options and sars. sars have not been granted under either of these plans.
under the lti plans, stock options are granted with an exercise price equal to
jpmorgan chases common stock price on the grant date. generally, options
cannot be exercised until at least one year after the grant date and become
exercisable over various periods as determined at the time of the grant.
options generally expire ten years after the grant date.
in january 2001, jpmorgan chase granted 82.2million options under the lti
plans pursuant to a growth performance incentive program (gpip). the exercise
price of all gpip awards is $51.22, the price of jpmorgan chases common stock
on the grant date. because the corporate and business unit performance goals
for this award were not achieved, these options will become exercisable in
january 2007, and expire ten years after the grant date. forfeitures of
gpip options aggregated 14.9million shares through december31, 2002.
the following table, which includes the gpip awards, presents a summary of
jpmorgan chases option activity under the lti plans during the last three
years:
year ended december 31,
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
(options in thousands)
options
exercise price
options
exercise price
options
exercise price
options outstanding, january 1
272,304
$
41.23
175,232
$
31.52
183,456
$
27.99
granted
53,230
36.41
136,863
51.07
22,488
48.24
exercised
(9,285
)
16.85
(28,954
)
25.69
(25,106
)
20.25
canceled
(17,518
)
45.59
(10,837
)
49.94
(5,606
)
34.29
options outstanding, december 31
298,731
$
40.84
272,304
$
41.23
175,232
$
31.52
options exercisable, december 31
144,421
$
34.91
123,045
$
30.34
130,479
$
27.46
the following table, which includes
the gpip awards, details the distribution of
options outstanding under the lti plans at december31, 2002:
options outstanding
options exercisable
(options in thousands)
options
weighted-average
weighted-average remaining
options
weighted-average
range of exercise prices
outstanding
exercise price
contractual life (in years)
exercisable
exercise price
$3.41  $20.00
27,563
$
16.04
1.7
27,453
$
16.04
$20.01  $35.00
32,921
27.77
4.0
30,420
27.64
$35.01  $50.00
123,956
40.22
7.0
66,583
41.08
$50.01  $65.58
114,291
51.27
7.7
19,965
51.35
total
298,731
$
40.84
6.4
144,421
$
34.91
restricted stock and rsus are granted by jpmorgan chase under the lti plans at
no cost to the recipient. restricted stock/rsus are subject to forfeiture until
certain restrictions have lapsed, including continued employment for a
specified period. the recipient of a share of restricted stock is entitled to
voting rights and dividends on the common stock. an rsu entitles the recipient
to receive a share of common stock after the applicable restrictions lapse; the
recipient is entitled to receive cash payments equivalent to dividends on the
underlying common stock during the period the rsu is outstanding.
during 2002, 24.0million restricted stock/rsu awards (all payable solely in
stock) were granted by jpmorgan chase under the lti plans. in 2001 and 2000,
25.9million and 36.1million awards, respectively, were granted under these
plans. the 2001 and 2000 grants each included 1.3million restricted stock/rsu
awards that are forfeitable. the vesting of these awards is conditioned upon
certain vesting periods being met and jpmorgan chases common stock price
reaching and sustaining target prices within a five-year performance period.
the expense related to the forfeitable awards is recognized over the designated
performance period and measured based on the number of shares granted and the
target stock price. if the target stock price is achieved, then any
unrecognized amount is recognized as compensation expense either immediately or
over the remaining minimum required service period if the target stock price is
achieved prior to completion of such period. the 2001, 2000 and 1999
forfeitable awards have not vested as the target stock prices have not been
achieved. see comparison of the fair and intrinsic value measurement methods on
the following page for a discussion of the reversal of compensation expense
related to these forfeitable awards.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
a portion of certain employees incentive compensation that exceeds specified
levels is awarded in restricted stock or rsu awards (the required deferral
plan) issued under the lti plans. these restricted stock/rsu awards vest
solely based on continued employment. during 2001 and 2000, 137,500 and
160,000, respectively, of such awards were granted. the required deferral plan
was discontinued in 2002.
broad-based employee stock options
in january 2002, jpmorgan chase granted 32.6million options to all eligible
full-time (375 options each) and part-time (188 options each) employees under
the value sharing plan, a nonshareholder-approved plan. this award is the third
of three equal annual grants to eligible active employees. the exercise price
for each annual grant is equal to jpmorgan chases common stock price on the
respective grant date. the options become exercisable after five years, or
earlier if jpmorgan chases common stock price reaches and sustains a target
price for a minimum period. options generally expire ten years after the grant
date. the 2002, 2001 and 2000 grants have not vested as the target stock prices
have not been achieved.
the following table presents a summary of jpmorgan chases broad-based employee
stock option plan activity during the past three years:
year ended december 31,
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
(options in thousands)
options
exercise
price
options
exercise price
options
exercise price
options outstanding, january 1
87,393
$
41.86
67,237
$
38.17
50,937
$
31.66
granted
32,550
36.85
26,042
51.22
28,054
49.79
exercised
(674
)
15.01
(2,267
)
27.65
(8,019
)
31.44
canceled
(6,114
)
41.14
(3,619
)
49.54
(3,735
)
51.15
options outstanding, december 31
113,155
$
40.62
87,393
$
41.86
67,237
$
38.17
options exercisable, december 31
38,864
$
31.95
40,390
$
31.76
42,768
$
31.51
the following table details the distribution of broad-based employee stock
options outstanding at december31, 2002:
options outstanding
options exercisable
(options in thousands)
options
weighted-average
weighted-average remaining
options
weighted-average
range of exercise prices
outstanding
exercise price
contractual life (in years)
exercisable
exercise price
$10.26  $20.00
7,147
$
12.81
1.3
7,147
$
12.81
$20.01  $35.00
7,942
28.79
4.0
7,942
28.79
$35.01  $50.00
74,516
41.19
7.4
23,775
38.76
$50.01  $65.58
23,550
51.22
8.1
total
113,155
$
40.62
6.9
38,864
$
31.95
comparison of the fair and intrinsic value measurement methods
pre-tax employee stock-based compensation expense recognized in reported
earnings totaled $0.6billion in 2002, $0.8billion in 2001 and $1.1billion in
2000. compensation expense for 2002 included the reversal of previously accrued
expenses in the amount of $120million related to the forfeitable key employee
awards granted in 1999, 2000 and 2001. during 2002, it was determined that it
was no longer probable that the target stock prices would be achieved within
their respective performance periods. the target stock prices for these
forfeitable awards ranged from $73.33 to $85.00.
the following table presents net income and basic and diluted earnings per
share as reported and after the impact of applying sfas 123. the increase in
compensation expense after applying sfas 123 in 2002 compared to 2001 reflects
expense related to a higher level of options granted in prior years that are
not fully vested. this increase is partially offset by a decline in the
weighted-average grant-date fair value of options granted in 2002. the higher
expense from applying sfas 123 in 2001 compared to 2000 results from the
increase in the number of options granted in 2001.
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except per share data)
net income as reported
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
add:
employee stock-based compensation
expense included in reported net income,
net of related tax effects
deduct:
employee stock-based compensation
expense determined under the fair value
method for all awards, net of related tax effects
(1,232
)
(1,101
)
(1,017
)
pro forma net income
$
$
1,072
$
5,371
earnings per share:
basic
as reported
$
0.81
$
0.83
$
2.99
pro forma
0.37
0.51
2.80
diluted
as reported
$
0.80
$
0.80
$
2.86
pro forma
0.37
0.50
2.68
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
the following table presents jpmorgan chases weighted-average grant-date fair
values for the employee stock-based compensation awards granted and the
assumptions used to value stock options under a black-scholes valuation model:
year ended december 31,
weighted-average grant-date fair value
stock options:
key employee
$
11.57
$
18.39
$
18.79
broad-based employee
9.49
14.60
17.66
restricted stock and rsus
(all payable solely in stock)
36.28
49.21
42.88
weighted-average annualized stock
option valuation assumptions
risk-free interest rate
4.61
%
5.08
%
6.65
%
expected dividend yield(a)
3.72
2.51
2.25
expected common
stock price volatility
assumed weighted-average expected
life of stock options (in years)
key employee
6.8
6.8
6.8
broad-based employee
3.8
3.8
5.5
(a)
based primarily on historical data at the grant dates.
note 25 restrictions on cash and intercompany funds transfers
the board of governors of the federal reserve system (frb) requires
depository institutions to maintain cash reserves with a federal reserve bank.
the average amount of reserve balances deposited by jpmorgan chases bank
subsidiaries with various federal reserve banks was approximately $2.2billion
in 2002 and $1.1billion in 2001.
restrictions imposed by federal law prohibit jpmorgan chase and certain other
affiliates from borrowing from banking subsidiaries unless the loans are
secured in specified amounts. such secured loans to jpmorgan chase or to other
affiliates generally are limited to 10% of the banking subsidiarys total
capital, as determined by the risk-based capital guidelines; the aggregate
amount of all such loans is limited to 20% of the banking subsidiarys total
capital. jpmorgan chase and its affiliates were well within these limits
throughout the year.
the principal sources of jpmorgan chases income (on a parent company-only
basis) are dividends and interest from jpmorgan chase bank and the other
banking and nonbanking subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase. in addition to dividend
restrictions set forth in statutes and regulations, the frb, the office of the
comptroller of the currency (occ) and the federal deposit insurance
corporation (fdic) have authority under the financial institutions
supervisory act to prohibit or to limit the payment of dividends by the banking
organizations they supervise, including jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries
that are banks or bank holding companies, if, in the banking regulators
opinion, payment of a dividend would constitute an unsafe or unsound practice
in light of the financial condition of the banking organization.
at january1, 2003 and 2002, jpmorgan chases bank subsidiaries could pay, in
the aggregate, $1.3billion and $2.2billion, respectively, in dividends to
their respective bank holding companies without prior approval of their
relevant banking regulators. dividend capacity in 2003 will be supplemented by
the banks earnings during the year.
in compliance with rules and regulations established by u.s. and non-u.s.
regulators, as of december31, 2002 and 2001, cash in the amount of $2.1
billion and $2.0billion, respectively, and securities with a market value of
$3.0billion and $4.4billion, respectively, were segregated in special bank
accounts for the benefit of securities and futures brokerage customers.
note 26 capital
there are two categories of risk-based capital: core capital (referred to as
tier 1 capital) and supplementary capital (referred to as tier 2 capital). tier
1 capital includes common stockholders equity, qualifying preferred stock and
minority interest less goodwill and other adjustments. tier 2 capital consists
of preferred stock not qualifying as tier 1, long-term debt and other
instruments qualifying as tier 2, the aggregate allowance for credit losses up
to a certain percentage of risk-weighted assets, less investments in certain
subsidiaries. under the risk-based capital guidelines of the frb, jpmorgan
chase is required to maintain minimum ratios of tier 1 and total (tier 1 plus
tier 2) capital to risk-weighted assets. failure to meet these minimum
requirements could result in actions taken by the frb. bank subsidiaries also
are subject to these capital requirements by their respective primary
regulators. management believes that as of december31, 2002, jpmorgan chase
met all capital requirements to which it was subject and is not aware of any
subsequent events that would alter this classification.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the following table presents the risk-based capital ratios for jpmorgan chase
and its significant banking subsidiaries:
risk-
adjusted
tier 1
total
tier 1
tier 1
total
weighted
average
capital(c)(e)
capital(c)(e)
leverage(c)(f)
december 31, 2002 (in millions)
capital(b)(c)
capital(c)
assets(d)
assets
ratio
ratio
ratio
j.p. morgan chase & co.(a)
$
37,570
$
54,495
$
455,948
$
741,862
8.24
%
11.95
%
5.06
%
jpmorgan chase bank
31,908
43,348
389,731
607,200
8.19
%
11.12
%
5.25
%
chase manhattan bank usa, n.a.
3,993
5,908
43,723
31,927
9.13
%
13.51
%
12.51
%
well capitalized ratios(g)
6.00
%
10.00
%
5.00
%(h)
minimum capital ratios(g)
4.00
%
8.00
%
3.00
%
(a)
assets and capital amounts for jpmorgan chases banking subsidiaries
reflect intercompany transactions, whereas the respective amounts for jpmorgan
chase reflect the elimination of intercompany transactions.
(b)
in accordance with the frb
risk-based capital guidelines, minority interest
for jpmorgan chase includes preferred stock instruments issued by subsidiaries
of jpmorgan chase. for a further discussion, see notes 16 and 17.
(c)
the provisions of sfas 115 do not apply to the calculations of the tier 1
capital and tier 1 leverage ratios. the risk-based capital guidelines permit the
inclusion of 45% of the pre-tax unrealized gain on certain equity securities in
the calculation of tier 2 capital.
(d)
includes off-balance sheet risk-weighted assets in the amounts of $170.4
billion, $148.4billion and $12.9billion, respectively, at december31, 2002.
(e)
tier 1 capital or total capital, as applicable, divided by risk-weighted
assets. risk-weighted assets include assets and off-balance sheet
positions, weighted by the type of instruments and the risk weight of the
counterparty, collateral or guarantor.
(f)
tier 1 capital divided by adjusted average assets (net of allowance for
loan losses, goodwill and certain intangible assets).
(g)
as defined by the
regulations issued by the frb, the fdic and the occ.
(h)
represents requirements for bank subsidiaries pursuant to regulations
issued under the federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act. there is
no tier 1 leverage component in the definition of a well-capitalized bank
holding company.
the following table shows the components of the firms tier 1 and total
capital:
december 31, (in millions)
tier 1 capital
common stockholders equity
$
40,065
$
40,530
nonredeemable preferred stock
1,009
1,009
minority interest
5,520
(a)
5,084
(b)
less:goodwill and investments in certain subsidiaries
8,122
8,231
nonqualifying intangible assets and other
tier 1 capital
$
37,570
$
37,713
tier 2 capital
long-term debt and other instruments
qualifying as tier 2
$
11,801
$
12,051
qualifying allowance for credit losses
5,458
4,759
less:investment in certain subsidiaries
tier 2 capital
$
16,925
$
16,360
total qualifying capital
$
54,495
$
54,073
(a)
minority interest includes trust preferred stocks of certain business trust
subsidiaries.
(b)
minority interest includes trust preferred stocks of certain business trust
subsidiaries and the preferred stock of a real estate investment trust
subsidiary of jpmorgan chase. for a further discussion, see notes 16 and 17.
note 27 commitments and contingencies
at december31, 2002, jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries were obligated under
a number of noncancelable operating leases for premises and equipment used
primarily for banking purposes. certain leases contain rent escalation clauses
for real estate taxes and other operating expenses and renewal option clauses
calling for increased rents. no lease agreement imposes any restrictions on
jpmorgan chases ability to pay dividends, engage in debt or equity financing
transactions, or enter into further lease agreements. future minimum rental
payments required under operating leases with noncancelable lease terms that
expire after december31, 2002 were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
$
after
4,849
total minimum payments required
8,118
less:sublease rentals under noncancelable subleases
net minimum payment required
$
7,844
total rental expense was as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
gross rentals
$
1,012
$
$
sublease rentals
(134
)
(135
)
(79
)
net rental expense
$
$
$
at december31, 2002, assets were pledged to secure public deposits and for
other purposes. the significant components of the assets pledged were as
follows:
at december 31, (in billions)
reverse repurchase/securities borrowing agreements
$
$
securities
loans
other (a)
total assets pledged
$
$
(a)
primarily composed of trading assets.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
the firm established a reserve of $900million related to costs anticipated to
be incurred in connection with the various private litigations and regulatory
inquiries involving enron corp. (enron) and the other material legal actions, proceedings and investigations
in which the firm is currently involved. this reserve represents managements
best estimate, after consultation with counsel, of the current probable
aggregate costs associated with these matters. of the $900million, $600
million has been allocated to the various cases, proceedings and investigations
associated with enron. the balance of $300million has been allocated to the
various material litigation, proceedings and investigations involving the
firms debt and equity underwriting activities and equity research practices,
and includes $80million relating to the firms settlement in december 2002
with various regulators relating to equity research practices. it is possible
that the reserve could be subject to revision in the future.
in addition to the various cases, proceedings and investigations for which the
reserve has been established, jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries are named as
defendants in a number of other legal actions and governmental proceedings
arising in connection with their respective businesses. additional actions,
investigations or proceedings may be brought from time to time in the future.
in view of the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of legal matters,
particularly where the claimants seek very large or indeterminate damages or
where the cases present novel legal theories or involve a large number of
parties, the firm cannot state with confidence what the eventual outcome of the
pending matters (including the pending material matters as to which the reserve
has been established) will be, what the timing of the ultimate resolution of
these matters will be, or what the eventual loss related to each pending matter
will be. subject to the foregoing caveat, jpmorgan chase anticipates, based
upon its current knowledge, after consultation with counsel and after taking
into account the establishment of the aforementioned $900million reserve, that
the outcome of the legal actions, proceedings and investigations currently
pending against it should not have a material adverse effect on the
consolidated financial condition of the firm, although the outcome of a
particular proceeding or the imposition of a particular fine or penalty may be
material to jpmorgan chases operating results for a particular period
depending upon, among other factors, the size of the loss or liability and the
level of jpmorgan chases income for that period.
note 28 accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities
sfas 133 establishes accounting and reporting standards for derivative
instruments, including derivative instruments embedded in other contracts, used
for trading and hedging activities. all derivatives, whether designated for
hedging relationships or not, are required to be recorded on the balance sheet
at fair value. the accounting for changes in value of a derivative depends on
whether the contract has been designated and qualifies for hedge accounting.
the majority of jpmorgan chases derivatives are entered into for trading
purposes. the firm also uses derivatives as an end user to hedge market
exposures, modify the interest rate characteristics of related balance sheet
instruments or meet longer-term investment objectives. both trading and
end-user derivatives are recorded at fair value in trading assets and trading
liabilities.
derivatives designated as hedges for accounting purposes must be considered to
be highly effective at reducing the risk associated with the exposure being
hedged. each derivative must be designated as a hedge, with documentation of
the risk management objective and strategy for the hedge, including
identification of the hedging instrument, the hedged item and the risk
exposure, and how effectiveness is to be assessed prospectively and
retrospectively.
for qualifying fair value hedges, all changes in the fair value of the
derivative and changes in the fair value of the hedged item are recognized in
earnings. if the hedge relationship is terminated, then the fair value
adjustment to the hedged item continues to be reported as part of the basis of
the item and is amortized to earnings as a yield adjustment. for qualifying
cash flow hedges, the effective portion of the change in the fair value of the
derivative is recorded in other comprehensive income and recognized in the
income statement when the hedged cash flows affect earnings. the ineffective
portions of cash flow hedges are immediately recognized in earnings. if the
hedge relationship is terminated, then the change in fair value of the
derivative recorded in other comprehensive income is recognized consistent with
the original hedge strategy, when the hedged cash flows occur. for hedge
relationships discontinued because the forecasted transaction is not expected
to occur according to the original strategy, any related derivative amounts
recorded in other comprehensive income are immediately recognized in earnings.
for qualifying net investment hedges, changes in the fair value of the
derivative or the revaluation of the foreign currencydenominated debt
instrument are recorded in the translation adjustments account within other
comprehensive income.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
jpmorgan chases fair value hedges primarily include hedges of fixed-rate
long-term debt, loans, afs securities and mortgage servicing rights. interest
rate swaps are the most common type of derivative contract used to modify
exposure to interest rate risk by converting fixed-rate assets and liabilities
to a floating rate. interest rate options and swaptions are also used in
combination with interest rate swaps to hedge the fair value of the firms
mortgage servicing rights. all amounts have been included in earnings
consistent with the classification of the hedged item, primarily net interest
income, fees and commissions and other revenue. jpmorgan chase did not
recognize any gains or losses during 2002 on firm commitments that no longer
qualify as fair value hedges.
jpmorgan chase enters into derivative contracts to hedge exposure to
variability in cash flows from floating-rate financial instruments and
forecasted transactions, primarily the rollover of short-term assets and
liabilities and anticipated securities transactions. interest rate swaps,
futures, options and foreign exchange forwards are the most common instruments
used to reduce the impact of interest rate and foreign exchange rate changes on
future earnings. all amounts have been included in earnings consistent with the
classification of the hedged item, primarily net interest income.
jpmorgan chase primarily uses forward foreign exchange contracts and foreign
currencydenominated debt instruments to protect the value of its net
investments in its non-u.s. subsidiaries in foreign currencies. the portion of
the hedging instruments excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness
(forward points) is recorded in net interest income.
the following table presents derivative instrument- and hedging-related
activities for the period indicated:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
fair value hedge ineffective net gains(a)
$
$
cash flow hedge ineffective net losses(a)
(1
)
(7
)
cash flow hedging gains on forecasted
transactions that failed to occur
(b)
expected reclassifications from oci to earnings(c)
(177
)
(a)
includes ineffectiveness and the components of hedging instruments that
have been excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness.
(b)
represents recognized gains in net interest income for cash flow hedges of
afs security purchases that were discontinued because the forecasted
transaction failed to occur.
(c)
represents the reclassification of net
after-tax gains (losses)on derivative instruments from oci to earnings that
are expected to occur over the next 12months. the maximum length of time over
which forecasted transactions are hedged is ten years, related to core lending
and borrowing activities.
in 2001, the adoption of sfas 133 resulted in an after-tax reduction to net
income of $25million and an after-tax reduction to other comprehensive income
of $36million. the impact of reclassifying certain sfas 115 securities from
afs to trading was not material at the adoption date. due to sfas 133, jpmorgan
chase changed certain hedging strategies and elected not to designate some
derivatives utilized to manage economic exposure as accounting hedges. for
example, to moderate its use of derivatives, the mortgage business began using
afs securities as economic hedges of mortgage servicing rights. certain
interest rate derivatives are recorded in trading revenue due to operational
and cost constraints of applying hedge accounting. changes in the fair value of credit derivatives used to manage the firms
credit risk are recorded in trading revenue because of the difficulties in
qualifying such contracts as hedges of loans and commitments.
prior to the adoption of sfas 133, derivatives used for hedging purposes
generally were not recorded on the consolidated balance sheet and the
unrealized gains and losses were deferred on those contracts.
note 29 off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments and guarantees
jpmorgan chase utilizes lending-related financial instruments (e.g.,
commitments and guarantees) to meet the financing needs of its customers. the
contractual amount of these financial instruments represents the maximum
possible credit risk should the counterparty draw down the commitment or the
firm fulfill its obligation under the guarantee, and the counterparty
subsequently fails to perform according to the terms of the contract. most of
these commitments and guarantees expire without a default occurring or without
being drawn. as a result, the total contractual amount of these instruments is
not, in the firms view, representative of the firms actual future credit
exposure or funding requirements. further, certain commitments, primarily
related to consumer financings, are cancelable, upon notice, at the option of
the firm.
to provide for the risk of loss inherent in commercial-related contracts, an
allowance for credit losses is maintained. see note 10 for a further discussion
on the allowance for credit losses on lending-related commitments.
the following table summarizes the contract amounts relating to off-balance
sheet lending-related financial instruments and guarantees at december31, 2002
and 2001:
off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments
december 31, (in millions)
consumer-related
$
151,138
$
131,854
commercial-related:
other unfunded commitments to extend credit (a)(b)
$
196,654
$
204,397
standby letters of credit and guarantees(a)
38,848
41,163
other letters of credit (a)
2,618
2,151
total commercial-related
$
238,120
$
247,711
customers securities lent
$
101,503
$
111,167
(a)
net of risk participations totaling $15.6billion and $13.9billion at
december31, 2002 and 2001.
(b)
includes unused advised lines of credit totaling $22.0billion at december
31, 2002 and $19.2billion at december31, 2001. in regulatory filings with the
frb, unused advised lines are not reportable.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
in november 2002, the fasb issued fin 45, which requires the firm to disclose
information about obligations under certain guarantee arrangements. fin 45
defines a guarantee as a contract that contingently requires the firm to pay a
guaranteed party based on: (a)changes in an underlying asset, liability, or
equity security of the guaranteed party, or (b)a third partys failure to
perform under a specified agreement. the firm considers the following
off-balance sheet lending arrangements to be guarantees under fin 45: certain
asset purchase agreements; standby letters of credit and financial guarantees;
and securities lending indemnifications.
unfunded commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend only when a
customer has complied with predetermined conditions, and they generally expire
on fixed dates. the allowance for credit losses on lending-related commitments
includes $213million at december31, 2002, related to unfunded commitments to
extend credit. the majority of the firms unfunded commitments are not
guarantees as defined in fin 45, except for asset purchase agreements of $36
billion at december31, 2002. these agreements are primarily used as a
mechanism to provide liquidity to spes. of the $36billion of asset purchase
agreements at december31, 2002, $33billion related to the firms multi-seller
conduits and structured commercial loan vehicles described in note 11.
certain asset purchase agreements can be exercised at anytime by the spes
administrator, while others require a triggering event to occur. triggering
events include, but are not limited to, a need for liquidity, a market value
decline of the assets or downgrade in the rating of jpmorgan chase bank. these
agreements may cause the firm to purchase an asset from the spe at an amount
above the assets fair value, in effect, providing a guarantee of the initial
value of the reference asset as of the date of the agreement. in most
instances, third-party credit enhancements of the spe mitigate the firms
potential losses on these agreements. the allowance for credit losses on
lending-related commitments related to these agreements was not material at
december31, 2002.
standby letters of credit and financial guarantees are conditional lending
commitments issued by jpmorgan chase to guarantee the performance of a customer
to a third party under borrowing arrangements such as commercial paper
facilities, bond financings and similar transactions. more than 90% of these
arrangements mature within three years. the firm typically has recourse to
recover from the customer any amounts paid under these guarantees; in addition,
the firm may hold cash or other highly liquid collateral to support these
guarantees. collateral held at december31, 2002 relating to these arrangements was $8
billion. the allowance for credit losses on lending-related commitments
included $150million related to standby letters of credit and financial
guarantees.
jpmorgan chase holds customers securities under custodial arrangements. at
times, these securities are loaned to third parties, and the firm issues
securities lending indemnification agreements to the customer that protect the
customer against the risk of loss if the third party fails to return the
securities. to support these indemnification agreements, jpmorgan chase
generally obtains from the third party cash or other highly liquid collateral
with a market value exceeding 100% of the value of the loaned securities. at
december31, 2002, the firm held $110billion in collateral in support of these
agreements.
in connection with issuing securities to investors, the firm may enter into
contractual arrangements with third parties that may require the firm to make a
payment to them in the event of a change in tax law or an adverse
interpretation of tax law. in certain of these cases, the contract may also
include a termination clause which would allow the firm to settle the contract
at its fair value, thus not requiring the firm to make a payment under the
indemnification agreement. even without the termination clause, management does
not expect such indemnification agreements to have a material adverse effect on
the consolidated financial condition of jpmorgan chase. the firm may also enter
into indemnification clauses when it sells a business or assets to a third
party pursuant to which it indemnifies that third party for losses they may
incur due to actions taken by the firm prior to the sale. it is difficult to
estimate the firms maximum exposure under these indemnification arrangements
since this would require an assessment of future changes in tax laws and future
claims that may be made against the firm that have not yet occurred. however,
based on historical experience, management expects the risk of loss to be
remote.
in addition to the contracts described above, there are certain derivative
contracts to which the firm is a counterparty that meet the characteristics of
a guarantee under fin 45. these derivatives are recorded on the consolidated
balance sheet at fair value. these contracts include written put options that
require the firm to purchase assets from the option holder at a specified price
by a specified date in the future, as well as derivatives that effectively
guarantee the return on a counter-partys reference portfolio of assets. the
total notional value of the derivatives that the firm deems to be guarantees
was $47billion at december31, 2002. the firm reduces its exposures to these
contracts by entering into offsetting transactions or by entering into
contracts that hedge the market risk related to these contracts. the fair value
related to these contracts was a derivative receivable of $141million and a
derivative payable of $814million at december31, 2002.
finally, certain written put options and credit derivatives permit cash
settlement and do not require the option holder or the buyer of credit
protection to own the reference asset. the firm does not consider these
contracts to be guarantees as described in fin 45.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 30 credit risk concentrations
concentrations of credit risk arise when a number of customers are engaged in
similar business activities, or activities in the same geographic region, or
have similar economic features that would cause their ability to meet
contractual obligations to be similarly affected by changes in economic
conditions.
jpmorgan chase regularly monitors various segments of its credit risk portfolio
to assess potential concentration risks and to obtain collateral when deemed
necessary. in the firms commercial portfolio, risk concentrations are
primarily evaluated by industry, and also by geographic region. in the consumer
portfolio, concentrations are primarily evaluated by product, and by u.s.
geographic region.
for further information regarding on-balance sheet credit concentrations by
major product and geography, see note 9 on page 80. for information regarding
concentrations of off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments by
major product, see note 29 on page 102. more information about concentrations
can be found on the following tables in the md&a:
commercial exposure
page 47
commercial selected industry concentrations
page 48
selected country exposure
page 53
residential mortgage loans by geographic region
page 55
managed credit card loans by geographic region
page 55
auto financings by geographic region
page 55
the table below presents both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet
commercial- and consumer-related credit exposure as of december31, 2002 and
2001:
credit
on-balance
off-balance
credit
on-balance
off-balance
december
31, (in billions)
exposure
sheet (a)
sheet (b)
exposure
sheet (a)
sheet(b)
commercial-related:
commercial banking
$
44.5
$
36.5
$
8.0
$
36.0
$
26.9
$
9.1
finance companies
24.2
1.7
22.5
23.5
4.0
19.5
all other commercial
344.2
136.6
207.6
364.2
145.1
219.1
total commercial-related
$
412.9
$
174.8
$
238.1
$
423.7
$
176.0
$
247.7
consumer-related:
credit cards (c)
$
143.1
$
19.7
$
123.4
$
124.2
$
19.4
$
104.8
residential mortgages
84.0
64.0
20.0
77.6
59.9
17.7
auto financings
35.4
33.6
1.8
27.6
25.7
1.9
all other consumer
13.4
7.5
5.9
15.1
7.6
7.5
total consumer-related
$
275.9
$
124.8
$
151.1
$
244.5
$
112.6
$
131.9
total exposure
$
688.8
$
299.6
$
389.2
$
668.2
$
288.6
$
379.6
(a)
represents loans, and derivative and other receivables.
(b)
represents lending-related financial instruments.
(c)
excludes securitized credit card receivables.
note 31 fair value of financial instruments
fair value is defined as the value at which positions could be closed out or
sold in a transaction with a willing and knowledgeable counterparty over a
period of time consistent with jpmorgan chases trading or investment strategy.
the accounting for an asset or liability may differ based on the type of
instrument and/or its use in a trading or investing strategy. generally, the
measurement framework recorded in financial statements is one of the following:
recorded at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet with changes in
fair value recorded each period in the consolidated statement of income;
recorded at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet with changes in
fair value recorded each period in a separate component of stockholders
equity and as part of other comprehensive income;
recorded at cost (less other-than-temporary impairments) with changes in fair value not recorded in the financial statements but disclosed in the notes thereto; or
recorded at the lower of cost or fair value.
fair value is based on quoted market prices, where available. if listed prices
or quotes are not available, fair value is based on internally developed models
that primarily use market-based or independent information as inputs. primary
market prices are used to determine the fair value of certain of the firms
financial instruments, such as loans and lending-related commitments, as they
provide an estimate of prices at which such financial instruments could
currently be originated.
valuation adjustments are made, at times, based on defined methodologies that
are applied consistently over time and that are intended to ensure that
positions are carried at the best estimate of fair value. valuation adjustments
include amounts to reflect counterparty credit quality, liquidity and
concentration concerns, and ongoing servicing costs. jpmorgan
chases valua-
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2002 annual report
tion process is continually subject to review, which includes valuation model
and methodology reviews and price testing with independent sources where
appropriate.
these methods may produce a fair value calculation that may not be indicative
of net realizable value or reflective of future fair values. furthermore, the
use of different methodologies or secondary market prices to determine the fair
value of certain financial instruments could result in a different estimate of
fair value at the reporting date; for example, the cost of credit derivatives
can be used to estimate the fair value of commercial loans and lending-related
commitments, rather than discounting them using primary market rates. following
such an approach, the fair value of the firms commercial loans would
approximate carrying value (i.e., commercial loans net of the allowance for
loan losses) at december31, 2002. following the same approach, the maximum
incremental depreciation in fair value of the firms commercial lending-related
commitments would be approximately 40 basis points of the total notional amount
of these commitments at december31, 2002.
certain financial instruments and all nonfinancial instruments are excluded
from the scope of sfas 107. accordingly, the fair value disclosures required by
sfas 107 provide only a partial estimate of the fair value of jpmorgan chase.
for example, jpmorgan chase has developed long-term relationships with its
customers through its deposit base and its credit card accounts, commonly
referred to as core deposit intangibles and credit card relationships. in the
opinion of management, these items in the aggregate add significant value to
jpmorgan chase, but their fair value is not disclosed in this note.
the following captions describe the methodologies and assumptions used, by
financial instrument, to determine fair value.
financial assets
assets for which fair value approximates carrying value
fair values of certain financial assets carried at cost, including cash and due
from banks, deposits with banks, securities borrowed, short-term receivables
and accrued interest receivable are considered to approximate their respective
carrying values due to their short-term nature and generally negligible credit
risk.
assets where fair value differs from cost
jpmorgan chases debt, equity and derivative trading instruments are carried at
their estimated fair value. quoted market prices, when available, are used to
determine the fair value of trading instruments. if quoted market prices are
not available, then fair values are estimated by using pricing models, quoted
prices of instruments with similar characteristics or discounted cash flows.
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements are
typically short-term in nature, and as such, for a significant majority of the
firms transactions, cost approximates carrying value. this balance sheet item
also includes structured resale agreements and similar products with long-dated
maturities. to estimate the fair value of these instruments, the cash flows are
discounted using the appropriate market rates for the applicable maturity.
securities
fair values of actively-traded securities are determined by the secondary
market, while the fair values for nonactively traded securities are based on
independent broker quotations.
derivatives
fair value for derivatives is determined based on the following:
position valuation principally based on liquid market pricing as
evidenced by exchange traded prices, broker-dealer quotations or related
input factors which assume all counter-parties have the same credit
rating;
adjustments to the resulting portfolio valuation to reflect the credit quality of individual counterparties that are principally based on market prices for credit risk; and
other pricing adjustments to take into consideration liquidity, transaction hedging costs and other factors.
loans
fair value for loans is determined using methodologies suitable for each type
of loan:
fair value for the commercial loan portfolio is based on the assessment
of the two main risk components of the portfolio: credit and interest. the
estimated cash flows are discounted using a primary market rate
appropriate for each maturity that incorporates the effects of interest
rate changes and then are adjusted to reflect the inherent credit risk.
fair values for consumer installment loans (including auto financings)
and residential mortgages for which market rates for comparable loans are
readily available are based on discounted cash flows, adjusted for
prepayments. the discount rates used for consumer installment loans are
current rates offered by commercial banks. for residential mortgages,
secondary market yields for comparable mortgage-backed securities,
adjusted for risk, are used.
fair value for credit card receivables is based on discounted expected
cash flows. the discount rates used for credit card receivables
incorporate only the effects of interest rate changes since the estimated
cash flows are adjusted for credit risk.
the fair value of loans in the held-for-sale and trading portfolios is
generally based on observable market prices and prices of similar
instruments, including bonds, credit derivatives and loans with similar
characteristics. otherwise, if market prices are not available, the fair
value is based on the estimated cash flows adjusted for credit risk that
is discounted using a rate appropriate for each maturity that incorporates
the effects of interest rate changes.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
other assets
this caption includes private equity investments and msrs.
for a discussion of the fair value methodology of private equity investments,
see note 13 on page 88.
fair value for mortgage servicing rights is estimated using a discounted future
cash flow model that considers portfolio characteristics and assumptions
regarding prepayment speeds, delinquency rates, ancillary revenues and other
economic factors. the firm reviews such assumptions against market comparables,
if available.
financial liabilities
liabilities for which fair value approximates carrying value
sfas 107 requires that the fair value disclosed for deposit liabilities with no
stated maturity (i.e., demand, savings and certain money market deposits) be
equal to their carrying value. sfas 107 does not allow for the recognition of
the inherent funding value of these instruments.
fair value of commercial paper, other borrowed funds, accounts payable and
accrued liabilities is considered to approximate their respective carrying
values due to their short-term nature.
interest-bearing deposits
fair values of interest-bearing deposits are estimated by discounting cash
flows based on contractual maturities of funds having similar interest rates
and similar maturities.
federal funds purchased and securities sold under
repurchase agreements
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements are
typically short-term in nature, and as such, for a significant majority of the
firms transactions, cost approximates carrying value. this balance sheet item
also includes structured repurchase agreements and similar products with
long-dated maturities. to estimate the fair value of these instruments, the
cash flows are discounted using the appropriate market rates for the applicable
maturity.
long-term debt-related instruments
fair value for long-term debt, including the guaranteed preferred beneficial
interests in the firms junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures, is
based on current market rates and is adjusted for jpmorgan chases credit
quality.
lending-related commitments
the firm estimates the fair value of its commitments to extend credit based on
the primary market prices to originate new commitments at december31, 2002. it
is the change in current primary market prices relative to the original prices
that provides the estimate of the fair value of these commitments. on this
basis, the fair value of the firms lending-related commitments approximated
the allowance for lending-related commitments of $363million at december31,
2002.
the following table presents the carrying value and estimated fair value of
financial assets and liabilities valued under sfas 107. accordingly, certain
amounts which are not considered financial instruments are excluded from the
table.
carrying
estimated
appreciation/
carrying
estimated
appreciation/
december 31, (in billions)
value
fair value
(depreciation)
value
fair value
(depreciation)
financial assets
assets for which fair value approximates carrying value
$
76.4
$
76.4
$
$
86.7
$
86.7
$
fed funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
65.8
66.0
0.2
63.7
63.7
trading assets
248.3
248.3
189.4
189.4
securities available-for-sale
84.0
84.0
59.3
59.3
securities held-to-maturity
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.5
loans-commercial, net of allowance for loan losses
88.6
89.1
0.5
102.4
102.8
0.4
loans-consumer, net of allowance for loan losses
122.4
124.7
2.3
110.5
112.2
1.7
other assets
53.3
53.5
0.2
65.5
65.8
0.3
total financial assets
$
739.2
$
742.4
$
3.2
$
678.0
$
680.4
$
2.4
financial liabilities
liabilities for which fair value approximates carrying value
$
145.1
$
145.1
$
$
153.6
$
153.6
$
interest-bearing deposits
222.7
223.1
(0.4
)
216.7
216.8
(0.1
)
fed funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
169.5
169.5
128.4
128.4
trading liabilities
133.1
133.1
109.1
109.1
long-term debt-related instruments
45.2
45.5
(0.3
)
43.6
44.4
(0.8
)
total financial liabilities
$
715.6
$
716.3
$
(0.7
)
$
651.4
$
652.3
$
(0.9
)
net appreciation
$
2.5
$
1.5
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual report
note 32 international operations
the following table presents income statement information of jpmorgan chase by
major geographic areas. jpmorgan chase defines international activities as
business transactions that involve customers residing outside the u.s., and the
information presented below is based primarily on the domicile of the customer.
however, many of the firms u.s. operations serve international businesses.
as the firms operations are highly integrated, estimates and subjective
assumptions have been made to apportion revenue and expense between u.s. and
international operations. the estimates and assumptions used to apportion
revenue and expense are consistent with the allocations used for jpmorgan
chases segment reporting as set forth in note 33.
jpmorgan chases long-lived assets for the periods presented are not considered
by management to be significant in relation to total assets. the majority of
the firms long-lived assets are located in the united states.
income (loss)
net
for the year ended december 31, (in millions)
revenue(a)
expense(b)
before income taxes
income (loss)
europe/middle east and africa
$
5,120
$
4,882
$
$
asia and pacific
1,900
1,820
latin america and the caribbean
other
total international
7,747
7,293
total u.s.
21,867
19,802
(c)
2,065
1,363
total
$
29,614
$
27,095
$
2,519
$
1,663
europe/middle east and africa
$
6,725
$
5,128
$
1,597
$
1,054
asia and pacific
1,934
2,229
(295
)
(195
)
latin america and the caribbean
(17
)
(11
)
other
total international
9,388
8,098
1,290
total u.s.
19,956
18,680
1,276
total
$
29,344
$
26,778
$
2,566
$
1,694
europe/middle east and africa
$
7,466
$
4,259
$
3,207
$
1,980
asia and pacific
3,194
1,906
1,288
latin america and the caribbean
other
(7
)
(7
)
total international
11,696
6,950
4,746
2,963
total u.s.
21,490
17,503
3,987
2,764
total
$
33,186
$
24,453
$
8,733
$
5,727
(a)
revenue is composed of net interest income and noninterest revenue.
(b)
expense is composed of noninterest expense and provision for credit losses.
the amounts include an allocation of merger and restructuring costs.
(c)
includes the $1.3billion (pre-tax) charge related to the settlement of the
enron surety litigation and the establishment of a litigation reserve for
certain material litigation, proceedings and investigations.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 33 segment information
jpmorgan chase is organized into five major businesses. these businesses are
segmented based on the products and services provided, or the type of customer
served, and reflect the manner in which financial information is evaluated by
management.
jpmorgan chase uses shareholder value added (sva) and operating earnings as
its principal measures of segment profitability. for a definition of these
measurements, see the glossary of terms on page 114.
operating revenues and expenses directly associated with each segment are
included in determining the segments operating earnings. guidelines exist for
allocating to the segments expenses that are not directly incurred by them,
such as corporate overhead and taxes. in addition, management has developed a
risk-adjusted capital methodology that quantifies different types of risk
credit, market, operational and private equity  within the
segment results and reconciliation (table continued on next page)
treasury &
investment management
investment bank
securities services
& private banking
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios)
operating
net interest income
$
2,613
$
2,943
$
2,450
$
1,390
$
1,472
$
1,538
$
$
$
operating
noninterest revenue
9,911
11,848
13,506
2,515
2,311
2,172
2,244
2,494
2,600
equity-related income (b)
(2
)
(8
)
intersegment revenue (c)
(123
)
(112
)
(279
)
total operating revenue
12,399
14,671
15,692
4,046
3,978
3,930
2,868
3,226
3,543
total operating expense
7,978
8,782
9,819
3,001
3,006
2,875
2,336
2,570
2,588
operating margin
4,421
5,889
5,873
1,045
1,055
credit costs
2,392
1,148
operating earnings (loss)before
taxes
2,029
4,741
5,628
1,044
1,051
income taxes (benefit)
1,823
2,106
operating earnings (loss)
$
1,365
$
2,918
$
3,522
$
$
$
$
$
$
merger and restructuring costs
and special items (d)
pre-sfas142 goodwill amortization(d)
net income (loss)
$
1,365
$
2,918
$
3,522
$
$
$
$
$
$
average common equity
$
18,323
$
18,964
$
18,335
$
2,998
$
2,958
$
2,883
$
6,115
$
6,275
$
4,447
average managed assets (e)
$
494,958
$
510,282
$
469,791
$
18,018
$
18,794
$
16,548
$
35,729
$
36,896
$
33,674
shareholder value added
$
(853
)
$
$
1,280
$
$
$
$
(357
)
$
(284
)
$
return on common equity
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
overhead ratio
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
(a)
corporate/reconciling items includes support units, corporate and the net
effect of management accounting policies.
(b)
equity-related income includes equity income of investees accounted for by
the equity method.
(c)
intersegment revenue includes intercompany revenue and revenue-sharing
agreements, net of intersegment expenses. transactions between business
segments are primarily conducted at fair value.
(d)
represents the after-tax amounts.
(e)
includes credit card receivables that have been securitized. the impact of
securitizations on total average assets was $26.5billion in
2002, $18.0billion
in 2001 and $18.8billion in 2000.
nanot applicable.
nmnot meaningful.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
various businesses and assigns capital accordingly. each business segment is
responsible for its credit costs, including actual net charge-offs and changes
in the specific and expected components of the allowance for credit losses. the
residual component of the allowance for credit losses, available for losses in
any business segment, is maintained at the corporate level.
a summary of the business segment results is shown in the following table. the
corporate/reconciling items column reflects revenues and expenses excluded from
the determination of the segments operating earnings. this column includes the
accounting effects remaining at the corporate level after the application of
management accounting policies, including income tax expenses (the difference
between the amounts allocated to business units and jpmorgan chases
consolidated income tax expense).
for a further discussion concerning jpmorgan chases business segments, see
segment results in the md&a on pages 24 and 25. additionally, financial
information relating to jpmorgan chases operations by geographic area is
provided in note 32.
(table continued from previous page)
corporate/
jpmorgan partners
chase financial services
reconciling items(a)
total
$
(321)
$
(350
)
$
(343
)
$
8,395
$
6,933
$
6,202
$
(741
)
$
(739
)
$
(536
)
$
11,819
$
10,846
$
10,018
(617)
(1,112
)
1,111
5,123
3,971
3,798
(16
)
(1
)
(300
)
19,160
19,511
22,887
(2)
(1
)
(1
)
(3
)
(39
)
(38
)
(14)
(7
)
(35
)
(87
)
(185
)
(91
)
(954)
(1,470
)
13,541
10,951
10,059
(847
)
(964
)
(965
)
31,053
30,392
33,045
6,421
5,617
5,298
20,156
20,488
21,258
(1,252)
(1,763
)
7,120
5,334
4,761
(969
)
(1,184
)
(1,248
)
10,897
9,904
11,787
3,159
2,873
2,094
5,770
4,230
2,370
(1,252)
(1,763
)
3,961
2,461
2,667
(1,102
)
(1,351
)
(1,250
)
5,127
5,674
9,417
(463)
(647
)
1,471
1,029
(359
)
(702
)
(720
)
1,743
1,872
3,241
$
(789)
$
(1,116
)
$
$
2,490
$
1,538
$
1,638
$
(743
)
$
(649
)
$
(530
)
$
3,384
$
3,802
$
6,176
(1,721
)
(1,715
)
(200
)
(1,721
)
(1,715
)
(200
)
na
(393
)
(249
)
na
(393
)
(249
)
$
(789)
$
(1,116
)
$
$
2,490
$
1,538
$
1,638
$
(2,464
)
$
(2,757
)
$
(979
)
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
$
5,454
$
6,475
$
7,590
$
10,293
$
9,118
$
8,668
$
(1,815
)
$
(2,266
)
$
(5,747
)
$
41,368
$
41,524
$
36,176
$
10,210
$
12,143
$
13,654
$
179,404
$
162,753
$
146,962
$
21,557
$
13,080
$
14,951
$
759,876
$
753,948
$
695,580
$
(1,614)
$
(2,097
)
$
(894
)
$
1,242
$
$
$
(362
)
$
(183
)
$
$
(1,631
)
$
(1,247
)
$
1,739
nm
nm
%
%
%
%
nm
nm
nm
%
%
%
nm
nm
%
%
%
%
nm
nm
nm
%
%
%
the tables below present reconciliations of the combined segment information
included in the preceding table to jpmorgan chases reported revenue and net
income as included in the consolidated statement of income on page 71.
year ended december
31, (in millions)
segments operating revenue
$
31,900
$
31,356
$
34,010
corporate/reconciling items
(847
)
(964
)
(965
)
consolidated operating revenue
31,053
30,392
33,045
impact of securitizations
(1,439
)
(1,048
)
(990
)
special items
1,131
consolidated revenue
$
29,614
$
29,344
$
33,186
year ended december 31, (in millions)
segments operating earnings
$
4,127
$
4,451
$
6,706
corporate/reconciling items
(743
)
(649
)
(530
)
consolidated operating earnings
3,384
3,802
6,176
merger and restructuring costs
and special items(a)
(1,721
)
(1,715
)
(200
)
pre-sfas 142 goodwill amortization(a)
na
(393
)
(249
)
consolidated net income
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
(a)
represents the after-tax amounts.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 34 parent company
parent company  statement of income
year ended december 31, (in millions)
income
dividends from subsidiaries(a)
$
3,501
$
10,554
$
5,404
interest from subsidiaries
1,174
2,090
3,038
all other income
1,079
total income
5,754
13,207
9,106
expense
interest expense
1,916
2,927
3,859
noninterest expense
1,077
total expense
2,993
3,453
4,781
income before income tax benefit and
undistributed net income of subsidiaries
2,761
9,754
4,325
income tax benefit
equity in undistributed net income (loss)
of subsidiaries
(1,530
)
(8,458
)
income before effect of accounting change
1,663
1,690
5,727
net effect of change in accounting principle
net income
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
parent company  balance sheet
december 31, (in millions)
assets
cash with banks
$
$
deposits with banking subsidiaries
9,994
6,239
securities purchased under resale agreements
trading assets
4,087
1,106
securities-afs
1,081
1,692
advances to subsidiaries:
bank and bank holding company
9,343
6,953
nonbank
20,984
29,546
investment (at equity) in subsidiaries:
bank and bank holding company
40,709
39,588
nonbank
10,826
8,401
other assets
9,892
9,274
total assets
$
107,408
$
103,555
liabilities and stockholders equity
other borrowed funds, primarily commercial paper
$
19,330
$
20,703
other liabilities
4,930
3,805
long-term debt(b)
40,842
37,948
total liabilities
65,102
62,456
stockholders equity
42,306
41,099
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
107,408
$
103,555
parent company  statement of cash flows
year ended december 31, (in millions)
operating activities
net income
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
less: net income of subsidiaries
1,971
2,096
6,204
parent company net loss
(308
)
(402
)
(477
)
add
cash dividends from subsidiaries:(a)
bank and bank holding company
1,898
2,650
4,952
nonbank
7,904
other, net
(912
)
(926
)
(1,712
)
net cash provided by operating activities
1,100
9,226
3,215
investing activities
net change in:
deposits with banking subsidiaries
(3,755
)
2,557
(1,907
)
advances to subsidiaries
6,172
3,931
(347
)
investment (at equity) in subsidiaries
(2,284
)
(5,303
)
(3,305
)
securities purchased under resale agreements, primarily with nonbank subsidiaries
(40
)
securities
(1,605
)
1,186
other, net
(26
)
(295
)
net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
(4,296
)
financing
activities
net change in other borrowed funds
(1,373
)
(4,313
)
3,195
proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt
13,564
7,773
11,127
repayments of long-term debt
(12,271
)
(10,184
)
(10,208
)
proceeds from the issuance of stock and stock-related awards
1,429
2,278
redemption of preferred stock
(511
)
(100
)
treasury stock purchased
(871
)
(2,950
)
cash dividends paid
(2,784
)
(2,697
)
(2,282
)
net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
(2,139
)
(9,374
)
1,060
net increase (decrease)in cash with banks
(304
)
(21
)
cash with banks at the beginning of the year
cash with banks at the end of the year, primarily with bank subsidiaries
$
$
$
cash interest paid
$
1,829
$
2,950
$
3,927
taxes paid (refund received)
$
$
(250
)
$
1,694
(a)
dividends in 2002 include a stock dividend of $1.2billion from the
mortgage business, which was contributed to jpmorgan chase bank. cash
dividends in 2001 include funds from flemings and beacon.
(b)
includes debt with subsidiaries of $5.7billion and $4.7billion at
december31,2002 and 2001,respectively.at december31,2002,all debt that
contractually matures in 2003 through 2007 totaled $6.15billion,$5.75
billion,$3.00billion,$2.32billion and $6.33billion, respectively.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
supplementary information
selected quarterly financial data
(unaudited)
as of or for the period ended
(in millions, except per share and ratio data)
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
reported basis
revenue
$
7,495
$
6,947
$
7,574
$
7,598
$
6,652
$
7,421
$
6,949
$
8,322
noninterest expense
(excluding merger and restructuring costs)
6,768
(a)
4,718
4,965
5,103
4,911
5,131
5,361
5,670
merger and restructuring costs
provision for credit losses
1,836
1,468
income tax expense (benefit)
(200
)
(236
)
net effect of change in accounting principle
(25
)
net income (loss)
$
(387
)
$
$
1,028
$
$
(332
)
$
$
$
1,199
per common share:
net income (loss)per share:
basic
$
(0.20
)
$
0.01
$
0.51
$
0.49
$
(0.18
)
$
0.22
$
0.18
$
0.60
diluted
(0.20
)
0.01
0.50
0.48
(0.18
)
0.22
0.18
0.58
cash dividends
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
book value at period-end
20.66
21.26
20.93
20.16
20.32
21.15
20.81
21.17
performance ratios:
return on average assets
nm
0.02
%
0.56
%
0.55
%
nm
0.24
%
0.21
%
0.67
%
return on average common equity
nm
0.25
9.96
9.72
nm
4.17
3.45
11.58
capital ratios:
tier 1 capital ratio
8.24
%
8.69
%
8.82
%
8.61
%
8.29
%
8.18
%
8.66
%
8.72
%
total capital ratio
11.95
12.43
12.66
12.48
11.88
11.58
12.20
12.31
tier 1 leverage ratio
5.06
5.40
5.38
5.44
5.17
5.29
5.37
5.44
selected balance sheet items:
net loans
$
211,014
$
206,215
$
207,080
$
209,541
$
212,920
$
219,411
$
216,245
$
213,116
total assets
758,800
741,759
740,546
712,508
693,575
799,300
712,702
713,624
deposits
304,753
292,171
293,829
282,037
293,650
281,604
276,804
272,572
long-term debt (b)
45,190
44,552
47,802
42,761
43,622
46,754
45,356
47,048
common stockholders equity
41,297
42,428
41,727
40,122
40,090
41,726
41,401
42,004
total stockholders equity
42,306
43,437
42,736
41,131
41,099
42,735
42,426
43,366
share price(c)
high
$
26.14
$
33.68
$
38.75
$
39.68
$
40.95
$
46.01
$
50.60
$
59.19
low
15.26
17.86
30.15
26.70
31.30
29.04
39.21
37.58
close
24.00
18.99
33.92
35.65
36.35
34.15
44.60
44.90
operating basis(d)
revenue
$
7,925
$
7,301
$
7,908
$
7,919
$
6,916
$
7,691
$
7,222
$
8,563
expense
5,468
4,620
4,965
5,103
4,760
4,985
5,214
5,529
operating margin
2,457
2,681
2,943
2,816
2,156
2,706
2,008
3,034
credit costs
1,351
2,190
1,155
1,074
1,732
1,015
earnings
$
$
$
1,179
$
1,150
$
$
1,133
$
$
1,527
operating performance:
shareholder value added
$
(551
)
$
(964
)
$
(57
)
$
(59
)
$
(915
)
$
(136
)
$
(481
)
$
return on average common equity
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
overhead ratio
common dividend payout ratio
selected balance sheet items:
managed net loans
$
241,736
$
236,058
$
234,579
$
232,766
$
234,344
$
238,135
$
233,998
$
229,741
total managed assets
789,522
771,602
768,045
735,733
714,999
818,024
730,455
730,249
(a)
includes a $1.3billion charge in connection with the settlement of the
enron-related surety litigation and the establishment of a reserve related to
certain material litigations, proceedings and investigations.
(b)
includes
guaranteed preferred beneficial interests in the firms junior subordinated
deferrable interest debentures.
(c)
jpmorgan chases common stock is listed and traded on the new york stock
exchange, the london stock exchange limited and the tokyo stock exchange. the
high, low and closing prices of jpmorgan chases common stock are from the new
york stock exchange composite transaction tape.
(d)
includes credit card receivables that had been securitized. amounts shown
exclude merger and restructuring costs, special items and the amortization of
goodwill. for a description of special items, see glossary of terms on page
114.
nmnot meaningful.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
five-year summary of financial highlights
j.p. morgan chase & co.
(unaudited)
as of or for the year ended december 31,
(in millions, except per share and ratio data)
reported basis
revenue
$
29,614
$
29,344
$
33,186
$
31,146
$
25,873
noninterest expense
(excluding merger and restructuring costs)
21,554
(a)
21,073
21,642
18,188
16,246
merger and restructuring costs
1,210
2,523
1,431
provision for credit losses
4,331
3,182
1,380
1,446
1,393
income tax expense
3,006
3,988
2,602
net effect of change in accounting principle
(25
)
net income
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
$
7,501
$
4,745
per common share:
net income per share
basic
$
0.81
$
0.83
$
2.99
$
3.87
$
2.37
diluted
0.80
0.80
2.86
3.69
2.27
cash dividends
1.36
1.36
1.28
1.08
0.96
book value at december 31
20.66
20.32
21.17
18.07
17.39
performance ratios:
return on average assets
0.23
%
0.23
%
0.85
%
1.19
%
0.72
%
return on average common equity
3.90
3.92
15.56
22.46
14.35
capital ratios:
tier 1 capital ratio
8.24
%
8.29
%
8.46
%
8.54
%
8.23
%
total capital ratio
11.95
11.88
12.03
12.34
11.94
tier 1 leverage ratio
5.06
5.17
5.43
5.85
5.34
selected balance sheet items:
net loans
$
211,014
$
212,920
$
212,385
$
199,270
$
194,227
total assets
758,800
693,575
715,348
667,003
626,942
deposits
304,753
293,650
279,365
287,064
267,465
long-term debt(b)
45,190
43,622
47,238
45,540
47,132
common stockholders equity
41,297
40,090
40,818
33,434
33,377
total stockholders equity
42,306
41,099
42,338
35,056
35,099
share
price(c)
high
$
39.68
$
59.19
$
67.17
$
60.75
$
51.71
low
15.26
29.04
32.38
43.88
23.71
close
24.00
36.35
45.44
51.79
47.33
operating basis(d)
revenue
$
31,053
$
30,392
$
33,045
$
31,911
$
26,643
expense
20,156
20,488
21,258
17,903
16,060
operating margin
10,897
9,904
11,787
14,008
10,583
credit costs
5,770
4,230
2,370
2,439
2,541
earnings
$
3,384
$
3,802
$
6,176
$
7,554
$
5,177
operating performance:
shareholder value added
$
(1,631
)
$
(1,247
)
$
1,739
$
3,496
$
1,187
return on average common equity
%
%
%
%
%
overhead ratio
common dividend payout ratio
selected balance sheet items:
managed net loans
$
241,736
$
234,344
$
230,256
$
217,209
$
212,260
total managed assets
789,522
714,999
733,219
684,942
644,975
(a)
includes a $1.3billion charge in connection with the settlement of the
enron-related surety litigation and the establishment of a reserve related
to certain material litigations, proceedings and investigations.
(b)
includes guaranteed preferred beneficial interests in the firms junior
subordinated deferrable interest debentures.
(c)
jpmorgan chases common stock is listed and traded on the new york stock
exchange, the london stock exchange limited and the tokyo stock exchange. the
high, low and closing prices of jpmorgan chases common stock are from the new
york stock exchange composite transaction tape. share-related data have been
restated to reflect a three-for-two stock split effective as of the close of
business on june9,2000.
(d)
includes credit card receivables that had been securitized. amounts shown
exclude merger and restructuring costs, special items and the amortization of
goodwill. for a reconciliation from reported results to operating basis, see
page 22.for a description of special items, see glossary of terms on page 114.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002
annual report
glossary of terms
j.p. morgan chase & co.
apb: accounting principles board opinion.
apb 25: accounting for stock issued to employees.
apb 30: reporting the results of operations  reporting the effects of
disposal of a segment of a business, and extraordinary, unusual and
infrequently occurring events and transactions.
asset capital tax: the capital that is allocated to each business unit based on
their average asset levels and certain off-balance sheet credit-related
exposures to reflect the need for the firm to maintain minimum leverage ratios
to meet bank regulatory definitions of well capitalized.
basis point value (bpv): this measurement quantifies the change in the market
value of assets and liabilities (that are not part of trading activities) that
would result from a one-basis point change in interest rates or one basis point
widening of interest rate spreads. bpv shows whether an increase of 1/100 of 1%
(or one basis point) in a market rate will yield a profit or loss, and of what
magnitude.
credit derivatives are contractual agreements that provide protection against a
credit event of one or more referenced credits. the nature of a credit event is
established by the protection buyer and protection seller at the inception of a
transaction, and such events include bankruptcy, insolvency and failure to meet
payment obligations when due. the buyer of the credit derivative pays a
periodic fee in return for a payment by the protection seller upon the
occurrence, if any, of a credit event.
credit risk: the risk of loss due to borrower or counterparty default.
criticized: an indication of credit quality of a portfolio, based on jpmorgan
chases internal risk assessment system.criticized assets generally represent a risk profile similar to a rating of a
ccc+/caa1 or lower, as defined by the independent rating agencies.
cross-currency interest rate swaps are contracts that involve the exchange of
both interest and principal amounts in two different currencies. also see
interest rate swaps in this glossary.
debt, equity, commodity and other contracts include swaps and option contracts
that are similar to interest rate contracts except the underlying instrument is
debt-, equity- or commodity-related.
eitf: emerging issues task force.
eitf issue 01-14: income statement
characterization of reimbursements received for out-of-pocket expenses incurred.
eitf issue 02-03: issues involved in accounting for derivative contract held
for trading purposes and contracts involved in energy trading and risk
management activities.
fasb: financial accounting standards board.
fin 39: fasb interpretation no.39, offsetting of amounts related to certain
contracts.
fin 41: fasb interpretation no.41, offsetting of amounts related to certain
repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements.
fin 45: fasb interpretation no.45, guarantors accounting and disclosure
requirement for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of indebtedness of
others.
fin 46: fasb interpretation no.46, consolidation of variable interest
entities, an interpretation of accounting research bulletin no.51.
foreign currency options are similar to interest rate options except they are
based on foreign exchange rates. also see interest rate options in this
glossary.
foreign exchange contracts are contracts that provide for the future receipt
and delivery of foreign currency at previously agreed-upon terms.
forward rate agreements are contracts to exchange payments on a specified
future date, based on a market change in interest rates from trade date to
contract settlement date.
interest rate futures and forwards are contracts for the delayed delivery of
securities or money market instruments. the selling party agrees to deliver, on
a specified future date, a specified instrument at a specified price or yield.
interest rate options, including caps and floors, are contracts to modify
interest rate risk in exchange for the payment of a premium when the contract
is initiated. a writer of interest rate options receives a premium in exchange
for bearing the risk of unfavorable changes in interest rates. conversely, a
purchaser of an option pays a premium for the right, but not the obligation, to
buy or sell a financial instrument or currency at predetermined terms in the
future.
interest rate swaps are contracts in which a series of interest rate payments
in a single currency are exchanged over a prescribed period. an example of a
situation in which an interest rate swap would be used would be to convert
fixed-rate debt to a variable rate. by entering into the swap, the principal
amount of the debt would remain unchanged, but the interest streams would
change from fixed to variable.
investment-grade: an indication of credit quality based on jpmorgan chases
internal risk assessment system. investment-grade represents a risk profile
similar to a rating of a bbb-/baa3 or better, as defined by the independent
rating agencies.
liquidity risk: the risk of being unable to fund a portfolio of assets at
appropriate maturities and rates, and the risk of being unable to liquidate a
position in a timely manner at a reasonable price.
managed credit card receivables or managed basis: refers to credit card
receivables on the firms balance sheet plus credit card receivables that have
been securitized.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
mark-to-market exposure: mark-to-market exposure is a measure, at a point in
time, of the value of a derivative or foreign exchange contract in the open
market. when the mark-to-market value is positive, it indicates the
counterparty owes jpmorgan chase and, therefore, creates a repayment risk for
the firm. when the mark-to-market value is negative, jpmorgan chase owes the
counterparty. in this situation, the firm does not have repayment risk.
market risk: the potential loss in value of portfolios and financial
instruments caused by movements in market variables, such as interest and
foreign-exchange rates, credit spreads, and equity and commodity prices.
master netting agreement: an agreement between two counterparties that have
multiple derivative contracts with each other that provides for the net
settlement of all contracts through a single payment, in a single currency, in
the event of default on or termination of any one contract. see fin 39.
merger: refers to the december31, 2000, merger of the chase manhattan
corporation and j.p. morgan & co. incorporated.
net interest spread on interest-earning assets: the average rate for
interest-earning assets less the average rate paid for all interest-bearing
liabilities.
operating basis or operating earnings: reported results excluding the impact of
merger and restructuring costs, special items, credit card securitizations and
the amortization of goodwill.
operational risk: the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed
processes or systems, human factors, or external events.
overhead ratio: operating expense (excluding merger and restructuring costs and
special items) as a percentage of operating revenue.
sfas: statement of financial accounting
standards.
sfas 5: accounting for
contingencies.
sfas 87: employers accounting for pensions.
sfas 88: employers accounting for settlements and curtailments of defined
benefit pension plans and for termination benefits.
sfas 106: employers accounting for postretirement benefits other than
pensions.
sfas 107: disclosures about fair value
of financial instruments.
sfas 109:
accounting for income taxes.
sfas 114: accounting by creditors for
impairment of a loan.
sfas 115: accounting for certain investments in debt and equity securities.
sfas 121: accounting for the impairment of long-lived assets and for
long-lived assets to be disposed of.
sfas 123: accounting for stock-based compensation.
sfas 128: earnings per share.
sfas 133: accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities.
sfas 140: accounting for transfers and servicing of financial assets and
extinguishments of liabilities  a replacement of fasb statement no.125.
sfas 141: business combinations.
sfas 142: goodwill and other intangible assets.
sfas 144: accounting for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets.
sfas 146: accounting for costs associated with exit or disposal activities.
shareholder value added (sva): represents operating earnings minus preferred
dividends and an explicit charge for capital.
six sigma: represents a business management approach that enables firms to
improve the quality of products and services delivered to clients through
understanding client priorities, and then eliminating process defects and
failures. sigmas (or standard deviations) are statistical measures of the
defects or failures generated by a business process.
special items: all amounts are on a pre-tax basis unless otherwise noted.
special items in 2002 included a $1.3billion charge for the settlement of the
enron surety litigation and the establishment of a litigation reserve and a $98
million charge for excess real estate capacity related to facilities in the
west coast of the united states. special items in 2001 included a $25million
loss (after-tax) from the cumulative effect of a transition adjustment related
to the adoption of sfas 133. special items in 2000 included an $827million
gain on the sale of the hong kong retail banking business, a $399million gain
from the transfer of euroclear-related business, an $81million gain from the
sale of the panama operations and a $176million loss resulting from the
economic hedge of the purchase price of flemings prior to its acquisition.
special items in 1999 were interest income of $62million from prior years tax
refunds, gains of $166million from sales of nonstrategic assets and a $100
million special contribution to the chase manhattan foundation. in 1998,
special items were interest income of $191million from prior years tax
refunds, a $131million gain from the sale of a global trust and agency
services business, a $56million gain from the sale of an investment management
business in australia and costs incurred of $37million for accelerated vesting
of stock-based incentive awards.
stress testing: a scenario that measures market risk under unlikely but
plausible events in abnormal markets.
value-at-risk (var): a measure of the dollar amount of potential loss from
adverse market moves in an ordinary market environment.
j.p. morgan chase & co./2002 annual report
distribution of assets, liabilities and stockholders equity;
interest rates and interest differentials
changes in net interest income, volume and rate analysis
the table below presents an analysis of the effect on net interest income of
volume and rate changes for the periods 2002 versus 2001 and 2001 versus 2000.
in this analysis, the change due to the volume/rate variance has been allocated
to volume.
2002 versus 2001
2001 versus 2000
(on a taxable-equivalent basis; in millions)
increase (decrease) due to change in:
increase (decrease) due to change in:
net
net
volume
rate
change
volume
rate
change
interest-earning assets
deposits with banks, primarily non-u.s.
$
$
(221
)
$
(149
)
$
(14
)
$
(307
)
$
(321
)
federal funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements:
u.s.
(1,119
)
(977
)
(1,037
)
(845
)
non-u.s.
(194
)
(556
)
(750
)
(2
)
(99
)
(101
)
securities and trading assets:
u.s.
(85
)
(1,010
)
(1,095
)
(840
)
(266
)
non-u.s.
(203
)
(643
)
(276
)
securities borrowed
(736
)
(662
)
(1,013
)
(951
)
loans:
u.s.
(305
)
(2,447
)
(2,752
)
1,260
(2,271
)
(1,011
)
non-u.s.
(185
)
(543
)
(728
)
(632
)
(59
)
(691
)
change in interest income
(68
)
(6,835
)
(6,903
)
1,807
(6,269
)
(4,462
)
interest-bearing liabilities
interest-bearing deposits:
u.s.
(983
)
(668
)
(1,031
)
(692
)
non-u.s.
(328
)
(1,749
)
(2,077
)
(355
)
(1,790
)
(2,145
)
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements:
u.s.
(2,575
)
(2,533
)
(2,121
)
(1,428
)
non-u.s.
(848
)
(809
)
(247
)
other borrowed funds:
u.s.
(831
)
(712
)
(877
)
(563
)
non-u.s.
(13
)
(6
)
(4
)
(277
)
(281
)
long-term debt, primarily u.s.
(55
)
(761
)
(816
)
(37
)
(871
)
(908
)
intracompany funding:
u.s.
(645
)
(230
)
(37
)
(1,067
)
(1,104
)
non-u.s.
(415
)
1,067
1,104
change in interest expense
(7,760
)
(7,621
)
1,462
(7,214
)
(5,752
)
change in net interest income
$
(207
)
$
$
$
$
$
1,290
consolidated average balance
sheet, interest and rates
provided below is a summary of jpmorgan
chases consolidated average balances,
interest rates and interest differentials
on a taxable-equivalent basis for the
years 2000 through 2002. income computed
on a taxable-equivalent basis is the
income reported in the
consolidated statement of income, adjusted
to make income and earnings yields on
assets exempt from income taxes (primarily
federal taxes) comparable with other
taxable income. the incremental tax rate
used for calculating the
taxable-equivalent adjustment was
approximately 41% in the year 2002,
(table continued on next page)
year ended december 31,
(taxable-equivalent interest and rates; in millions, except rates)
average balance
interest
average rate
assets
deposits with banks
$
11,945
$
2.54
%
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
84,194
2,078
2.47
securities and trading assets
204,337
10,232
5.01
(a)
securities borrowed
42,703
1.59
loans
211,432
12,068
(b)
5.71
total interest-earning assets
554,611
25,362
4.57
allowance for loan losses
(5,178
)
cash and due from banks
18,850
trading assets  derivative receivables
73,641
all other assets
91,433
total assets
$
733,357
liabilities
interest-bearing deposits
$
217,417
$
5,253
2.42
%
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
168,428
3,313
1.97
commercial paper
16,134
1.74
other borrowings(d)
69,393
3,444
4.96
long-term debt
43,927
1,467
3.34
total interest-bearing liabilities
515,299
13,758
2.67
noninterest-bearing deposits
69,999
trading liabilities  derivative payables
57,607
all
other liabilities, including the allowance for lending-related
commitments
47,988
total liabilities
690,893
preferred stock of subsidiary
stockholders equity
preferred stock
1,009
common stockholders equity
41,368
total stockholders equity
42,377
(e)
total liabilities, preferred stock of subsidiary and stockholders equity
$
733,357
interest rate spread
1.90
%
net interest income and net yield on interest-earning assets
$
11,604
2.09
note:
the weighted-average interest rates reflect the impact of local interest
rates prevailing in certain latin american countries with highly inflationary
economies.
(a)
the annualized rate for available-for-sale securities based on amortized
cost was 5.13% in 2002, 5.57% in 2001 and 6.06% in 2000. the annualized rate
for available-for-sale securities based on fair value was 5.09% in 2002, 5.59%
in 2001 and 6.30% in 2000.
(b)
fees and commissions on loans included in loan interest amounted to $276
million in 2002, $210million in 2001 and $255million in 2000.
(c)
includes $84million in 2001 of interest income resulting from the refund
of prior-years taxes. excluding this amount, the net yield on interest-earning
assets would be 1.97% in 2001.
(d)
includes securities sold but not yet purchased.
(e)
the ratio of average stockholders equity to average assets was 5.8% for 2002,
5.8% for 2001 and 5.6% for 2000. the return on average stockholders equity was 3.9%
for 2002, 4.0% for 2001 and 15.2% for 2000.
approximately 41% in 2001 and
approximately 42% in
2000. a substantial portion of jpmorgan
chases securities is taxable.
within the consolidated average balance
sheet, interest and rates summary, the
principal amounts of nonaccrual
loans have been included in
the average loan balances used to
determine the average interest rate
earned on loans. for additional
information on nonaccrual loans,
including interest accrued, see note 9
on pages 80 and 81.
(continuation of table)
average balance
interest
average rate
average balance
interest
average rate
$
9,119
$
4.96
%
$
9,404
$
8.22
%
83,841
3,805
4.54
79,344
4,751
5.99
196,166
11,117
5.67
(a)
178,770
11,659
6.52
(a)
38,156
1,343
3.52
36,398
2,294
6.30
219,843
15,548
(b)
7.07
209,488
17,250
(b)
8.23
547,125
32,265
5.90
513,404
36,727
7.15
(3,862)
(3,697
)
20,928
17,478
78,461
70,727
93,321
78,893
$
735,973
$
676,805
$
215,865
$
7,998
(c)
3.70
%(c)
$
214,411
$
10,835
5.05
%
163,858
6,655
4.06
133,705
7,818
5.85
18,561
4.03
17,956
1,121
6.24
64,029
3,694
5.77
59,247
4,166
7.03
45,583
2,283
5.01
46,282
3,191
6.89
507,896
21,379
4.21
471,601
27,131
5.75
60,983
52,811
69,676
66,573
54,158
47,523
692,713
638,508
1,186
1,571
41,524
36,176
42,710
(e)
37,747
(e)
$
735,973
$
676,805
1.69
%
1.40
%
$
10,886
1.99
(c)
$
9,596
1.87
interest rates and interest
differential analysis of net interest income  u.s. and non-u.s.
presented below is a summary of interest
rates and interest differentials
segregated between u.s. and non-u.s.
operations for the years 2000 through
2002. the segregation of u.s. and non-u.s.
components is based on the location of the office recording
the transaction. intracompany funding
generally comprises dollar-denominated
deposits originated in various locations
that are centrally managed by jpmorgan
chases treasury units. u.s. net interest
income was $8,912million in 2002, an
increase of $480
(table continued on next page)
year ended december 31,
average
average
(taxable-equivalent interest and rates; in millions, except rates)
balance
interest
rate
interest-earning assets:
deposits with banks, primarily non-u.s.
$
11,945
$
2.54
%
federal funds sold and securities purchased
under resale agreements:
u.s.
60,176
1,302
2.16
non-u.s.
24,018
3.23
securities and trading assets:
u.s.
134,947
7,310
5.42
non-u.s.
69,390
2,922
4.21
securities borrowed, primarily u.s.
42,703
1.59
loans:
u.s.
174,359
9,627
5.52
non-u.s.
37,073
2,441
6.58
total interest-earning assets
554,611
25,362
4.57
interest-bearing liabilities:
interest-bearing deposits:
u.s.
107,823
2,412
2.24
non-u.s.
109,594
2,841
2.59
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements:
u.s.
131,213
2,800
2.13
non-u.s.
37,215
1.38
other borrowed funds:
u.s.
58,533
2,490
4.25
non-u.s.
26,994
1,235
4.58
long-term debt, primarily u.s.
43,927
1,467
3.34
intracompany funding:
u.s.
68,736
1,758
non-u.s.
(68,736
)
(1,758
)
total interest-bearing liabilities
515,299
13,758
2.67
noninterest-bearing liabilities(b)
39,312
total investable funds
$
554,611
$
13,758
2.48
%
net interest income and net yield:
$
11,604
2.09
%
u.s.
8,912
2.25
non-u.s.
2,692
1.69
percentage of total assets and liabilities attributable
to non-u.s. operations:
assets
31.7
liabilities
34.9
(a)
see note (c)on page 116. excluding the tax refund, the
u.s. net yield on interest-earning assets would be 2.10% in
2001.
(b)
represents the amount of noninterest-bearing liabilities
funding interest-earning assets.
million from the prior
year. the increase primarily was attributable to improved
spreads. net interest income from non-u.s. operations was
$2,692million for 2002, compared with $2,454million in
2001. the increase also reflected improved spreads.
for further discussion, see the section
entitled net interest income in the
md&a on page 20.
(continuation of table)
average
average
average
average
balance
interest
rate
balance
interest
rate
$
9,119
$
4.96
%
$
9,404
$
8.22
%
53,783
2,279
4.24
49,264
3,124
6.34
30,058
1,526
5.08
30,080
1,627
5.41
136,544
8,405
6.16
127,241
8,671
6.81
59,622
2,712
4.55
51,529
2,988
5.80
38,156
1,343
3.52
36,398
2,294
6.30
179,912
12,379
6.88
161,586
13,390
8.29
39,931
3,169
7.94
47,902
3,860
8.06
547,125
32,265
5.90
513,404
36,727
7.15
93,589
3,080
(a)
3.29
(a)
83,275
3,772
4.53
122,276
4,918
4.02
131,136
7,063
5.39
129,400
5,333
4.12
112,623
6,761
6.00
34,458
1,322
3.84
21,082
1,057
5.01
55,770
3,202
5.74
50,300
3,765
7.49
26,820
1,241
4.63
26,903
1,522
5.66
45,583
2,283
5.01
46,282
3,191
6.89
52,418
1,988
53,394
3,092
(52,418
)
(1,988
)
(53,394
)
(3,092
)
507,896
21,379
4.21
471,601
27,131
5.75
39,229
41,803
$
547,125
$
21,379
3.91
%
$
513,404
$
27,131
5.28
%
$
10,886
1.99
%(a)
$
9,596
1.87
%
8,432
2.12
(a)
6,995
1.91
2,454
1.64
2,601
1.76
31.4
32.3
38.0
41.9
securities portfolio
the table below presents the amortized cost, estimated fair value and average
yield (including the impact of related derivatives) of jpmorgan chases
securities by contractual maturity range and type of security.
maturity schedule of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities
due in 1
due after 1
due after 5
due after
december 31, 2002 (in millions, rates on a taxable-equivalent basis)
year or less
through 5 years
through 10 years
10 years(a)
total
u.s. government and federal
agency/corporation obligations:
amortized cost
$
2,884
$
12,883
$
7,665
$
42,857
$
66,289
fair value
2,867
13,265
7,815
43,199
67,146
average yield(b)
2.31
%
3.76
%
4.36
%
5.18
%
4.68
%
other:(c)
amortized cost
$
7,191
$
5,039
$
1,780
$
2,653
$
16,663
fair value
7,174
5,066
1,913
2,733
16,886
average yield(b)
3.47
%
3.76
%
5.02
%
5.05
%
3.98
%
total available-for-sale securities:(d)
amortized cost
$
10,075
$
17,922
$
9,445
$
45,510
$
82,952
fair value
10,041
18,331
9,728
45,932
84,032
average yield(b)
3.14
%
3.76
%
4.48
%
5.17
%
4.54
%
total held-to-maturity securities:(d)
amortized cost
$
$
$
$
$
fair value
average yield(b)
2.09
%
6.80
%
6.42
%
(a)
securities with no stated maturity are included with securities with a
contractual maturity of 10years or more. substantially all of jpmorgan chases
mortgaged-backed securities (mbss) and collateralized mortgage obligations
(cmos) are due in 10years or more based on contractual maturity. the
estimated duration, which reflects anticipated future prepayments based on a
consensus of dealers in the market, is approximately three years for mbss and
less than one year for cmos.
(b)
the average yield is based on amortized cost balances at the end of the
year. yields are derived by dividing interest income (including the effect of
related derivatives on available-for-sale securities and the amortization of
premiums and accretion of discounts) by total amortized cost.
taxable-equivalent yields are used where applicable.
(c)
includes obligations of state and political subdivisions, debt securities
issued by non-u.s. governments, corporate debt securities, cmos of private
issuers and other debt and equity securities.
(d)
for the amortized cost of the above categories of securities at december31, 2001,
see note 7 on page 79. at december31, 2000, the amortized cost of u.s. government
and federal agencies and other available-for-sale securities was $59,487million and $14,079
million, respectively. at december31, 2000, the amortized cost of u.s.
government and federal agencies and other held-to-maturity securities was $587
million and $2million, respectively.
of the securities held in jpmorgan chases
securities portfolios, securities issued
by the federal republic of germany
exceeded 10% of jpmorgan chases total
stockholders equity at december31, 2002,
and had at that date a fair value of
$7,804million and an amortized cost of
$7,772million. the u.s.
government and
certain of its agencies were the only
other issuers whose securities exceeded
10% of jpmorgan chases total
stockholders equity at december31, 2002.
for a further discussion of jpmorgan
chases securities portfolios, see note 7
on page 79.
loan portfolio
the table below sets forth the amounts of loans outstanding by type:
december 31, (in millions)
u.s. loans:
commercial and industrial
$
49,205
$
56,680
$
64,031
$
58,563
$
47,268
commercial real estate  commercial mortgage
3,176
3,533
4,109
5,207
3,907
commercial real estate  construction
financial institutions
3,770
5,608
7,342
6,623
6,505
consumer
124,687
111,850
95,960
85,289
80,941
total u.s. loans
181,354
178,286
172,167
156,482
139,576
non-u.s. loans:
commercial and industrial
31,446
33,530
37,002
38,067
45,774
commercial real estate
1,470
financial institutions
2,438
3,570
3,976
3,779
5,626
non-u.s. governments
1,161
1,517
2,667
consumer
2,801
3,821
total non-u.s. loans
35,010
39,158
43,883
46,526
58,673
total loans(a)
$
216,364
$
217,444
$
216,050
$
203,008
$
198,249
(a)
loans are presented net of unearned income of $1.89billion, $1.83billion,
$1.57billion, $1.53billion and $1.69billion at december31, 2002, 2001,
2000, 1999 and 1998, respectively.
for a discussion of jpmorgan chases loan outstandings, see credit
portfolio on pages 46 through 55.
maturities and sensitivity to changes in interest rates
the table below shows, at december31, 2002, commercial loan maturity and
distribution between fixed and floating interest rates based upon the stated
terms of the commercial loan agreements. the table does not include the impact
of derivative instruments.
within
1-5
after 5
december 31, 2002 (in millions)
1 year(a)
years
years
total
u.s.:
commercial and industrial
$
21,709
$
22,813
$
4,683
$
49,205
commercial real estate
1,297
1,661
3,692
financial institutions
3,335
3,770
non-u.s.
13,324
12,756
8,801
34,881
total commercial loans
$
39,102
$
37,291
$
15,155
$
91,548
loans at fixed interest rates
$
17,891
$
4,790
loans at variable interest rates
19,400
10,365
total commercial loans
$
37,291
$
15,155
(a)
includes demand loans, overdrafts and loans having no stated schedule of
repayments and no stated maturity.
cross-border outstandings
cross-border disclosure is based upon the
federal financial institutions examination
councils (ffiec) guidelines governing
the determination of cross-border risk. in
accordance with ffiec revised guidelines,
credit derivatives were included in the
determination of cross-border exposure
beginning in 2000.
the following table lists all countries in
which jpmorgan chases cross-border
outstandings exceed 0.75% of consolidated
assets as of any of the dates specified.
the disclosure includes certain exposures
that are not required under the disclosure
requirements of the sec. the most
significant differences between the ffiec
and sec methodologies relate to the
treatments of local country exposure and
to foreign exchange and derivatives.
for a further discussion of jpmorgan
chases cross-border exposure based on
managements view of this exposure, see
page 53.
cross-border outstandings exceeding 0.75% of total assets
net
localcountryassets
totaldirect
exposure(b)
totalcross-border
exposure
(in millions)
at december 31,
governments
banks
other(a)
commitments(c)
germany
$
21,705
$
10,213
$
4,789
$
$
36,707
$
20,405
$
57,112
32,003
10,068
4,194
46,265
11,977
58,242
15,265
11,644
4,169
31,078
11,163
42,241
u.k.
$
1,386
$
7,821
$
12,191
$
$
21,398
$
20,416
$
41,814
1,380
1,980
7,590
10,950
14,360
25,310
8,262
17,676
26,588
15,095
41,683
france
$
5,212
$
6,461
$
3,136
$
$
15,793
$
14,902
$
30,695
5,621
3,792
3,743
13,156
9,044
22,200
4,150
4,732
2,472
11,814
7,998
19,812
netherlands
$
4,030
$
2,907
$
8,724
$
$
15,661
$
7,744
$
23,405
4,871
1,468
7,999
14,347
4,729
19,076
1,847
6,547
4,026
12,430
2,950
15,380
japan
$
7,990
$
1,534
$
1,443
$
$
10,967
$
10,290
$
21,257
4,696
2,499
2,278
9,473
6,662
16,135
4,572
6,507
5,710
17,217
5,199
22,416
italy
$
7,340
$
3,604
$
2,489
$
$
13,921
$
6,001
$
19,922
11,323
2,147
3,722
1,492
18,684
4,901
23,585
11,863
3,742
2,973
18,977
3,776
22,753
spain
$
2,293
$
1,501
$
1,987
$
$
6,440
$
5,613
$
12,053
2,860
1,869
1,670
6,953
3,453
10,406
1,472
2,926
5,867
2,241
8,108
switzerland
$
$
1,684
$
3,129
$
$
5,976
$
3,375
$
9,351
3,142
3,129
6,827
2,141
8,968
1,789
3,815
6,306
2,604
8,910
luxembourg
$
$
$
5,355
$
$
6,904
$
$
7,550
1,946
2,510
4,589
5,340
1,652
2,412
3,022
belgium
$
$
$
1,283
$
$
2,684
$
1,975
$
4,659
1,224
1,884
2,615
5,723
2,644
8,367
3,231
1,979
5,677
2,027
7,704
(a)
consists primarily of commercial
and industrial.
(b)
exposure includes loans and accrued interest receivable, interest-bearing
deposits with banks, acceptances, resale agreements, other monetary assets,
cross-border trading debt and equity instruments, mark-to-market exposure of
foreign exchange and derivative contracts and local country assets, net of
local country liabilities. the amounts associated with foreign exchange and
derivative contracts are presented after taking into account the impact of
legally enforceable master netting agreements.
(c)
commitments include outstanding letters of credit, undrawn commitments to
extend credit and credit derivatives.
jpmorgan chases total
cross-border exposure tends to fluctuate greatly, and the amount of
exposure at year-end tends to be a function of timing rather than
representing a consistent trend.
risk elements
the following table sets forth nonperforming assets and contractually past-due assets at the dates indicated:
december 31, (in millions)
nonperforming assets
u.s. nonperforming loans:(a)
commercial and industrial
$
1,769
$
1,186
$
$
$
commercial real estate
financial institutions
consumer
total u.s. nonperforming loans
2,578
1,770
1,198
non-u.s. nonperforming loans:(a)
commercial and industrial
1,566
commercial real estate
financial institutions
non-u.s. governments
consumer
total non-u.s. nonperforming loans
1,615
total nonperforming loans
4,193
2,496
1,818
1,737
1,562
derivative receivables
1,300
other receivables(b)
assets acquired in loan satisfactions
total nonperforming assets
$
4,780
$
3,920
$
1,923
$
1,873
$
1,728
contractually past-due assets(c)
u.s. loans:
commercial and industrial
$
$
$
$
$
commercial real estate
consumer
total u.s. loans
non-u.s. loans
commercial and industrial
$
$
$
$
$
financial institutions
consumer
total non-u.s. loans
derivative receivables
total
$
$
$
$
$
(a)
all nonperforming loans accounted for on a nonaccrual basis. there were no
nonperforming renegotiated loans. renegotiated loans are those for which
concessions, such as the reduction of interest rates or the deferral of
interest or principal payments, have been granted as a result of a
deterioration in the borrowers financial condition.
(b)
other receivables at december31, 2002 represents the enron-related letter
of credit, which continues to be the subject of litigation and was classified
in other assets.
(c)
accruing loans past-due 90days or more as to principal
and interest, which are not characterized as nonperforming
loans.
for a discussion of nonperforming loan and past-due loan policies, see note 9
on pages 80-81.
impact of nonperforming loans on interest income
the negative impact on interest income from nonperforming loans represents the
difference between the amount of interest income that would have been recorded
on nonperforming loans according to contractual terms and the amount of
interest that actually was recognized on a cash basis. the following table sets
forth this data for the years specified. the increase in 2002 in total negative
impact on interest income reflects a higher level of interest that was not
recognized in income due to the increased level of nonperforming loans.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
u.s.:
gross amount of interest that would have been recorded at the original rate
$
$
$
interest that was recognized in income
(24
)
(30
)
(20
)
negative impact  u.s.
non-u.s.:
gross amount of interest that would have been recorded at the original rate
interest that was recognized in income
(3
)
(2
)
negative impact  non-u.s.
total negative impact on interest income
$
$
$
summary of loan and lending-related
commitments loss experience
the tables below summarize the changes in the allowance for loan losses and
lending-related commitments, respectively, during the periods indicated. for a
further discussion, see note 10 on page 82.
allowance for loan losses
year ended december 31, (in millions)
balance at beginning of year
$
4,524
$
3,665
$
3,738
$
4,022
$
4,170
provision for loan losses
4,039
3,185
1,377
1,446
1,453
u.s. charge-offs
commercial and industrial
(967
)
(852
)
(293
)
(262
)
(102
)
commercial real estate
(5
)
(7
)
(3
)
(2
)
(6
)
financial institutions
(19
)
(35
)
(28
)
(70
)
consumer
(2,070
)
(1,485
)
(1,067
)
(1,253
)
(1,160
)
total u.s. charge-offs
(3,061
)
(2,379
)
(1,391
)
(1,587
)
(1,268
)
non-u.s. charge-offs
commercial and industrial
(955
)
(192
)
(208
)
(396
)
(527
)
financial institutions
(43
)
(1
)
(2
)
(9
)
(122
)
non-u.s. governments
(9
)
(1
)
consumer
(1
)
(1
)
(32
)
(42
)
(29
)
total non-u.s. charge-offs
(999
)
(203
)
(243
)
(447
)
(678
)
total charge-offs
(4,060
)
(2,582
)
(1,634
)
(2,034
)
(1,946
)
u.s. recoveries
commercial and industrial
commercial real estate
financial institutions
consumer
total u.s. recoveries
non-u.s. recoveries
commercial and industrial
commercial real estate
financial institutions
non-u.s. governments
consumer
total non-u.s. recoveries
total recoveries
net charge-offs
(3,676
)
(2,335
)
(1,400
)
(1,747
)
(1,554
)
charge to conform to ffiec revised policy
(80
)
transfer to derivative receivables
(50
)
allowance related to purchased portfolios
other
(1
)
(2
)
balance at year-end
$
5,350
$
4,524
$
3,665
$
3,738
$
4,022
allowance for lending-related commitments
year ended december 31, (in millions)
balance at beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
provision for lending-related commitments
(3
)
(60
)
u.s. charge-offs  commercial and industrial
(212
)
non-u.s. charge-offs  commercial and industrial
(15
)
total charge-offs
(212
)
(15
)
non-u.s. recoveries  commercial and industrial
total recoveries
net charge-offs
(212
)
(15
)
other
(1
)
balance at year-end
$
$
$
$
$
loan loss analysis
year ended december 31, (in millions, except ratios)
balances
loans  average
$
211,432
$
219,843
$
209,488
$
199,912
$
200,329
loans  year-end
216,364
217,444
216,050
203,008
198,249
net charge-offs
3,676
2,335
1,480
(a)
1,747
1,554
allowance for loan losses:
u.s.
4,122
3,743
3,006
2,813
2,687
non-u.s.
1,228
1,335
total allowance for loan losses
5,350
4,524
3,665
3,738
4,022
nonperforming loans
4,193
2,496
1,818
1,737
1,562
ratios
net charge-offs to:
loans  average
1.74
%
1.06
%
0.71
%
0.87
%
0.78
%
allowance for loan losses
68.71
51.61
40.38
46.74
38.64
allowance for loan losses to:
loans  year-end
2.47
2.08
1.70
1.84
2.03
nonperforming loans
127.59
181.25
201.60
215.20
257.49
(a)
includes a charge of $80million to conform to ffiec revised policy.
lending-related commitments loss analysis
year ended december 31, (in millions, except ratios)
balances
commercial lending-related commitments  average
$
241,145
$
255,419
$
261,255
$
275,768
$
279,997
commercial lending-related commitments  year-end
238,120
247,711
263,154
290,794
281,531
net charge-offs
(3
)
allowance for lending-related commitments:
u.s.
non-u.s.
total allowance for lending-related commitments
ratios
net charge-offs to:
commercial lending-related commitments  average
0.09
%
nm
0.01
%
nm
nm
allowance for lending-related commitments
58.40
nm
5.30
nm
nm
allowance for lending-related commitments to:
commercial lending-related commitments  year-end
0.15
0.11
%
0.11
0.10
%
0.10
%
nm - not meaningful.
deposits
the following table provides a summary of the average balances and average
interest rates of jpmorgan chases various deposits for the years indicated:
average balances
average interest rates
(in millions, except interest rates)
u.s.:
noninterest-bearing demand
$
23,506
$
23,828
$
21,904
%
%
%
interest-bearing demand
4,192
1,720
2,251
1.02
1.37
1.51
savings
84,215
69,149
62,399
0.26
1.57
2.68
time
57,929
54,110
43,515
3.71
3.64
4.75
total u.s. deposits
169,842
148,807
130,069
1.42
2.07
2.90
non-u.s.:
noninterest-bearing demand
7,395
5,229
6,013
interest-bearing demand
56,331
49,831
43,284
2.34
3.99
5.85
savings
1,008
1,331
0.56
1.93
2.71
time
52,840
72,190
86,525
2.87
4.04
5.20
total non-u.s. deposits(a)
117,574
128,041
137,153
2.42
3.84
5.15
total deposits
$
287,416
$
276,848
$
267,222
1.83
%
2.89
%
4.05
%
(a)
the majority of non-u.s. deposits were in denominations of $100,000 or more.
at december31, 2002, u.s. time deposits in denominations of $100,000 or more
totaled $35billion, substantially all of which mature in three months or less.
the table below presents the maturities for u.s. time certificates of deposit
in denominations of $100,000 or more:
3 months
over 3 months
over 6 months
over
by remaining maturity at december 31, 2002 (in millions)
or less
but within 6 months
but within 12 months
12 months
total
u.s. time certificates of deposit ($100,000 or more)
$
13,285
$
1,945
$
$
$
16,470
short-term and other borrowed funds
the following table provides a summary of jpmorgan chases short-term and other
borrowed funds for the years indicated:
(in millions, except rates)
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements:
balance at year-end
$
169,483
$
128,445
$
131,738
average daily balance during the year
168,428
163,858
133,705
maximum month-end balance
198,110
181,775
158,047
weighted-average rate at december 31
1.45
%
2.40
%
5.77
%
weighted-average rate during the year
1.97
4.06
5.85
commercial paper:
balance at year-end
$
16,591
$
18,510
$
24,851
average daily balance during the year
16,134
18,561
17,956
maximum month-end balance
23,726
22,753
24,851
weighted-average rate at december 31
1.36
%
1.92
%
5.53
%
weighted-average rate during the year
1.74
4.03
6.24
other borrowed funds:(a)
balance at year-end
$
75,810
$
63,823
$
71,997
average daily balance during the year
69,393
64,029
59,247
maximum month-end balance
92,439
93,468
82,127
weighted-average rate at december 31
5.39
%
6.62
%
6.90
%
weighted-average rate during the year
4.96
5.77
7.03
(a)
includes securities sold but not yet purchased.
federal funds purchased represents
overnight funds. securities sold under
repurchase agreements generally mature
between one day and three months.
commercial paper generally is issued in
amounts not
less than $100,000 and with maturities of
270days or less. other borrowed funds
consist of demand
notes, term federal funds purchased and
various other borrowings that generally
have maturities of one year or less. at
december31, 2002, jpmorgan chase had no
lines of credit for general corporate
purposes.
part iv
item15: exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
(a)
exhibits, financial statements and
financial statement schedules
1.
financial statements
the consolidated financial statements,
the notes thereto and the report
thereon listed in item8 are set forth
commencing on page 70.
2.
financial statement schedules
financial statement schedules are
omitted since the required information
is either not applicable, not deemed
material, or is shown in the
respective consolidated financial
statements or in the notes thereto.
3.
exhibits
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation
of j.p. morgan chase & co. (incorporated
by reference to exhibit3.1 to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co. (the registrant) (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
3.2
by-laws of j.p. morgan chase
& co. as amended by the board of directors on october15,
2002.
4.1
deposit agreement, dated as of
february8, 1996, between j.p. morgan &
co. incorporated (succeeded through merger
by j.p. morgan chase & co.) and morgan
guaranty trust company of new york
(succeeded through merger by jpmorgan
chase bank), as depository (incorporated
by reference to exhibit4.7 to the
registration statement on form8-a of the
chase manhattan corporation (now known as
j.p. morgan chase & co.) file no.1-5805),
filed december20, 2000.
4.2
indenture, dated as of december1,
1989, between chemical banking
corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.) and the chase
manhattan bank (national association),
as succeeded to by bankers trust
company (now known as deutsche bank
trust company americas), as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.9 to the registration statement on
forms-3 (file no.33-
32409) of chemical banking
corporation).
4.3(a)
indenture, dated as of april1,
1987, as amended and restated as of
december15, 1992, between chemical
banking corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.) and morgan guaranty
trust company of new york (now known as
jpmorgan chase bank), as succeeded to by
u.s. bank trust national association, as
trustee (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.3(a) to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended december
31, 2000).
4.3(b)
second supplemental indenture,
dated as of october8, 1996, between the
chase manhattan corporation (now known as
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank
trust national association, as trustee, to
the indenture, dated as of april1, 1987,
as amended and restated as of december15,
1992 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.3(b) to the annual report on form10-k
of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.
1-5805) for the year ended december31,
2000).
4.3(c)
third supplemental indenture,
dated as of december29, 2000, between
the chase manhattan corporation (now
known as j.p. morgan chase & co.) and
u.s. bank trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as of
april1, 1987, as amended and restated as
of december15, 1992 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.3(c) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase
& co. (file no.1-5805) for the year
ended december31, 2000).
4.4(a)
amended and restated indenture,
dated as of september1, 1993, between the
chase manhattan corporation (as assumed by
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and chemical bank
(succeeded through merger by jpmorgan
chase bank), as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4(a) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.4(b)
first supplemental indenture, dated
as of march29, 1996, among chemical
banking corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.), the chase
manhattan corporation, chemical bank,
as resigning trustee, and u.s. bank
trust national association, as
successor trustee, to the amended and
restated indenture, dated as of
september1, 1993 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4(b) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
part iv
4.4(c)
second supplemental indenture,
dated as of october8, 1996, between the
chase manhattan corporation (now known as
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank
trust national association, as trustee, to
the amended and restated indenture, dated
as of september1, 1993 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4(c) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan
chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the year
ended december31, 2000).
4.4(d)
third supplemental indenture, dated
as of december29, 2000, between the chase
manhattan corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank trust
national association, as trustee, to the
amended and restated indenture, dated as
of september1, 1993 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4(d) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.5(a)
indenture dated as of august15, 1982, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase &
co.) and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee (incorporated
by reference to exhibit4.5(a) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(b)
first supplemental indenture,
dated as of may5, 1986, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase &
co.) and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as
of august15, 1982 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.5(b) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31,
2000).
4.5(c)
second supplemental indenture,
dated as of february27, 1996, between
j.p. morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase & co.)
and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as of
august15, 1982 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.5(c) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(d)
third supplemental indenture, dated
as of january30, 1997, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase & co.)
and u.s. bank trust national association,
as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of
august15, 1982 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit4.5(d) to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended december
31, 2000).
4.5(e)
fourth supplemental indenture,
dated as of december29, 2000, among
j.p. morgan & co. incorporated, the
chase manhattan corporation (now known
as j.p.
morgan chase & co.), and u.s. bank
trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as of
august15, 1982 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.5(e) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.6(a)
indenture dated as of december1, 1986, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase &
co.) and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee (incorporated
by reference to exhibit4.6(a) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.6(b)
first supplemental indenture,
dated as of may12, 1992, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase &
co.) and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as
of december1, 1986 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.6(b) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31,
2000).
4.6(c)
second supplemental indenture,
dated as of december29, 2000, among j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated, the chase
manhattan corporation (now known as j.p. morgan chase & co.), and u.s. bank
trust national association, as trustee,
to the indenture, dated as of december1,
1986 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.6(c) to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co.
(file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.7(a)
indenture dated as of march1,
1993, between j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated (succeeded through merger by
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank
trust national association, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.7(a) to the annual report on form10-k
of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.
1-5805) for the year ended december31,
2000).
4.7(b)
first supplemental indenture, dated
as of december29, 2000, among j.p. morgan
& co. incorporated, the chase manhattan
corporation (now known as j.p. morgan
chase & co.), and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee, to the indenture,
dated as of march1, 1993 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.7(b) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.8
indenture dated may25, 2001, between
j.p. morgan chase & co. and deutsche bank
trust company americas (previously known
as bankers trust company), as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4(a)(1) to the registration statement on
forms-3 (file no.333-52826) of j.p.
morgan chase & co., file no.1-5805).
4.9(a)
junior subordinated indenture,
dated as of december1, 1996, between the
chase manhattan corporation (now known as
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and the bank of
new york, as debenture trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.24 to the registration statement on
forms-3 (file no.333-19719) of the
chase manhattan corporation).
4.9(b)
guarantee agreement, dated as of
january24,
1997, between the chase manhattan
corporation (now known as j.p. morgan
chase & co.) and the bank of new york, as
trustee, with respect to the global
floating rate capital securities, series
b, of chase capital ii
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.8 to the annual report on form10-k,
dated december31, 1997, of the chase
manhattan corporation, file no.
1-5805).
4.9(c)
amended and restated trust
agreement, dated as of january24, 1997,
among the chase manhattan corporation (now
known as j.p. morgan chase & co.), the
bank of new york, as property trustee, the
bank of new york (delaware), as delaware
trustee, and the administrative trustees
named therein, with respect to chase
capital ii (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.9 to the annual report on form
10-k, dated december31, 1997, of the
chase manhattan corporation, file no.
1-5805).
4.10(a)
junior subordinated indenture,
dated as of november1, 1996, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase & co.)
and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
debenture trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4(a)(1) to the
registration statement on forms-3
(file no.333-15079) of j.p. morgan &
co. incorporated, file no.1-5885).
4.10(b)
guarantee agreement, dated as of
december4, 1996, between j.p. morgan &
co. incorporated (succeeded through merger by j.p. morgan chase
& co.) and u.s. bank trust
national association, as guarantee
trustee, with respect to the capital
securities of jpm capital trust i
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.9(b) to the annual report on form
10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.10(c)
amended and restated declaration
of trust, dated as of december4, 1996,
between j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated (succeeded through merger by j.p. morgan chase
& co.) and u.s. bank trust
national association, as property
trustee, wilmington trust company, as
delaware trustee, and the
administrative trustees named therein,
with respect to jpm capital trust i
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.9(c) to the annual report on form
10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
10.1
deferred compensation plan for
non-employee directors of the chase
manhattan corporation and the chase
manhattan bank, as amended and restated
effective december 1996 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.1 to the annual
report on form10-k, dated december31,
1996, of the chase manhattan corporation,
file no.1-5805).
10.2
post-retirement compensation plan for
non-employee directors, as amended and
restated as of may21, 1996 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.2
to the annual report on form10-k, dated
december31, 1996, of the chase manhattan
corporation, file no.1-5805).
10.3
deferred compensation program of the
chase manhattan corporation and
participating companies, effective as of
january1, 1996 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.3 to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended december
31, 2000).
10.4
amended and restated 1996 long-term
incentive plan of the chase manhattan
corporation (incorporated by reference to
schedule14a, filed on april5, 2000, of
the chase manhattan corporation, file no.
1-5805).
10.5
the chase manhattan 1994 long-term
incentive plan (incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit10o to the chase
manhattan corporations quarterly report
on form10-q for the quarter ended june
30, 1994, file no.1-5945).
10.6
amendment to the chase manhattan
1994 long-term incentive plan
(incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit10s to the chase manhattan
corporations quarterly report on form
10-q for the quarter ended september30,
1995, file no.1-5945).
10.7
chemical banking corporation
long-term stock incentive plan, as amended
and restated as of may19, 1992
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.7
to the annual report on form10-k, dated
december31, 1992, of chemical banking
corporation, file no.1-5805).
part iv
10.8
the chase manhattan 1987 long-term
incentive plan, as amended (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10a to the chase
manhattan corporations annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31,
1990, file no.1-5945).
10.9
amendment to the chase manhattan
1987/82 long-term incentive plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10t
to the quarterly report on form10-q, for
the quarter ended september30, 1995, of
the chase manhattan corporation, file no.
1-5945).
10.10
long term incentive program of
manufacturers hanover corporation
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.10 to the annual report on form10-k,
dated december31, 1997, of the chase
manhattan corporation, file no.1-5805).
10.11
key executive performance plan of
the chase manhattan corporation, as
amended and restated january1, 1999
(incorporated by reference to schedule
14a, filed on march25, 1999, of the chase
manhattan corporation, file no.1-5805).
10.12
forms of severance agreements as
entered into by the chase manhattan
corporation and certain of its
executive officers (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.13 to the annual
report on form10-k, dated december31,
1997, of the chase manhattan corporation,
file no.1-5805).
10.13
permanent life insurance options
plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.11 to the annual report on
form10-k, dated december31, 1992, of
chemical banking corporation, file no.
1-5805).
10.14
excess retirement plan of the chase
manhattan bank and participating
companies, restated effective january1,
1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.14 to the annual report on form10-k of
j.p. morgan chase & co.
(file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
10.15
1992 stock incentive plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10a to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on
form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1994, file no.
1-5885).
10.16
director stock plan, as amended
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
10b to j.p. morgan & co. incorporateds
annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1994, file no.
1-5885).
10.17
deferred compensation plan for
directors fees, as amended (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10c to j.p.
morgan & co. incorporateds annual report
on form10-k for the year ended december
31, 1992, file no.1-5885).
10.18
1989 stock incentive plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10d to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december31,
1994, file no.1-5885).
10.19
1987 stock incentive plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10e to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on
form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1994, file no.
1-5885).
10.20
incentive compensation plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10f to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december31,
1997, file no.1-5885).
10.21
stock option award (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10h to j.p. morgan &
co. incorporateds quarterly report on
form10-q for the quarter ended march31,
1995, file no.1-5885).
10.22
1995 stock incentive plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10i to j.p.
morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on
form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1996, file no.
1-5885).
10.23
1995 executive officer performance
plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10j to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on
form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1995, file no.
1-5885).
10.24
1998 performance plan (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10 to j.p. morgan
& co. incorporateds quarterly report on
form10-q for the quarter ended september
30, 1998, file no.1-5885).
10.25
executive retirement plan of the
chase manhattan corporation and certain
subsidiaries (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.25 to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co.
(file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
10.26
benefit equalization plan of the
chase manhattan corporation and certain
subsidiaries (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.26 to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co.
(file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
12.1
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
12.2
computation of ratio of earnings to
fixed charges and preferred stock
dividend requirements.
21.1
list of subsidiaries of j.p. morgan chase & co.
22.1
annual report on form11-k of the
jpmorgan chase 401(k) savings plan (to be filed by amendment pursuant to
rule15d-21 under the securities exchange
act of 1934).
23.1
consent of independent accountants.
jpmorgan chase hereby agrees to furnish to
the securities and exchange commission,
upon request, copies of instruments
defining the rights of holders for the
outstanding nonregistered long-term debt
of jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries.
these instruments have not been filed as
exhibits hereto by reason that the total
amount of each issue of such securities
does not exceed 10% of the total assets of
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries on a
consolidated basis. in addition, jpmorgan
chase hereby agrees to file with the
securities and exchange commission, upon
request, the guarantees and the amended
and restated trust agreements for each
delaware business trust subsidiary that
has issued capital securities. the
provisions of such agreements differ from the documents
constituting exhibits 4.9(b) and (c)and
4.10(b) and (c)to this report only with
respect to the pricing terms of each
series of capital securities; these
pricing terms are disclosed in note 16 on
page 91.
(b)reports on form 8-k
a current report on form8-k was
filed on october18, 2002 announcing
j.p. morgan chase & co.s financial
results for the third quarter of
2002.
a current report on form8-k was
filed on november14, 2002
announcing the certification of
periodic reports on the principal
executive officer and principal
financial officer of j.p. morgan
chase & co. pursuant to section 906
of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
a current report on form8-k was
filed on december26, 2002 announcing
that j.p. morgan chase & co. reached
an agreement in principle with the
sec, nasd, nyse, new york state
attorney generals office and north
american securities administrators
association to resolve their
investigation of j.p. morgan chase &
co. relating to research analyst
independence.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange
act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on behalf
of the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
j.p. morgan chase & co.
(registrant)
by:
/s/ william b. harrison, jr.
(william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer)
date: march18, 2003
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report
has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and
in the capacity and on the date indicated. jpmorgan chase does not exercise the
power of attorney to sign on behalf of any director.
capacity
date
/s/ william b. harrison, jr.
(william b. harrison, jr.)
director, chairman and chief executive officer
(principal executive officer)
/s/ hans w. becherer
(hans w. becherer)
director
/s/ riley p. bechtel
(riley p. bechtel)
director
march18, 2003
/s/ frank a. bennack, jr.
(frank a. bennack, jr.)
director
/s/ lawrence a. bossidy
(lawrence a. bossidy)
director
/s/ m. anthony burns
(m. anthony burns)
director
capacity
date
/s/ h. laurance fuller
(h. laurance fuller)
director
/s/ ellen v. futter
(ellen v. futter)
director
/s/ william h. gray, iii
(william h. gray, iii)
director
/s/ helene l. kaplan
(helene l. kaplan)
director
march18, 2003
/s/ lee r. raymond
(lee r. raymond)
director
/s/ john r. stafford
(john r. stafford)
director
/s/ dina dublon
(dina dublon)
executive vice president
and chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
/s/ joseph l. sclafani
(joseph l. sclafani)
executive vice president and controller
(principal accounting officer)
certification
i, william b. harrison, jr., certify that:
1.
i have reviewed this annual report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co.;
2.
based on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by
this annual report;
3.
based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this annual report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of
the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual
report;
4.
the registrants other certifying officers and i are responsible for
establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in exchange act rules13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and we
have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this annual
report is being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure controls
and procedures as of a date within 90days prior to the filing date
of this annual report (the evaluation date); and
c)
presented in this annual report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on our
evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrants other certifying officers and i have disclosed, based on
our most recent evaluation, to the registrants auditors and the audit
committee of registrants board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent function):
a)
all significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal
controls which could adversely affect the registrants ability to
record, process, summarize and report financial data and have
identified for the registrants auditors any material weaknesses in
internal controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or
other employees who have a significant role in the registrants
internal controls; and
6.
the registrants other certifying officers and i have indicated in this
annual report whether or not there were significant changes in internal
controls or in other factors that could significantly affect internal
controls subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including
any corrective actions with regard to significant deficiencies and
material weaknesses.
date: march18, 2003
/s/ william b. harrison, jr.
william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer
certification
i, dina dublon, certify that:
1.
i have reviewed this annual report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co.;
2.
based on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by
this annual report;
3.
based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this annual report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of
the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual
report;
4.
the registrants other certifying officers and i are responsible for
establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in exchange act rules13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and we
have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this annual
report is being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants disclosure controls
and procedures as of a date within 90days prior to the filing date
of this annual report (the evaluation date); and
c)
presented in this annual report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on our
evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrants other certifying officers and i have disclosed, based on
our most recent evaluation, to the registrants auditors and the audit
committee of registrants board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent function):
a)
all significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal
controls which could adversely affect the registrants ability to
record, process, summarize and report financial data and have
identified for the registrants auditors any material weaknesses in
internal controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or
other employees who have a significant role in the registrants
internal controls; and
6.
the registrants other certifying officers and i have indicated in this
annual report whether or not there were significant changes in internal
controls or in other factors that could significantly affect internal
controls subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including
any corrective actions with regard to significant deficiencies and
material weaknesses.
date: march18, 2003
/s/ dina dublon
dina dublon
executive vice president and chief financial officer
exhibit index
exhibit number
description
3.2
by-laws of j.p. morgan chase& co. as amended by the board of
directors on october15, 2002.
12.1
computation of ratio
of earnings to fixed charges.
12.2
computation of ratio
of earnings to fixed charges and preferred stock dividend
requirements.
21.1
list of subsidiaries
of j.p. morgan chase& co.
23.1
consent of
independent accountants.
