10-k
y94051e10vk.htm
j.p. morgan chase & co.
j.p. morgan chase & co.
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
commission file
december31, 2003
number 1-5805
j.p. morgan chase & co.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-2624428
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
270 park avenue, new york, ny
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (212)270-6000
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
common stock
depositary shares representing a one-tenth interest in 6% cumulative
preferred stock (stated value$500)
adjustable rate cumulative preferred stock, seriesa (stated value$100)
adjustable rate cumulative preferred stock, seriesl (stated value$100)
adjustable rate cumulative preferred stock, seriesn (stated value$25)
6.50% subordinated notes due 2005
6.25% subordinated notes due 2006
6% subordinated notes due 2008
6.75% subordinated notes due 2008
6.50% subordinated notes due 2009
guarantee of 7.03% capital securities, seriese, of chase capital v
guarantee of 7.00% capital securities, seriesg, of chase capital vii
guarantee of 8.25% capital securities, seriesh, of chase capital viii
guarantee of 7.50% capital securities, seriesi, of j.p. morgan chase capital
ix
guarantee of 7.00% capital securities, seriesj, of j.p. morgan chase capital x
guarantee of 5% capital securities, seriesk, of j.p. morgan chase
capital xi
guarantee of 6.25% capital securities, seriesl, of j.p. morgan chase capital
xii
indexed linked notes on the s&p 500 index due november26, 2007
jpmorgan market participation notes on the s&p 500 index due march12, 2008
capped quarterly observation notes linked to s&p 500 index due september28,
capped quarterly observation notes linked to s&p 500 index due october30,
capped quarterly observation notes linked to s&p 500 index due january21,
consumer price indexed securities due january15, 2010
the indexed linked notes, jpmorgan market participation notes, capped quarterly observation notes and consumer
price indexed securities are listed on the american stock exchange;
all other securities named above are listed on the new york stock exchange.
securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act: none
number of shares of common stock outstanding on january31, 2004: 2,058,165,766
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90days. yes ..x.. no .....
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item
405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to
the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form 10-k or any
amendment to this form 10-k. [x]
indicate by check mark whether registrant is an accelerated filer (as
defined in exchange act rule12b-2). yes ..x.. no .....
the aggregate market value of j.p. morgan chase & co. common stock held by
non-affiliates of j.p. morgan chase & co. on june30, 2003 was approximately
$69,498,000,000.
document incorporated by reference: portions of registrants proxy statement
for the 2004 annual meeting of stockholders, which will be filed within 120
days of registrants fiscal year-end, are incorporated by reference in this
form10-k in response to items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of partiii.
form10-k index
part i
page
item1
business
overview
business segments
competition
supervision and regulation
important factors that may affect future results
non-u.s. operations
distribution of assets, liabilities and stockholders equity;
interest rates and interest differentials
132-136
return on equity and assets
129, 132
securities portfolio
loan portfolio
52-64, 98-99, 138-139
summary of loan and lending-related commitments loss experience
64-65, 100, 141-142
deposits
142-143
short-term and other borrowed funds
item2
properties
item3
legal proceedings
item4
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the registrant
part ii
item5
market for registrants common equity and
related stockholder matters
item6
selected financial data
item7
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations
item7a
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8
financial statements and supplementary data
item9
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting
and financial disclosure
item9a
controls and procedures
part iii
item10
directors and executive officers of jpmorgan chase
item11
executive compensation
item12
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
and related stockholder matters
item13
certain relationships and related transactions
item14
principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item15
exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
list of subsidiaries
consent of independent accountants
certification
certification
certification
table of contents
part i
item1: business
on january14, 2004, jpmorgan chase & co. (jpmorgan chase) and bank one
corporation (bank one) announced an agreement to merge. the merger agreement
between jpmorgan chase and bank one has been approved by the boards of
directors of both companies. the merger is subject to approval by the
shareholders of both institutions as well as u.s. federal and state and
non-u.s.
regulatory authorities. completion of the transaction is expected to occur in
mid-2004. see agreement to merge with bank one corporation on page 24 for a
further description of the merger.
the information presented in this annual report on form 10-k does not give
effect to the merger.
overview
j.p. morgan chase & co. (jpmorgan chase or the firm) is a financial holding
company incorporated under delaware law in 1968. as of december31, 2003,
jpmorgan chase was one of the largest banking institutions in the united states,
with $771billion in assets and $46billion in stockholders equity.
jpmorgan chase is a global financial services firm with operations in more than
50 countries. its principal bank subsidiaries are jpmorgan chase bank
(jpmorgan chase bank), a new york banking corporation headquartered in new
york city, and chase manhattan bank usa, national association (chase usa),
headquartered in delaware. the firms principal nonbank subsidiary is j.p.
morgan securities inc. (jpmsi).
the bank and nonbank subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase operate nationally as well
as through overseas branches and subsidiaries, representative offices and
affiliated banks.
the firms website is www.jpmorganchase.com. jpmorgan chase makes available
free of charge, through its website, annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly
reports on form 10-q and current reports on form 8-k, and any amendments to
those reports filed or furnished, pursuant to section 13(a) or section 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934, as soon as reasonably practicable after it
electronically files such material with, or furnishes such material to, the
securities and exchange commission (the sec). the firm has adopted, and
posted on its website, a code of ethics for its chief executive
officer, chief financial officer, chief accounting officer and other
senior financial officers.
business segments
jpmorgan chases activities are internally organized, for management reporting
purposes, into five major business segments (investment bank, treasury &
securities services, investment management & private banking, jpmorgan partners
and chase financial services). a description of the firms business segments
and the products and services they provide to their respective client bases are
discussed in the segment results section of managements discussion and
analysis (md&a) beginning on page 27, and in note 34 on page 126.
competition
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries and affiliates operate in a highly
competitive environment. competitors include other banks,
brokerage firms,
investment banking companies, merchant banks, insurance companies, mutual fund
companies, credit card companies, mortgage banking companies, automobile
financing companies, leasing companies, e-commerce and other internet-based
companies, and a variety of other financial services and advisory companies.
jpmorgan chases businesses compete with these other firms with respect to the
range of products and services offered and the types of clients, customers,
industries and geographies served. with respect to some of its geographies and
products, jpmorgan chase competes globally; with respect to others, the firm
competes on a regional basis. jpmorgan chases ability to compete effectively
depends on the relative performance of its products, the degree to which the
features of its products appeal to customers, and the extent to which the firm
is able to meet its clients objectives or needs. the firms ability to compete
also depends on its ability to attract and retain its professional and other
personnel, and on its reputation.
the financial services industry has experienced consolidation and convergence
in recent years, as financial institutions involved in a broad range of
financial services industries have merged. this convergence trend is expected
to continue, as demonstrated by the proposed merger of jpmorgan chase and bank
one. consolidation could result in competitors of jpmorgan chase gaining
greater capital and other resources, such as a broader range of products and
services and geographic diversity. it is possible that competition will become
even more intense as the firm continues to compete with financial institutions
that may be larger, or better capitalized, or may have a stronger local
presence in certain geographies.
supervision and regulation
permissible business activities: the firm is subject to regulation under state
and federal law, including the bank holding company act of 1956, as amended
(the bhca).
under the gramm-leach-bliley act (glba), enacted in 1999, bank holding
companies meeting certain eligibility criteria may elect to become financial
holding companies, which may engage in any activities that are financial in
nature, as well as in additional activities that the board of governors of the
federal reserve system (the federal reserve board) and the united states
department of the treasury (u.s. treasury department) determine are financial
in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities. under glba,
financial activities specifically
table of contents
part i
include insurance, securities underwriting and dealing, merchant banking,
investment advisory and lending activities. jpmorgan chase elected to become a
financial holding company as of march13, 2000.
under regulations implemented by the federal reserve board, if any depository
institution controlled by a financial holding company ceases to be
well-capitalized or well-managed (as defined below), the federal reserve
board may impose corrective capital or managerial requirements on the financial
holding company and place limitations on its ability to conduct the broader
financial activities permissible for financial holding companies.
in addition, the federal reserve board may require divestiture of the holding
companys depository institutions if the deficiencies persist. the regulations
also provide that if any depository institution controlled by a financial
holding company fails to maintain a satisfactory rating under the community
reinvestment act (cra), the federal reserve board must prohibit the financial
holding company and its subsidiaries from engaging in any additional activities
other than those permissible for bank holding companies that are not financial
holding companies. the depository institution subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase
currently meet the capital, management and cra requirements necessary to permit
the firm to conduct the broader activities permitted under glba. however, there
can be no assurance that this will continue to be the case in the future.
regulation by federal reserve board under glba: under glbas system of
functional regulation, the federal reserve board acts as an umbrella
regulator, and certain of jpmorgan chases subsidiaries are regulated directly
by additional regulatory authorities based on the particular activities of
those subsidiaries (e.g., securities and investment advisory activities are
regulated by the sec, and insurance activities are regulated by state insurance
commissioners). the firm must continue to file reports and other information
with, and submit to examination by, the federal reserve board as umbrella
regulator. however, under glba, with respect to matters affecting functionally
regulated subsidiaries, the federal reserve board is required to defer to the
applicable functional regulators unless the federal reserve board concludes
that the activities at issue pose a risk to a depository institution or breach
a specific law the federal reserve board has the authority to enforce.
dividend restrictions: federal law imposes limitations on the payment of
dividends by the subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase that are chartered by a state
and are member banks of the federal reserve system (a state member bank) or
national banks. nonbank subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase are not subject to those
limitations. the amount of dividends that may be paid by a state member bank,
such as jpmorgan chase bank, or by a national bank, such as chase usa, is
limited to the lesser of the amounts calculated under a recent earnings test
and an undivided profits test. under the recent earnings test, a dividend may
not be paid if the total of all dividends declared by a bank in any calendar
year is in excess of the current years net income combined with the retained
net income of the two preceding years, unless the bank obtains the approval of
its appropriate federal banking regulator (which, in the case of a state member
bank, is the federal reserve board and, in the case of a national bank, is the
office of the comptroller of the currency (the comptroller of the currency)).
under the undivided profits
test, a dividend may not be paid in excess of a
banks undivided profits. similar restrictions on the payment of dividends by
jpmorgan chase bank are imposed by new york law. see note 25 on page 114 for
the amount of dividends that the firms principal bank subsidiaries could pay,
at december31, 2003 and 2002, to their respective bank holding companies
without the approval of their relevant banking regulators.
in addition to the dividend restrictions described above, the federal reserve
board, the comptroller of the currency and the federal deposit insurance
corporation (the fdic) have authority to prohibit or to limit the payment of
dividends by the banking organizations they supervise, including jpmorgan chase
and its bank and bank holding company subsidiaries, if, in the banking
regulators opinion, payment of a dividend would constitute an unsafe or
unsound practice in light of the financial condition of the banking
organization.
capital requirements: the federal banking regulators have adopted risk-based
capital and leverage guidelines that require the firms capital-to-assets
ratios to meet certain minimum standards.
the risk-based capital ratio is determined by allocating assets and specified
off-balance sheet financial instruments into four weighted categories, with
higher levels of capital being required for the categories perceived as
representing greater risk. under the guidelines, capital is divided into two
tiers: tier 1 capital and tier 2 capital. for a further discussion of tier 1
capital and tier 2 capital, see note 26 on page 114. the amount of tier 2
capital may not exceed the amount of tier 1 capital. total capital is the sum
of tier 1 capital and tier 2 capital.
banking organizations are required to maintain a total capital ratio (total
capital to risk-weighted assets) of 8% and a tier 1 capital ratio of 4%.
the risk-based capital requirements explicitly identify concentrations of
credit risk and certain risks arising from non-traditional banking activities,
and the management of those risks, as important factors to consider in
assessing an institutions overall capital adequacy. other factors taken into
consideration by federal regulators include: interest rate exposure; liquidity,
funding and market risk; the quality and level of earnings; the quality of
loans and investments; the effectiveness of loan and investment policies; and
managements overall ability to monitor and control financial and operational
risks, including the risks presented by concentrations of credit and
non-traditional banking activities. in addition, the risk-based capital rules
incorporate a measure for market risk in foreign exchange and commodity
activities and in the trading of debt and equity instruments. the market
risk-based capital rules require banking organizations with large trading
activities (such as jpmorgan chase) to maintain capital for market risk in an
amount calculated by using the banking organizations own internal
value-at-risk models (subject to parameters set by the regulators).
the federal banking agencies have also implemented specialized capital
requirements with respect to securitizations and equity in nonfinancial
companies.
the federal banking regulators have established minimum leverage ratio
guidelines. the leverage ratio is defined as tier 1 capital divided by average
total assets (net of the allowance for loan losses, goodwill and certain intangible
assets). the minimum leverage ratio is 3% for strong bank holding companies
(i.e., those rated
table of contents
composite 1 under the bank subsidiaries, other subsidiaries, parent company,
earnings and capital adequacy, or bopec, rating system) and for bank holding
companies that have implemented the federal reserve boards risk-based capital
measure for market risk. other bank holding companies must have a minimum
leverage ratio of 4%. bank holding companies may be expected to maintain ratios
well above the minimum levels depending upon their particular condition, risk
profile and growth plans.
tier 1 components: capital surplus and common stock remain the most important
forms of capital at jpmorgan chase. because common equity has no maturity date
and because dividends on common stock are paid only when and if declared by the
board of directors, common equity is available to absorb losses over long
periods of time. noncumulative perpetual preferred stock is similar to common
stock in its ability to absorb losses. if the board of directors does not
declare a dividend on noncumulative perpetual preferred stock in any dividend
period, the holders of the instrument are never entitled to receive that
dividend payment. jpmorgan chases outstanding noncumulative preferred stock is
a type commonly referenced as a frap: a fixed-rate/adjustable preferred
stock. however, because the interest rate on fraps may increase (up to a
predetermined ceiling), the federal reserve board treats the firms
noncumulative fraps in a manner similar to cumulative perpetual preferred
securities. the federal reserve board permits cumulative perpetual preferred
securities to be included in tier 1 capital but only up to certain limits, as
these financial instruments do not provide as strong protection against losses
as common equity and noncumulative, non-frap securities. cumulative perpetual
preferred stock does not have a maturity date, similar to other forms of tier 1
capital. however, any dividends not declared on cumulative preferred stock
accumulate and thus continue to be due to the holder of the instrument until
all arrearages are satisfied. currently, the federal reserve board also permits trust
preferred securities to be included in tier 1 capital up to certain limits.
trust preferred securities are a type of security generally issued by a
special-purpose trust established and owned by jpmorgan chase. proceeds from
the issuance to the public of the trust preferred security are lent to the firm
for at least 30 (but not more than 50) years. the intercompany note that
evidences this loan provides that the interest payments by jpmorgan chase on
the note may be deferred for up to five years. during the period of any such
deferral, no payments of dividends may be made on any outstanding jpmorgan
chase preferred or common stock or on the outstanding trust preferred
securities issued to the public. during 2003, the firm implemented financial accounting
standards board (the fasb) interpretation no.46 consolidation of
variable interest entities (fin 46), which addresses the consolidation rules to
be applied to entities defined in fin 46, as variable interest entities.
prior to fin 46, trusts that issued trust preferred securities were
consolidated subsidiaries of their respective parents. as a result of fin 46,
jpmorgan chase is no longer permitted to consolidate these trusts. as a result,
it is possible that the federal reserve board may conclude that trust preferred
securities would no longer qualify as treatment as tier 1 regulatory capital.
although the federal reserve board has issued a supervisory letter indicating
that trust preferred securities will continue at present to be treated as tier
1 capital until notice is given to the contrary, such guidance also indicated
that the federal
reserve board may provide further guidance on this point. therefore, there is
no certainty that trust preferred securities will continue to be treated as
tier 1 capital instruments or that existing issues will be grandfathered for
such treatment.
tier 2 components: long-term subordinated debt (generally having an original
maturity of 10-12years) is the primary form of jpmorgan chases tier 2
capital. subordinated debt is deemed a form of regulatory capital because
payments on the debt are subordinated to other creditors of jpmorgan chase,
including holders of senior and medium long-term debt and counterparties on
derivative contracts.
the minimum risk-based capital requirements adopted by the federal banking
agencies follow the capital accord of the basel committee on banking
supervision. the basel committee, which is comprised of bank supervisors and
central banks from the group of ten countries, issued its capital accord in
1988 to achieve convergence in the capital regulations applicable to
internationally active banking organizations. the basel committee issued a
proposed replacement for the capital accord in january 2001 and, subsequently,
issued a number of working papers supplementing various aspects of that
replacement (the new accord). based on these documents, the new accord would
adopt a three-pillar framework for addressing capital adequacy. these pillars
would include minimum capital requirements, more emphasis on supervisory
assessment of capital adequacy and greater reliance on market discipline. the
minimum capital requirements in the new accord would also incorporate a capital
charge for operational risk. in august2003, the federal banking regulators
issued an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking (anpr) addressing the
implementation of the new accord in the united states. the anpr contemplates
requiring all u.s. banking institutions with either total banking assets of at
least $250billion or more or total on-balance sheet foreign exposure of $10
billion or more (core banks) to implement the advanced approaches for
measuring risk under the new accord on a mandatory basis. as a core bank,
jpmorgan chase will thus be required to implement advanced measurement
techniques employing its internal estimates of certain key risk drivers to
derive capital requirements. prior to implementation of the new capital regime,
core banks, such as jpmorgan chase, will be required to demonstrate to their
primary federal supervisor that their internal criteria meet relevant
supervisory standards. while the basel supervisors committee has targeted
december31, 2006 for implementation of the new accord, the u.s. regulators
have proposed an effective date of january1, 2007 with certain transitional
implementation arrangements.
fdicia: the federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act of 1991
(fdicia) provides a framework for regulation of depository institutions and
their affiliates, including parent holding companies, by their federal banking
regulators and, among other things, requires the relevant federal banking
regulator to take prompt corrective action with respect to a depository
institution if that institution does not meet certain capital adequacy
standards.
pursuant to fdicia, the federal reserve board, the fdic and the comptroller of
the currency adopted regulations setting forth a five-tier scheme for measuring
the capital adequacy of the depository institutions they supervise. under the
regulations (commonly referred to as the prompt corrective action rules), an
institution
table of contents
part i
would be placed in one of the following five capital categories when these
ratios fall within the prescribed ranges:
ratios
total
tier 1
tier 1
capital
capital
leverage
at least
well-capitalized
%
%
%
adequately capitalized
%
%
%(a)
less than
undercapitalized
%
%
%(a)
significantly undercapitalized
%
%
%
critically undercapitalized
tangible equity to total assets of 2% or less
(a)may be 3% in some cases.
an institution may be treated as being in a capital category lower than that
indicated based on other supervisory criteria.
supervisory actions by the appropriate federal banking regulator under the
prompt corrective action rules generally will depend upon an institutions
classification within the five capital categories. the regulations apply only
to banks and not to bank holding companies such as jpmorgan chase; however,
subject to limitations that may be imposed pursuant to glba, as described
below, the federal reserve board is authorized to take appropriate action at
the holding company level based on the undercapitalized status of the holding
companys subsidiary banking institutions. in certain instances relating to an
undercapitalized banking institution, the bank holding company would be
required to guarantee the performance of the undercapitalized subsidiary and
may be liable for civil money damages for failure to fulfill its commitments on
that guarantee.
as of december31, 2003, each of jpmorgan chases banking subsidiaries was
well-capitalized.
fdic insurance assessments: fdicia also requires the fdic to establish a
risk-based assessment system for fdic deposit insurance. under the fdics
risk-based insurance premium assessment system, each depository institution is
assigned to one of nine risk classifications based upon certain capital and
supervisory measures and, depending upon its classification, is assessed
insurance premiums on its deposits.
depository institutions insured by the bank insurance fund are required to pay
premiums ranging from 0 basis points to 27 basis points of u.s. deposits. each
of jpmorgan chases banks, including jpmorgan chase bank and chase usa,
currently qualifies for the 0 basis point assessment. legislation has been
introduced in congress that, if enacted, would give the fdic discretion to
impose deposit insurance premiums on all depository institutions. in addition,
if the ratio of insured deposits to money in the bank insurance fund drops
below specified levels, the fdic would be required to impose premiums on all
banks insured by the bank insurance fund. all depository institutions must also
pay an annual assessment so that the financing corporation (fico) may pay
interest on bonds it issued in connection with the resolution of savings
association insolvencies occurring prior to 1991. the fico assessment for the
first quarter of 2004 is 1.54 basis points of u.s. deposits. the rate schedules
are subject to future adjustments by the fdic. in addition, the fdic has
authority to impose special
assessments from time to time, subject to certain
limitations specified in the deposit insurance funds act.
powers of the fdic upon insolvency of an insured depository institution: an
fdic-insured depository institution can be held liable for any loss incurred or
expected to be incurred by the fdic in connection with another fdic-insured
institution under common control with such institution being in default or
in danger of default (commonly referred to as cross-guarantee liability).
default is generally defined as the appointment of a conservator or receiver
and in danger of default is defined as certain conditions indicating that a
default is likely to occur absent regulatory assistance. an fdic
cross-guarantee claim against a depository institution is generally superior in
right of payment to claims of the holding company and its affiliates against
such depository institution.
if the fdic is appointed the conservator or receiver of an insured depository
institution, upon its insolvency or in certain other events, the fdic has the
power: (1)to transfer any of the depository institutions assets and
liabilities to a new obligor without the approval of the depository
institutions creditors; (2)to enforce the terms of the depository
institutions contracts pursuant to their terms; or (3)to repudiate or
disaffirm any contract or lease to which the depository institution is a party,
the performance of which is determined by the fdic to be burdensome and the
disaffirmance or repudiation of which is determined by the fdic to promote the
orderly administration of the depository institution. the above provisions
would be applicable to obligations and liabilities of those of jpmorgan chases
subsidiaries that are insured depository institutions, such as jpmorgan chase
bank and chase usa, including, without limitation, obligations under senior or
subordinated debt issued by those banks to investors (referred to below as
public noteholders) in the public markets.
under federal law, the claims of a receiver of an insured depository
institution for administrative expenses and the claims of holders of u.s.
deposit liabilities (including the fdic, as subrogee of the depositors) have
priority over the claims of other unsecured creditors of the institution,
including public noteholders, in the event of the liquidation
or other resolution of the institution. as a result, whether or not the fdic
ever sought to repudiate any obligations held by public noteholders of any
subsidiary of the firm that is an insured depository institution, such as
jpmorgan chase bank or chase usa, the public noteholders would be treated
differently from, and could receive, if anything, substantially less than, the
depositors of the depository institution.
the usa patriot act: on october26, 2001, president bush signed into law the
usa patriot act of 2001 (the act).
the act substantially broadens existing anti-money laundering legislation and
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the united states, imposes new compliance
and due diligence obligations, creates new crimes and penalties, compels the
production of documents located both inside and outside the united states,
including those of non-u.s. institutions that have a correspondent relationship
in the united states, and clarifies the safe harbor from civil liability to
customers. the act mandates the u.s. treasury department to issue a number of
regulations to further clarify the acts requirements or provide more specific
guidance on their application.
table of contents
the act requires all financial institutions, as defined, to establish certain
anti-money laundering compliance and due diligence programs. the act requires
financial institutions that maintain correspondent accounts for non-u.s.
institutions or persons or that are involved in private banking for non-united
states persons or their representatives, to establish appropriate, specific
and, where necessary, enhanced due diligence policies, procedures, and controls
that are reasonably designed to detect and report instances of money laundering
through those accounts. jpmorgan chase believes its programs satisfy the
requirements of the act.
other supervision and regulation: under current federal reserve board policy,
jpmorgan chase is expected to act as a source of financial strength to its bank
subsidiaries and to commit resources to support the bank subsidiaries in
circumstances where it might not do so absent such policy. however, because
glba provides for functional regulation of financial holding company activities
by various regulators, glba prohibits the federal reserve board from requiring
payment by a holding company or subsidiary to a depository institution if the
functional regulator of the payor objects to such payment. in such a case, the
federal reserve board could instead require the divestiture of the depository
institution and impose operating restrictions pending the divestiture.
any loans by a bank holding company to any of its subsidiary banks are
subordinate in right of payment to deposits and to certain other indebtedness
of the subsidiary banks. in the event of a bank holding companys bankruptcy,
any commitment by the bank holding company to a federal bank regulatory agency
to maintain the capital of a subsidiary bank at a certain level will be assumed
by the bankruptcy trustee and entitled to a priority of payment.
the bank subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase are subject to certain restrictions
imposed by federal law on extensions of credit to, and certain other
transactions with, the firm and certain other affiliates and on investments in
stock or securities of jpmorgan chase and those affiliates. these restrictions
prevent jpmorgan chase and other affiliates from borrowing from a bank
subsidiary unless the loans are secured in specified amounts.
the firms bank and certain of its nonbank subsidiaries are subject to direct
supervision and regulation by various other federal and state authorities (many
of which will be considered functional regulators under glba). jpmorgan chase
bank as a new york state-chartered bank and a state member bank, is subject to
supervision and regulation by the new york state banking department as well as
by the federal reserve board and the fdic. jpmorgan chases national bank
subsidiaries, such as chase usa, are subject to substantially similar
supervision and regulation by the comptroller of the currency. supervision and
regulation by each of the foregoing regulatory agencies generally include
comprehensive annual reviews of all major aspects of the relevant banks
business and condition, as well as the imposition of periodic reporting
requirements and limitations on investments and other powers. the firm also
conducts securities underwriting, dealing and brokerage activities through
jpmsi and other broker-dealer subsidiaries, all of which are subject to the
regulations of the sec and the national association of securities dealers, inc.
jpmsi is a member of the new york stock exchange. the operations of jpmorgan
chases mutual funds also are subject to regulation by the sec. the types of
activities in which the non-u.s.
branches of jpmorgan chase bank and the international subsidiaries of jpmorgan
chase may engage are subject to various restrictions imposed by the federal
reserve board. those non-u.s. branches and international subsidiaries also are
subject to the laws and regulatory authorities of the countries in which they
operate.
the activities of jpmorgan chase bank and chase usa as consumer lenders also
are subject to regulation under various federal laws, including the
truth-in-lending, the equal credit opportunity, the fair credit reporting, the
fair debt collection practice and the electronic funds transfer acts, as well
as various state laws. these statutes impose requirements on the making,
enforcement and collection of consumer loans and on the types of disclosures
that need to be made in connection with such loans.
in addition, under the requirements imposed by glba, jpmorgan chase and its
subsidiaries are required periodically to disclose to their retail customers
the firms policies and practices with respect to (1)the sharing of non-public
customer information with jpmorgan chase affiliates and others and (2)the
confidentiality and security of that information. under glba, retail customers
also must be given the opportunity to opt out of information sharing
arrangements with non-affiliates, subject to certain exceptions set forth in
glba.
important factors that may affect future results
from time to time, the firm has made and will make forward-looking statements.
these statements can be identified by the fact that they do not relate strictly
to historical or current facts. forward-looking statements often use words such
as anticipate, target, expect, estimate, intend, plan, goal,
believe or other words of similar meaning. forward-looking statements give
jpmorgan chases current expectations or forecasts of future events,
circumstances or results. jpmorgan chases disclosures in this report, including
in the md&a section, contain forward-looking statements. the firm also may
make forward-looking statements in its other documents filed with the sec and
in other written materials. in addition, the firms senior management may make
forward-looking statements orally to analysts, investors, representatives of
the media and others.
any forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the firm speak only as
of the date they are made. jpmorgan chase does not undertake to update
forward-looking statements to reflect the impact of circumstances or events
that arise after the date the forward-looking statement was made. the reader
should, however, consult any further disclosures of a forward-looking nature
jpmorgan chase may make in its annual reports on form 10-k, its quarterly
reports on form 10-q and its current reports on form 8-k.
all forward-looking statements, by their nature, are subject to risks and
uncertainties. the firms actual future results may differ materially from
those set forth in jpmorgan chases forward-looking statements. factors that
might cause jpmorgan chases future financial performance to vary from that
described in its forward-looking statements include the credit, market,
operational, liquidity, interest rate and other risks discussed in the md&a
section of this report and in other periodic reports filed with the sec. in
addition, the following discussion sets forth cer-
table of contents
part i
tain risks and uncertainties that the firm believes could cause its actual
future results to differ materially from expected results. however, other
factors besides those listed below or discussed in jpmorgan chases reports to
the sec also could adversely affect the firms results, and the reader should
not consider any such list of factors to be a complete set of all potential
risks or uncertainties. this discussion is provided as permitted by the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995.
merger of jpmorgan chase and bank one. there are significant risks and
uncertainties associated with the firms proposed merger with bank one. for
example, the merger may not be consummated, or may not be consummated by
mid-2004 as currently anticipated, as a result of the inability to obtain
governmental approvals of the merger on the proposed terms or the failure of
either company to receive shareholder approval for the merger. in addition,
jpmorgan chase may fail to realize the growth opportunities and cost savings
anticipated to be derived from the merger. if the firm is not able to combine
successfully the businesses of jpmorgan chase and bank one, the anticipated
benefits from the merger may not be realized fully or at all or may take longer
to realize than expected. for example, it is possible that the integration
process could result in the loss of key employees, or that the disruption of
ongoing business from the merger could adversely affect jpmorgan chases
ability to maintain relationships with clients or suppliers. finally, upon
consummation of the merger, managements present expectations of the future
results of the merger may be modified or revised.
business conditions and general economy. the profitability of jpmorgan chases
businesses could be adversely affected by a worsening of general economic
conditions in the united states or abroad. the difficult global market and
economic conditions that existed in 2002 improved markedly in 2003. while the
outlook for the firm for 2004 is cautiously optimistic, based upon the gradual
improvement of the overall economic environment, there can be no assurances
that the economic recovery that began in 2003 will continue throughout 2004.
factors such as the liquidity of the global financial markets, the level and
volatility of equity prices and interest rates, investor sentiment, inflation,
and the availability and cost of credit could significantly affect the activity
level of clients with respect to size, number and timing of transactions
affected by the firms investment banking business, including its underwriting
and advisory businesses, and also may affect the realization of cash returns
from jpmorgan chases private equity business. a recurrence of a market
downturn would likely lead to a decline in the volume of transactions that
jpmorgan chase executes for its customers and, therefore, lead to a decline in
the revenues it receives from trading commissions and spreads. higher interest
rates or continued weakness in the market also could affect the willingness of
financial investors to participate in loan syndications or underwritings
managed by jpmorgan chase. the firm generally maintains large trading
portfolios in the fixed income, currency, commodity and equity markets and has
significant investment positions, including merchant banking investments at
jpmorgan partners. the revenues derived from mark-to-market values of jpmorgan
chases business are affected by many factors, including jpmorgan chases
credit standing; its success in proprietary positioning; volatility in interest
rates and in equity and debt markets; and the economic,
political and business
factors described below. jpmorgan chase anticipates that these revenues will
fluctuate over time.
the fees jpmorgan chase earns for managing assets are also dependent upon
general economic conditions. for example, a higher level of u.s. or non-u.s.
interest rates or a downturn in trading markets could affect the valuations of
the mutual funds managed by the firm, which, in turn could affect the firms
revenues. moreover, even in the absence of a market downturn, below-market
performance by jpmorgan chases mutual funds could result in outflows of assets
under management and, therefore, reduce the fees the firm receives.
the credit quality of jpmorgan chases on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet
assets may be affected by business conditions. in a poor economic environment
there is a greater likelihood that more of the firms customers or
counterparties could become delinquent on their loans or other obligations to
jpmorgan chase, which, in turn, could result in a higher level of charge-offs
and a higher level of provision for credit losses, all of which would adversely
affect the firms earnings.
the firms consumer businesses are particularly affected by domestic economic
conditions, including u.s. interest rates, the rate of unemployment, the level
of consumer confidence, changes in consumer spending, and the number of
personal bankruptcies, as these factors will affect the level of consumer loans
and credit quality.
competition. jpmorgan chase operates in a highly competitive environment and
expects various factors to cause competitive conditions to continue to
intensify. the firm expects competition to intensify as continued merger activity in the financial services industry produces
larger, better-capitalized companies that are capable of offering a wider array
of financial products and services, and at more competitive prices. in
addition, technological advances and the growth of e-commerce have made it
possible for non-depository institutions to offer products and services that
traditionally were banking products and for financial institutions to compete
with technology companies in providing electronic and internet-based financial
solutions.
non-u.s. operations; trading in non-u.s. securities. the firm does business
throughout the world, including in developing regions of the world commonly
known as emerging markets. jpmorgan chases businesses and revenues derived
from non-u.s. operations are subject to risk of loss from unfavorable political
and diplomatic
developments, currency fluctuations, social instability, changes in
governmental policies or policies of central banks, expropriation,
nationalization, confiscation of assets and changes in legislation relating to
non-u.s. ownership. jpmorgan chase also invests in the securities of
corporations located in non-u.s. jurisdictions, including emerging markets.
revenues from the trading of non-u.s. securities also may be subject to
negative fluctuations as a result of the above factors. the impact of these
fluctuations could be accentuated because, generally, non-u.s. trading markets,
particularly in emerging market countries, are smaller, less liquid and more
volatile than u.s. trading markets.
operational risk. jpmorgan chase, like all large corporations, is exposed to
many types of operational risk, including the risk of fraud by employees or
outsiders, unauthorized transactions by employees or operational errors,
including clerical or record-keeping errors or errors resulting from faulty or
disabled computer
table of contents
or telecommunications systems. given the high volume of transactions at
jpmorgan chase, certain errors may be repeated or compounded before they are
discovered and successfully rectified. in addition, the firms necessary
dependence upon automated systems to record and process its transaction volume
may further increase the risk that technical system flaws or employee tampering
or manipulation of those systems will result in losses that are difficult to
detect. the firm may also be subject to disruptions of its operating systems,
arising from events that are wholly or partially beyond its control (including,
for example, computer viruses or electrical or telecommunications outages),
which may give rise to losses in service to customers and to loss or liability
to the firm. the firm is further exposed to the risk that its external vendors
may be unable to fulfill their contractual obligation to the firm (or will be
subject to the same risk of fraud or operational errors by their respective
employees as is the firm), and to the risk that its (or its vendors) business
continuity and data security systems prove not to be sufficiently adequate. the
firm also faces the risk that the design of its controls and procedures prove
inadequate, or are circumvented, thereby causing delays in detection or errors
in information. although jpmorgan chase maintains a system of controls designed
to keep operational risk at appropriate levels, there can be no assurance that
jpmorgan chase will not suffer losses from operational risks in the future that
may be material in amount.
government monetary policies and economic controls.
jpmorgan chases businesses and earnings are affected by general economic
conditions, both domestic and international. jpmorgan chases businesses and
earnings also are affected by the fiscal or other policies that are adopted by
various regulatory authorities of the united states, non-u.s. governments and
international agencies. for example, policies and regulations of the federal
reserve board influence, directly and indirectly, the rate of interest paid by
commercial banks on their interest-bearing deposits and also may impact the
value of financial instruments held by the firm. these actions of the federal
reserve board also determine to a significant degree the cost to jpmorgan chase
of funds for lending and investing. the nature and impact of future changes in
economic and market conditions and fiscal policies are not predictable and are
beyond jpmorgan chases control. in addition, these policies and conditions can
impact the firms customers and counterparties, both in the u.s. and abroad,
which may increase the risk that such customers or counterparties default on
their obligations to jpmorgan chase.
reputational and legal risk. the firms ability to attract and retain customers
and employees could be adversely affected to the extent its reputation is
damaged. the failure of the firm to deal, or to appear to fail to deal, with
various issues that could give rise to reputational risk could cause harm to
the firm and its business prospects. these issues include, but are not limited
to, appropriately dealing with potential conflicts of interest, legal and
regulatory requirements, ethical issues, money-laundering, privacy,
record-keeping, sales and trading practices and the proper identification of
the legal, reputational, credit, liquidity and market risks inherent in its
products. failure to address appropriately these issues could also give rise to
additional legal risk to the firm, which could, in turn, increase the size and
number of claims and damages asserted against the firm or subject the firm to
enforcement actions, fines and penalties.
credit, market, liquidity and private equity risk. jpmorgan chases revenues
also are dependent upon the extent to which management can successfully achieve
its business strategies within a disciplined risk environment. jpmorgan chases
ability to grow its businesses is affected by pricing and competitive
pressures, as well as by the costs associated with the introduction of new
products and services and the expansion and development of new distribution
channels. the ability of management to utilize the shareholder value added
methodology to evaluate investment opportunities and the ability to maintain
expense discipline will be important factors in determining the extent to which
the firm achieves its financial targets. in addition, to the extent any of the
instruments and strategies jpmorgan chase uses to hedge or otherwise manage its
exposure to market, credit and private equity risk are not effective, the firm
may not be able to mitigate effectively its risk exposures in particular market
environments or against particular types of risk. jpmorgan chases balance
sheet growth will be dependent upon the economic conditions described above, as
well as on its determination to securitize, sell, purchase or syndicate
particular loans or loan portfolios. jpmorgan chases trading revenues and
interest rate risk are dependent upon its ability to identify properly, and
mark to market, changes in the value of its financial instruments caused by
changes in market prices or rates. the firmss earnings will also be dependent
upon how effectively its critical accounting estimates, including those used in
its private equity valuations, prove accurate and upon how effectively it
determines and assesses the cost of credit and manages its risk concentrations.
to the extent its assessments of migrations in credit quality and of risk
concentrations, or its assumptions or estimates used in establishing its valuation
models for the fair value of its assets and liabilities or for its loan loss
reserves, prove inaccurate or not predictive of actual results, the firm could
suffer higher-than-anticipated losses. the successful management of credit,
market, operational and private equity risk is an important consideration in
managing the firms liquidity risk, as evaluation by rating agencies of the
management of these risks affects their determinations as to the firms credit
ratings and, therefore, its cost of funds.
non-u.s. operations
for geographic distributions of total revenue, total expense, income before
income tax expense and net income, see note 32 on page 124. for a discussion of
non-u.s. loans, see note 11 on page 99 and the sections entitled country
exposure in the md&a on page 58 and cross-border outstandings on page 139.
item2: properties
the headquarters of jpmorgan chase is located in new york city at 270 park
avenue, which is a 50-story bank and office building owned by jpmorgan chase.
this location contains approximately 1.3million square feet of space. in
addition, jpmorgan chase leases approximately 2.2million square feet of office
space in two midtown manhattan office buildings, 277 park avenue and 245 park
avenue, which, together with 270 park, comprise the jpmorgan chase midtown
campus. the 277 park avenue building is fully occupied. the lower floors of
245 park avenue are occupied by jpmorgan chase, but approximately 200,000
square feet on the upper floors are presently being marketed. jpmorgan chase
also owns and occupies a large portion of a 60-
table of contents
part i
story building at one chase manhattan plaza in new york city. this location has
approximately 2million square feet of commercial office and retail space, of
which approximately 700,000 square feet is leased to outside tenants. jpmorgan
chase also owns and occupies a 22-story building at 4 new york plaza, new york
city. this location has 900,000 square feet of commercial office and retail
space, none of which is leased to outside tenants. jpmorgan chase is also a
tenant in a number of other office buildings in manhattan.
in the third quarter of 2003, jpmorgan chase sold the two adjacent buildings it
owned at 23 wall street and 15 broad street in new york city to a private
developer. the two buildings contain approximately 1million square feet of
commercial office and retail space.
jpmorgan chase built and fully occupies a two-building complex known as chase
metrotech center in downtown brooklyn, new york that was completed in 1992.
this facility contains approximately 1.75million square feet and houses
operations and product support functions. jpmorgan chase currently leases two
office buildings at the newport office center in jersey city, new jersey,
comprising approximately 1.1million square feet of office and retail space.
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries also own and occupy administrative and
operational facilities in hicksville, new york; tampa, florida; tempe, arizona;
newark, delaware; and in houston, arlington and el paso, texas.
in the united kingdom, jpmorgan chase occupies, in the aggregate, approximately
2.6million square feet of space. the most significant components of leased
space in london are 370,000 square feet at 125 london wall, 325,000 square feet
at aldermanbury, and a 450,000 square-foot office complex at 60 victoria
embankment in london. jpmorgan chase owns and occupies a 350,000 square-foot
operations center in bournemouth.
in addition to the above, jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries occupy retail
branches, offices and other administrative and operational facilities
throughout the world under various types of ownership and leasehold agreements.
the properties occupied by jpmorgan chase are used across all of jpmorgan
chases business segments and for corporate purposes.
jpmorgan chase incurred charges of $270million in 2003 and $120million in
2002 to cover the costs of disposing of excess space. jpmorgan chase continues
to evaluate its current and projected space requirements, particularly in light
of its proposed merger with bank one. there is no assurance that the firm will
be able to dispose of its excess premises or that it will not incur additional
charges in connection with such dispositions.
item3: legal proceedings
enron litigation. jpmorgan chase is involved in a number of lawsuits and
investigations arising out of its banking relationships with enron corp. and
its subsidiaries (enron). pending in london is a lawsuit by the firm against
westdeutsche landes-bank girozentrale (wlb) seeking to compel payment of $165
million under an enron-related letter of credit issued by wlb.
actions involving enron have been initiated by parties against jpmorgan chase,
its directors and certain of its officers. these lawsuits include a series of
purported class actions brought on behalf of shareholders of enron, including
the lead action captioned newby v. enron corp., and a series of purported class
actions brought on behalf of enron employees who participated in various
employee stock ownership plans, including the lead action captioned tittle v.
enron corp. the consolidated complaint filed in newby names as defendants,
among others, jpmorgan chase, several other investment banking firms, a number
of law firms, enrons former accountants and affiliated entities and
individuals and other individual defendants, including present and former
officers and directors of enron, and it purports to allege claims against
jpmorgan chase and the other defendants under federal and state securities
laws. the tittle complaint named as defendants, among others, jpmorgan chase,
several other investment banking firms, a law firm, enrons former accountants
and affiliated entities and individuals and other individual defendants,
including present and former officers and directors of enron and purports to
allege claims against jpmorgan chase and certain other defendants under the
racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations act (rico) and state common
law. on december20, 2002, the court denied the motion of jpmorgan chase and
other defendants to dismiss the newby action. on september30, 2003, judge
harmon dismissed all claims against jpmorgan chase in tittle.
additional actions include a purported consolidated class action lawsuit by
jpmorgan chase stockholders alleging that the firm issued false and misleading
press releases and other public documents relating to enron in violation of
section 10(b) of the securities exchange act of 1934 and rule10b-5 thereunder;
a putative class action on behalf of jpmorgan chase employees who participated
in the firms employee stock ownership plans alleging claims under the employee
retirement income security act (erisa) for alleged breaches of fiduciary
duties and negligence by jpmorgan chase, its directors and named officers;
shareholder derivative actions alleging breaches of fiduciary duties and
alleged failures to exercise due care and diligence by the firms directors and
named officers in the management of jpmorgan chase; individual and putative class
actions in various courts by enron investors, creditors and holders of
participating interests related to syndicated credit facilities; third-party
actions brought by defendants in enron-related cases, alleging federal and
state law claims against jpmorgan chase and many other defendants;
investigations by governmental agencies with which the firm is
cooperating; and an
adversary proceeding brought by enron in bankruptcy court seeking damages for
alleged aiding and abetting breaches of fiduciary duty by enron insiders,
return of alleged fraudulent conveyances and preferences, and equitable
subordination of jpmorgan chases claims in the enron bankruptcy. on july28,
2003, an examiner appointed in the enron bankruptcy case filed with the
bankruptcy court the third in a series of reports. in this report, the enron
examiner opined that the enron bankruptcy estate has colorable claims against
(among others) jpmorgan chase for aiding and abetting breaches of fiduciary
duties by certain of enrons officers with respect to certain transactions
involving enron, for equitable subordination and for avoidance of allegedly
preferential payments made to the firm. the report acknowledges that any such
claims may be subject to certain defenses which could be asserted by jpmorgan
chase.
table of contents
by joint order of the district court
handling newby, tittle and a number of
other enron-related cases and the
bankruptcy court handling enrons
bankruptcy case, a mediation among various
investors and creditor plaintiffs, the
enron bankruptcy estate and a number of
financial institution defendants,
including jpmorgan chase, has been
initiated before the honorable william c.
conner, senior united states district
judge for the southern district of new
york.
on july28, 2003, the firm announced that
it had reached agreements with the
securities and exchange commission (sec),
the federal reserve bank of new york
(frb), the new york state banking
department (nysbd), and the new york
county district attorneys office (nyda)
resolving matters relating to jpmorgan
chases involvement with certain
transactions involving enron. in connection
with the sec settlement, the sec alleged
that jpmorgan chase aided and abetted a
securities fraud by enron. jpmorgan chase
has neither admitted nor denied the secs
allegations but has consented to relief
sought by the sec, including an order
enjoining the firm from future violations
of the antifraud provisions of the
securities laws and requiring the firm to
pay a total of $135million, consisting of
$65million of disgorgement of revenues, $5
million of interest and $65million of
penalties. the agreement with the nyda
provides that neither jpmorgan chase nor
any of its officers or employees will be
prosecuted by the nyda and that the firm
will pay a total of $27.5million,
consisting of $25million in penalties and
$2.5million in reimbursement of expenses
of the nyda. jpmorgan chase has also
committed to take certain measures to
improve controls with respect to structured
finance transactions. the agreement with
the frb and nysbd, a formal written
agreement, requires jpmorgan chase to adopt
programs acceptable to the frb and the
nysbd for enhancing the firms management
of credit risk and legal and reputational
risk, particularly in relation to its
participation in structured finance
transactions.
worldcom litigation. j.p. morgan securities
inc. (jpmsi) and jpmorgan chase have been
named as defendants in more than 50 actions
that were filed in either united states
district courts or state courts in more
than 20 states and in one arbitral panel
beginning in july2002 arising out of
alleged accounting irregularities in the
books and records of worldcom inc.
plaintiffs in these actions are individual
and institutional investors, including
state pension funds, who purchased debt
securities issued by worldcom pursuant to
public offerings in 1997, 1998, 2000 and
2001. jpmsi acted as an underwriter of the
1998, 2000 and 2001 offerings and was an
initial purchaser in the december2000
private bond offering. in addition to
jpmsi, jpmorgan chase and, in two actions,
j.p. morgan securities ltd. (jpmsl) in
its capacity as one of the underwriters of
the international tranche of the 2001
offering, the defendants in various of the
actions include other underwriters, certain
executives of worldcom and worldcoms
auditors. in the actions, plaintiffs allege
that defendants either knew or were
reckless or negligent in not knowing that
the securities were sold to plaintiffs on
the basis of misrepresentations and
omissions of material facts concerning the
financial condition of worldcom. the
complaints against jpmorgan chase, jpmsi
and jpmsl assert claims under federal and
state securities laws, other state statutes
and under common law theories of fraud and
negligent misrepresentation.
commercial financial services litigation.
jpmsi (formerly known as chase securities
inc.) has been named as a defendant in
several actions that were filed in or
transferred to the united states district
and bankruptcy courts for the northern
district of oklahoma or filed in oklahoma
state court beginning in october1999,
arising out of the failure of commercial
financial services, inc. (cfsi).
plaintiffs in
these actions are institutional investors
who purchased approximately $2.0billion in
original face amount of asset-backed
securities issued by cfsi. the securities
were backed by charged-off credit card
receivables. in addition to jpmsi, the
defendants in various of the actions are
the founders and key executives of cfsi, as
well as its auditors and outside counsel.
jpmsi is alleged to have been the
investment bankers to cfsi and to have
acted as an initial purchaser and as
placement agent in connection with the
issuance of certain of the securities.
plaintiffs allege that defendants either
knew or were reckless or negligent in not
knowing that the securities were sold to
plaintiffs on the basis of misleading
misrepresentations and omissions of
material facts. the complaints against
jpmsi assert claims under the securities
exchange act of 1934, under the oklahoma
securities act and under common law
theories of fraud and negligent
misrepresentation. in the actions against
jpmsi, damages in the amount of
approximately $1.6billion, allegedly
suffered as a result of defendants
misrepresentations and omissions, plus
punitive damages and interest, are being
claimed. cfsi has commenced an action
against jpmsi in oklahoma state court and
has asserted claims against jpmsi for
professional negligence and breach of
fiduciary duty. cfsi alleges that jpmsi
failed to detect and prevent its
insolvency. cfsi seeks unspecified damages.
cfsi has also commenced, in its bankruptcy
case, an adversary proceeding against jpmsi
and its credit card affiliate, chase
manhattan bank usa, n.a., alleging that
certain payments, aggregating $78.4
million, made in connection with cfsis
purchase or securitization of charged-off
credit card receivables were constructive
fraudulent conveyances, and seeks to
recover such payments and interest. a trial
date on the adversary proceeding has been
set for november1, 2004.
ipo allocation litigation. beginning in may
2001, jpmorgan chase and certain of its
securities subsidiaries have been named,
along with numerous other firms in the
securities industry, as defendants in a
large number of putative class action
lawsuits filed in the united states
district court for the southern district of
new york. these suits purport to challenge
alleged improprieties in the allocation of
stock in various public offerings,
including some offerings for which a
jpmorgan chase entity served as an
underwriter. the suits allege violations of
securities and antitrust laws arising from
alleged material misstatements and
omissions in registration statements and
prospectuses for the initial public
offerings (ipos) and alleged market
manipulation with respect to aftermarket
transactions in the offered securities. the
securities claims allege, among other
things, misrepresentations and market
manipulation of the aftermarket trading for
these offerings by tying allocations of
shares in ipos to undisclosed excessive
commissions paid to jpmorgan chase and to
required aftermarket purchase transactions
by customers who received allocations of
shares in the respective ipos, as well as
allegations of misleading analyst reports.
the antitrust claims allege an illegal
conspiracy to require customers, in
exchange for ipo allocations, to pay
undisclosed and excessive commissions and
to make aftermarket
table of contents
part i
purchases of the ipo securities at a price
higher than the offering price as a
precondition to receiving allocations. on
february13, 2003, the court denied the
motions of jpmorgan chase and others to
dismiss the securities complaints. on
november3, 2003, the court granted
defendants motion to dismiss the antitrust
claims relating to the ipo allocation
practices. a separate antitrust claim
alleging that jpmsi and the other
underwriters conspired to fix their
underwriting
fees is in discovery.
jpmorgan chase has also received various
subpoenas and informal requests from
governmental and other agencies seeking
information relating to ipo allocation
practices. on february20, 2003, jpmsi reached a settlement with the
national association of securities dealers
(nasd) pursuant to which the nasd censured jpmsi and fined it $6
million for activities it found to
constitute unlawful profit sharing by
hambrecht & quist group in the period
immediately prior to and following its
acquisition in 2000. in agreeing to the
resolution of the charges, jpmsi neither
admitted nor denied the nasds contentions.
in late september jpmsi and the sec agreed
to resolve matters relating to the secs
investigation of jpmsis ipo allocation
practices during 1999 and 2000. the sec
alleged that jpmsi violated rule101 of sec
regulationm in certain hot ipos by
attempting to induce certain customers to
place aftermarket orders for ipo shares
before the ipo was completed. also, in the
case of one ipo, the sec alleged that jpmsi
violated just and equitable principles of
trade under nasd conduct rule2110 by
persuading at least one customer to accept
an allocation of shares in a cold ipo in
exchange for a promise of an allocation of
shares in an upcoming ipo that was expected
to be oversubscribed. jpmsi neither
admitted nor denied the secs allegations,
but consented to a judgment (entered
october1, 2003) enjoining jpmsi from
future violations of regulationm and nasd
conduct rule2110 and requiring jpmsi to
pay a civil penalty of $25million.
research analysts conflicts. on december
20, 2002, the firm reached a settlement agreement in
principle with the sec, the nasd, the new
york stock exchange (nyse), the new york
state attorney generals office and the
north american securities administrators
association, on behalf of state securities
regulators, to resolve their investigations
of jpmorgan chase relating to research
analyst independence. pursuant to the
agreement in principle, jpmorgan chase, without
admitting or denying the allegations concerning alleged conflicts,
agreed, among other things: (i)to pay $50
million for retrospective relief, (ii)to
adopt internal structural and operational
reforms that will further augment the steps
it has already taken to ensure the
integrity of jpmorgan chase analyst
research, (iii)to contribute $25million
spread over five years to provide
independent third-party research to clients
and (iv)to contribute $5million towards
investor education. mutually satisfactory
settlement documents have been negotiated
and approved by the sec, the nyse, the nasd
and the texas state securities board.
mutually satisfactory settlement documents
have been negotiated and approved by the
regulatory authorities in all but a few
states, and settlement documents are in the
process of being negotiated with the
remaining states. on october31, 2003, the
court entered final judgment pursuant to
the settlement with the sec.
jpmsi has been named as a co-defendant with
nine other broker-dealers in two actions
involving allegations similar to those at
issue in the regulatory investigations: a
putative class action filed
in federal
court in colorado seeking an unspecified
amount of money damages for alleged violations of
federal securities laws, and an action
filed in west virginia state court by west
virginias attorney general seeking
recovery from the defendants in the
aggregate of $5,000 for each of what are
alleged to be hundreds of thousands of
violations of the states consumer
protection statute. on august8, 2003, the
plaintiffs in the colorado action dismissed
the complaint without prejudice. motions to
dismiss the west virginia action and to
disqualify private counsel retained by the
attorney general to prosecute that action
are pending.
jpmsi was served by the sec, nasd and nyse
on or about may
30, 2003, with subpoenas or document
requests seeking information regarding
certain present and former officers and
employees in connection with a follow-up to
the regulatory investigations, this time
focusing on whether particular individuals
properly performed supervisory functions
regarding domestic equity research. the
firm is cooperating with the
investigations, which continue.
litigation reserve and other. during the
fourth quarter of 2002, the firm
established a reserve of $900million
related to costs anticipated to be incurred
in connection with the various private
litigation and regulatory inquiries
involving enron and the other material
legal actions, proceedings and
investigations discussed above. in the
second quarter of 2003, the firm added $100
million to the reserve related to enron. of
the $1billion, $700million was allocated
to the various cases, proceedings and
investigations associated with enron. the
balance of $300million was allocated to
the various litigations, proceedings and
investigations involving the firms debt
and equity underwriting activities and
equity research practices. the reserve may
be revised in the future. as of december
31, 2003, the enron-related litigation
reserve was $524million, and the balance
of the $300million set aside at december
31, 2002 was $221million.
in addition to the various cases,
proceedings and investigations for which
the reserve has been established, jpmorgan
chase and its subsidiaries are named as
defendants in a number of other legal
actions and governmental proceedings
arising in connection with their respective
businesses. additional actions,
investigations or proceedings may be
brought from time to time in the future. in
view of the inherent difficulty of
predicting the outcome of legal matters,
particularly where the claimants seek very
large or indeterminate damages or where the
cases present novel legal theories or
involve a large number of parties, the firm
cannot state with confidence what the
eventual outcome of the pending matters
(including the pending matters as to which
the reserve has been established) will be,
what the timing of the ultimate resolution
of these matters will be or what the
eventual loss, fines or penalties related
to each pending matter may be. subject to
the foregoing caveat, jpmorgan chase
anticipates, based upon its current
knowledge, after consultation with counsel
and after taking into account its
litigation reserves, that the outcome of
the legal actions, proceedings and
investigations currently pending against it
should not have a material adverse effect
on the consolidated financial condition of
the firm, although the outcome of a
particular proceeding or the imposition of
a particular fine or penalty may be
material to jpmorgan chases operating
results for a particular period, depending
upon, among other factors, the size of the
loss or liability and the level of jpmorgan
chases income for that period.
table of contents
item4: submission of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
executive officers of the registrant
name
age
positions and offices held with jpmorgan chase
(at december31, 2003)
william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer since november2001, prior to which he
was president and chief executive officer from december2000. he was
chairman and chief executive officer from january through december2000 and
president and chief executive officer from june through december1999, prior to
which he had been vice chairman of the board.
david a. coulter
head of the investment bank and of investment management & private banking.
he had been head of chase financial services until may2002. prior to joining
jpmorgan chase in 2000, he led the west coast operations of the beacon
group, prior to which he was chairman and chief executive officer of
bankamerica corporation and bank of america nt & sa.
dina dublon
chief financial officer.
john j. farrell
director human resources, head
of security since september2001 and since july2003 head of real estate/facilities,
general services.
donald h. layton
head of chase financial services, treasury & securities services and since
july2003 of technology. he had been co-head of the investment bank until
may2002. prior to 2001, he was responsible for global markets, the international
infrastructure and cash management and securities processing services.
frederick w. hill
director of corporate marketing and communications.
william h. mcdavid
general counsel.
john w. schmidlin
chairman of technology council. he led the infrastructure delivery model
initiative from june2001 until july2003. prior to 2001, he had been chief
operating officer of the private banking initiative (morgan online) of j.p. morgan
& co. incorporated.
jeffrey c. walker
head of jpmorgan partners.
don m. wilson iii
chief risk officer and chairman, risk management committee. he had been
co-head of credit & rates for the investment bank from 2001 until july2003,
prior to which he headed the global trading division.
unless otherwise noted, during the five fiscal years ended december31, 2003,
all of jpmorgan chases above-named executive officers have continuously held
senior-level positions with jpmorgan chase or its predecessor institutions,
j.p. morgan & co. incorporated and the chase manhattan corporation. there are
no family relationships among the foregoing executive officers.
table of contents
parts ii & iii
part ii
item5: market for registrants
common equity and related
stockholder matters
the outstanding shares of jpmorgan chases
common stock are listed and traded on the
new york stock exchange, the london stock
exchange limited and the tokyo stock
exchange. for the quarterly high and low
prices of jpmorgan chases common stock on
the new york stock exchange for the last
two years, see the section entitled
supplementary information  selected
quarterly financial data (unaudited) on
page 128. jpmorgan chase declared
quarterly cash dividends on its common
stock in the amount of $0.34 per share for
each quarter of 2003 and 2002. the common
dividend payout ratio based on reported
net income was 43% for 2003, 171% for 2002
and 168% for 2001. at january31, 2004,
there were 123,838 holders of record of
jpmorgan chases common stock. for
information regarding securities
authorized for issuance under the firms
employee stock-based compensation plans,
see item12 on page 13.
item6: selected financial data
for five-year selected financial data,
see five-year summary of financial
highlights (unaudited) on page 129.
item7: managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and
results of operations
managements discussion and analysis of
the financial condition and results of
operations, entitled managements
discussion and analysis, appears on pages
22 through 80. such information should be
read in conjunction with the consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto,
which appear on pages 82 through 127.
item7a: quantitative and qualitative
disclosures about market risk
for information related to market risk, see
the market risk management section on
pages 66 through 72 and note 28 on page
116.
item8: financial statements and
supplementary data
the consolidated financial statements,
together with the notes thereto and the
report of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
dated january20, 2004 thereon, appear on
pages 81 through 127.
supplementary financial data for each full
quarter within the two years ended december
31, 2003 are included on page 128 in the
table entitled supplementary information
selected quarterly financial data
(unaudited). also included is a glossary
of terms on pages 130 and 131.
item9: changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
none.
item9a: controls and procedures
within the 75-day period prior to the
filing of this report, an evaluation was
carried out under the supervision and with
the participation of the firms management,
including its chief executive officer and
chief financial officer, of the
effectiveness of the design and operation
of its disclosure controls and procedures
(as defined in rule13a-14(c) under the
securities exchange act of 1934). see
exhibits 31.1 and 31.2 for the
certification statements issued by the
chief executive officer and chief financial
officer. based upon that evaluation, the
chief executive officer and chief financial
officer concluded that the design and
operation of these disclosure controls and
procedures were effective. no significant
changes were made in the firms internal
controls or in other factors that could
significantly affect these controls
subsequent to the date of their evaluation.
part iii
item10: directors and executive
officers of jpmorgan chase
see item13 on page 13.
item11: executive compensation
see item13 on page 13.
table of contents
item12: security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
for security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management, see item
13 below.
the following table details the total number of shares available for issuance
under jpmorgan chase employee stock-based incentive plans (including shares
available for issuance to nonemployee directors). the firm is not authorized to
grant stock-based incentive awards to nonemployees other than to nonemployee
directors.
number of shares to be
weighted-average
number of shares remaining
december 31, 2003
issued upon exercise of
exercise price of
available for future issuance under
(shares in thousands)
outstanding options
outstanding options
equity compensation plans
employee stock-based incentive plans approved by shareholders
224,658
$
37.66
184,819
(a)
employee stock-based incentive plans not approved by shareholders
187,173
42.07
108,000
total
411,831
$
39.67
292,819
(a)
includes 55million shares of restricted stock/restricted stock units available for grant in lieu of cash.
item13: certain relationships and
related transactions
information related to jpmorgan chases
executive officers is included on page 11.
pursuant to instruction g (3)to form 10-k, the remainder of the information to be
provided in items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of
form 10-k (other than information pursuant
to rule402 (i), (k)and (l)of regulation
s-k) is incorporated by reference to
jpmorgan chases definitive proxy statement
for the 2004 annual meeting of
stockholders, which proxy statement will be
filed with the securities and exchange
commission pursuant to regulation14a
within 120days of the close of jpmorgan
chases 2003 fiscal year.
item14: principal accounting fees and
services
see item13 above.
table of contents
part iv
item15: exhibits, financial statement
schedules and reports on form 8-k
(a)
exhibits, financial statements and financial statement schedules
1.
financial statements
the consolidated financial statements,
the notes thereto and the report
thereon listed in item8 are set forth
commencing on page 81.
2.
financial statement schedules
financial statement schedules are
omitted since the required information
is either not applicable, not deemed
material, or is shown in the
respective consolidated financial
statements or in the notes thereto.
3.
exhibits
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of j.p. morgan chase & co.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co.
(the registrant) (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
3.2
by-laws of j.p. morgan chase & co. as amended by the board of directors on
october15, 2002 (incorporated by reference to exhibit3.2 to the annual report
on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the year
ended december31, 2002).
3.3
agreement and plan of merger, dated as
of january14, 2004, by and between j.p.
morgan chase & co. and bank one corporation
(incorporated by reference to exhibit2.1
to form8-k of j.p. morgan chase & co.
(file no.1-5805), dated january14, 2004).
3.4
stock option agreement, dated as of
january14, 2004, by and between bank one
corporation (issuer)and j.p. morgan chase
& co. (grantee) (incorporated by reference
to exhibit99.1 to form8-k of j.p. morgan
chase & co. (file no.1-5805), dated
january14, 2004).
3.5
stock option agreement, dated as of
january14, 2004, by and between j.p.
morgan chase & co. (issuer)and bank one
corporation (grantee) (incorporated by
reference to exhibit99.2 to form8-k of
j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.
1-5805), dated january14, 2004).
4.1
deposit agreement, dated as of
february8, 1996, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase & co.)
and morgan guaranty
trust company of new york (succeeded
through merger by jpmorgan chase
bank), as depository (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.7 to the
registration statement on form8-a of
the chase manhattan corporation (now
known as j.p. morgan chase & co.)
file no.1-5805), filed december20,
2000.
4.2
indenture, dated as of december1,
1989, between chemical banking
corporation (now known as j.p. morgan chase & co.) and the chase
manhattan bank (national association),
as succeeded to by bankers trust
company (now known as deutsche bank
trust company americas), as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.9 to the registration statement on
forms-3 (file no.33-32409) of
chemical banking corporation).
4.3(a)
indenture, dated as of april1,
1987, as amended and restated as of
december15, 1992, between chemical
banking corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.) and morgan guaranty
trust company of new york (now known as
jpmorgan chase bank), as succeeded to by
u.s. bank trust national association, as
trustee (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.3(a) to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended december
31, 2000).
4.3(b)
second supplemental indenture,
dated as of october8, 1996, between the
chase manhattan corporation (now known as
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank
trust national association, as trustee, to
the indenture, dated as of april1, 1987,
as amended and restated as of december15,
1992 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.3(b) to the annual report on form10-k
of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.
1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.3(c)
third supplemental indenture,
dated as of december29, 2000, between
the chase manhattan corporation (now
known as j.p. morgan chase & co.) and
u.s. bank trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as of
april1, 1987, as amended and restated as
of december15, 1992 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.3(c) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase
& co. (file no.1-5805) for the year
ended december31, 2000).
4.4(a)
amended and restated indenture,
dated as of september1, 1993, between the
chase manhattan corporation (as assumed by
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and chemical bank
(succeeded through merger by jpmorgan
chase bank), as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4(a) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
table of contents
4.4(b)
first supplemental indenture, dated
as of march29, 1996, among chemical
banking corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.), the chase manhattan
corporation, chemical bank, as resigning
trustee, and u.s. bank trust national
association, as
successor trustee, to the amended and
restated indenture, dated as of september
1, 1993 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.4(b) to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.4(c)
second supplemental indenture,
dated as of october8, 1996, between the
chase manhattan corporation (now known as
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank
trust national association, as trustee, to
the amended and restated indenture, dated
as of september1, 1993 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4(c) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.4(d)
third supplemental indenture, dated
as of december29, 2000, between the chase
manhattan corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank trust
national association, as trustee, to the
amended and restated indenture, dated as
of september1, 1993 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4(d) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.5(a)
indenture dated as of august15, 1982, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase &
co.) and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee (incorporated
by reference to exhibit4.5(a) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(b)
first supplemental indenture,
dated as of may5, 1986, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase &
co.) and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as
of august15, 1982 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.5(b) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31,
2000).
4.5(c)
second supplemental indenture,
dated as of february27, 1996, between
j.p. morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as of
august15, 1982 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.5(c) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(d)
third supplemental indenture, dated
as of january30, 1997, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase & co.)
and u.s. bank trust national association,
as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of
august15, 1982 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit4.5(d) to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(e)
fourth supplemental indenture,
dated as of december29, 2000, among j.p. morgan & co. incorporated, the
chase manhattan corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.), and u.s. bank
trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as of
august15, 1982 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.5(e) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.6(a)
indenture dated as of december1, 1986, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase &
co.) and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee (incorporated
by reference to exhibit4.6(a) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.6(b)
first supplemental indenture,
dated as of may12, 1992, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as
of december1, 1986 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.6(b) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31,
2000).
4.6(c)
second supplemental indenture,
dated as of december29, 2000, among
j.p. morgan & co. incorporated, the
chase manhattan corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.), and u.s. bank
trust national association, as
trustee, to the indenture, dated as
of december1, 1986 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.6(c) to the
annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805)
for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.7(a)
indenture dated as of march1,
1993, between j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated (succeeded through merger by
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank
trust national association, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.7(a) to the annual report on form10-k
of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.
1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
table of contents
part iv
4.7(b)
first supplemental indenture, dated
as of december29, 2000, among j.p. morgan
& co. incorporated, the chase manhattan
corporation (now known as j.p. morgan
chase & co.), and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee, to the indenture,
dated as of march1, 1993 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.7(b) to the annual
report on form10-k of j.p. morgan chase &
co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.8
indenture dated may25, 2001, between
j.p. morgan chase & co. and deutsche bank
trust company americas (previously known
as bankers trust company), as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4(a)(1) to the registration statement on
forms-3 (file no.333-52826) of j.p.
morgan chase & co., file no.1- 5805).
4.9(a)
junior subordinated indenture,
dated as of december1, 1996, between the
chase manhattan corporation (now known as
j.p. morgan chase & co.) and the bank of
new york, as debenture trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.24 to the registration statement on
forms-3 (file no.333-19719) of the
chase manhattan corporation).
4.9(b)
guarantee agreement, dated as of
january24, 1997, between the chase
manhattan corporation (now known as j.p.
morgan chase & co.) and the bank of new
york, as trustee, with respect to the
global floating rate capital securities,
seriesb, of chase capital ii
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.8 to the annual report on form10-k,
dated december31, 1997, of the chase
manhattan corporation, file no.1-5805).
4.9(c)
amended and restated trust agreement, dated as of january24, 1997,
among the chase manhattan corporation (now
known as j.p. morgan chase & co.), the
bank of new york, as property trustee, the
bank of new york (delaware), as delaware
trustee, and the administrative trustees
named therein, with respect to chase
capital ii (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.9 to the annual report on form
10-k, dated december31, 1997, of the
chase manhattan corporation, file no.
1-5805).
4.10(a)
junior subordinated indenture,
dated as of november1, 1996, between j.p.
morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded
through merger by j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
debenture trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4(a)(1) to the
registration statement on forms-3
(file no.333-15079) of j.p. morgan &
co. incorporated, file no.1-5885).
4.10(b)
guarantee agreement, dated as of
december4, 1996, between j.p. morgan &
co. incorporated (succeeded through
merger by j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
guarantee trustee, with respect to the
capital securities of jpm capital
trust i (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.9(b) to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co.
(file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.10(c)
amended and restated declaration
of trust, dated as of december4, 1996,
between j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated (succeeded through merger
by j.p. morgan chase & co.) and u.s.
bank trust national association, as
property trustee, wilmington trust
company, as delaware trustee, and the
administrative trustees named therein,
with respect to jpm capital trust i
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.9(c) to the annual report on form
10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
10.1
deferred compensation plan for
non-employee directors of the chase
manhattan corporation and the chase
manhattan bank, as amended and restated
effective december1996 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.1 to the annual
report on form10-k, dated december31,
1996, of the chase manhattan corporation,
file no.1-5805).
10.2
post-retirement compensation plan for
non-employee directors, as amended and
restated as of may21, 1996 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.2 to the annual
report on form10-k, dated december31,
1996, of the chase manhattan corporation,
file no.1-5805).
10.3
deferred compensation program of the
chase manhattan corporation and
participating companies, effective as of
january1, 1996 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.3 to the annual report on
form10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended december
31, 2000).
10.4
amended and restated 1996 long-term
incentive plan of the chase manhattan
corporation (incorporated by reference to
schedule14a, filed on april5, 2000, of
the chase manhattan corporation, file no.1-5805).
10.5
the chase manhattan 1994 long-term
incentive plan (incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit10o to the chase
manhattan corporations quarterly report
on form10-q for the quarter ended june
30, 1994, file no.1-5945).
table of contents
10.6
amendment to the chase manhattan 1994
long-term incentive plan (incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10s to the
chase manhattan corporations quarterly
report on form10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 1995, file no.1-5945).
10.7
chemical banking corporation
long-term stock incentive plan, as amended
and restated as of may19, 1992
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.7
to the annual report on form10-k, dated
december31, 1992, of chemical banking
corporation, file no.1-5805).
10.8
the chase manhattan 1987 long-term
incentive plan, as amended (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10a to the chase
manhattan corporations annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31,
1990, file no.1-5945).
10.9
amendment to the chase manhattan
1987/82 long-term incentive plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10t
to the quarterly report on form10-q, for
the quarter ended september30, 1995, of
the chase manhattan corporation, file no.1-5945).
10.10
key executive performance plan of
the chase manhattan corporation, as
amended and restated january1, 1999
(incorporated by reference to schedule14a, filed on
march25, 1999, of the chase manhattan
corporation, file no.1-5805).
10.11
permanent life insurance options
plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.11 to the annual report on
form10-k, dated december31, 1992, of
chemical banking corporation, file no.1-5805).
10.12
excess retirement plan of the chase
manhattan bank and participating companies,
restated effective january1, 1997
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.14
to the annual report on form10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
10.13
1992 stock incentive plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10a to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on
form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1994, file no.1-5885).
10.14
director stock plan, as amended
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10b
to j.p. morgan & co. incorporateds annual
report on form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1994, file no.1-5885).
10.15
deferred compensation plan for
directors fees, as amended (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10c to j.p. morgan
& co. incorporateds annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december31, 1992,
file no.1-5885).
10.16
1989 stock incentive plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10d to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december31,
1994, file no.1-5885).
10.17
1987 stock incentive plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10e to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on
form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1994, file no.1-5885).
10.18
incentive compensation plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit10f to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december31,
1997, file no.1-5885).
10.19
stock option award (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10h to j.p. morgan &
co. incorporateds quarterly report on
form10-q for the quarter ended march31,
1995, file no.1-5885).
10.20
1995 stock incentive plan, as
amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit10i to j.p. morgan
& co. incorporateds annual report on
form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1996, file no.
1-5885).
10.21
1995 executive officer performance
plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10j to j.p. morgan & co.
incorporateds annual report on
form10-k for the year ended
december31, 1995, file no.
1-5885).
10.22
1998 performance plan (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10 to j.p. morgan
& co. incorporateds quarterly report on
form10-q for the quarter ended september
30, 1998, file no.1-5885).
10.23
executive retirement plan of the
chase manhattan corporation and certain
subsidiaries (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.25 to the annual report on form
10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.
1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
10.24
benefit equalization plan of the chase manhattan
corporation and certain subsidiaries
(incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.26 to the annual report on form10-k
of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.
1-5805) for the year ended december31,
2000).
table of contents
part iv
12.1
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
12.2
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges and preferred stock dividend requirements.
21.1
list of subsidiaries of j.p. morgan chase & co.
22.1
annual report on form11-k of the jpmorgan chase 401(k)
savings plan (to be filed by amendment pursuant to rule15d-21 under
the securities exchange act of 1934).
23.1
consent of independent accountants.
31.1
certification.
31.2
certification.
certification pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted
pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
jpmorgan chase hereby agrees to furnish
to the securities and exchange
commission, upon request, copies of
instruments defining the rights of
holders for the outstanding nonregistered long-term debt of jpmorgan chase and its
subsidiaries. these instruments have not
been filed as exhibits hereto by reason
that the total amount of each issue of such
securities does not exceed
10% of the total
assets of jpmorgan chase and its
subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. in
addition, jpmorgan chase hereby agrees to
file with the securities and exchange
commission, upon request, the guarantees
and the amended and restated trust
agreements for each delaware business trust
subsidiary that has issued capital
securities. the provisions of such
agreements differ from the documents
constituting exhibits 4.9(b) and (c)and
4.10(b) and (c)to this report only with
respect to the pricing terms of each series
of capital securities; these pricing terms
are disclosed in note 18 on page 111.
(b)
reports on form 8-k
jpmorgan chase filed 3 reports on form
8-k during the quarter ended december31,
2003:
form8-k filed october1, 2003: press release announcing that j.p.
morgan securities inc. (jpmsi) had entered into an agreement with the
securities and exchange commission on october1, 2003 resolving matters
relating to jpmsis initial public offering allocation practices.
form8-k filed october22, 2003: press release announcing jpmorgan
chases results for the third quarter of 2003.
form8-k filed october27, 2003: form of the master agency
agreement between jpmorgan chase and the agents listed on exhibita
thereto, relating to the jpmorgan chase medium-term notes and forms of
notes.
pages 19-20 not used
table of contents
table of contents
financial:
managements discussion and analysis:
overview
results of operations
segment results
risk and capital management
capital and liquidity management
credit risk management
market risk management
operational risk management
private equity risk management
critical accounting estimates used by the firm
accounting and reporting developments
comparison between 2002 and 2001
audited financial statements:
managements report on responsibility for financial reporting
report of independent auditors
consolidated financial statements
notes to consolidated financial statements
supplementary information:
selected quarterly financial data
five-year summary of financial highlights
glossary of terms
this section of the annual
report provides managements
discussion and analysis
(md&a) of the financial
condition and results of
operations for jpmorgan chase.
see glossary of terms on pages
130 and 131 for a definition of
terms used throughout this
annual report.
certain forward-looking statements
the md&a contains certain
forward-looking statements.
those forward-looking statements
are subject to risks and
uncertainties, and jpmorgan
chases actual results may
differ from those set forth in
the forward-looking statements.
see jpmorgan chases reports
filed with the securities and
exchange commission for a
discussion of factors that could
cause jpmorgan chases actual
results to differ materially
from those described in the
forward-looking statements.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
overview
j.p. morgan chase & co. is a leading
global financial services firm with assets
of $771billion and operations in more
than 50 countries. the firm serves more
than 30million consumers nationwide
through its retail businesses, and many of
the worlds most prominent corporate,
institutional and government clients
through its global wholesale businesses.
financial performance of jpmorgan chase
as of or for the year ended december 31,
(in millions, except per share and ratio data)
change
revenue
$
33,256
$
29,614
%
noninterest expense
21,688
22,764
(5
)
provision for credit losses
1,540
4,331
(64
)
net income
6,719
1,663
net income per share  diluted
3.24
0.80
average common equity
42,988
41,368
return on average common equity (roce)
%
%
1,200
bp
tier 1 capital ratio
8.5
%
8.2
%
bp
total capital ratio
11.8
12.0
(20
)
tier 1 leverage ratio
5.6
5.1
in 2003, global growth strengthened
relative to the prior two years. the u.s.
economy improved significantly, supported
by diminishing geopolitical uncertainties,
new tax relief, strong profit growth, low
interest rates and a rising stock market.
productivity at u.s. businesses continued
to grow at an extraordinary pace, as a
result of ongoing investment in
information technologies. profit margins
rose to levels not seen in a long time.
new hiring remained tepid, but signs of an
improving job market emerged late in the
year. inflation fell to the lowest level
in more than 40years, and the board of
governors of the federal reserve system
(the federal reserve board) declared
that its long-run goal of price stability
had been achieved.
against this backdrop, j.p. morgan chase &
co. (jpmorgan chase or the firm)
reported 2003 net income of $6.7billion,
compared with net income of $1.7billion
in 2002. all five of the firms lines
of business benefited from the improved
economic conditions, with each reporting
increased revenue over 2002. in
particular, the lowinterest rate
environment drove robust fixed income
markets and an unprecedented mortgage
refinancing boom, resulting in record
earnings in the investment bank and chase
financial services.
total revenue for 2003 was $33.3
billion, up 12% from 2002. the
investment banks revenue increased by
approximately $1.9billion from 2002,
and chase financial services revenue
was $14.6billion in 2003, another
record year.
total noninterest expense was $21.7
billion, down 5% from the prior year. in
2002, the firm recorded $1.3billion of
charges, principally for enron-related
surety litigation and the establishment of
litigation reserves; and $1.2billion for
merger and restructuring costs related to
programs announced prior to january1,
2002. excluding these costs, expenses rose
by 7% in 2003, reflecting higher
performance-related incentives; increased
costs related to stock-based compensation
and pension and other postretirement
expenses; and higher occupancy expenses. the firm began expensing
stock options in 2003. restructuring costs
associated with initiatives announced
after january1, 2002, were recorded in
their relevant expense categories and
totaled $630million in 2003, down 29%
from 2002.
the 2003 provision for credit losses of
$1.5billion was down $2.8billion, or
64%, from 2002. the provision was lower
than total net charge-offs of $2.3
billion, reflecting significant
improvement in the quality of the
commercial loan portfolio. commercial
nonperforming assets and criticized
exposure levels declined 42% and 47%,
respectively, from december31, 2002.
consumer credit quality remained stable.
earnings per diluted share (eps) for
the year were $3.24, an increase of 305%
over the eps of $0.80 reported in 2002.
results in 2002 were provided on both a
reported basis and an operating basis,
which excluded merger and restructuring
costs and special items. operating eps in
2002 was $1.66. see page 28 of this
annual report for a reconciliation
between reported and operating eps.
summary of segment results
the firms wholesale businesses are known globally as
jpmorgan, and its national consumer and
middle market businesses are known as
chase. the wholesale businesses comprise
four segments: the investment bank (ib),
treasury & securities services (tss),
investment management & private banking
(impb) and jpmorgan partners (jpmp).
ib provides a full range of investment
banking and commercial banking products
and services, including advising on
corporate strategy and structure, capital
raising, risk management, and
market-making in cash securities and
derivative instruments in all major
capital markets. the three businesses
within tss provide debt servicing,
securities custody and related functions,
and treasury and cash management services
to corporations, financial institutions
and governments. the impb business
provides investment management services to
institutional investors, high net worth
individuals and retail customers and also
provides personalized advice and solutions
to wealthy individuals and families. jpmp,
the firms private equity business,
provides equity and mezzanine capital
financing to private companies. the firms
national consumer and middle market
businesses, which provide lending and
full-service banking to consumers and
small and middle market businesses,
comprise chase financial services (cfs).
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
segment results  operating basis (a)
operating revenue (loss)
operating earnings (losses)
year ended december 31,
change from
change from
return on allocated capital
(in millions, except ratios)
investment bank
$
14,440
%
$
3,685
%
%
%
treasury & securities services
3,992
(16
)
investment management &
private banking
2,878
jpmorgan partners
(190
)
(293
)
nm
nm
chase financial services
14,632
2,495
support units and corporate
(626
)
nm
nm
nm
jpmorgan chase
$
35,126
%
$
6,719
%
%
%
(a)
represents the reported results excluding the impact of credit card securitizations and, in 2002, merger and restructuring costs and special items.
the table above shows jpmorgan chases
segment results. these results reflect the
manner in which the firms financial
information is currently evaluated by
management and is presented on an
operating basis. prior-period segment
results have been adjusted to reflect
alignment of management accounting
policies or changes in organizational
structure among businesses.
ib reported record earnings of $3.7
billion for 2003, up 183% from 2002,
driven by strong growth in capital markets
revenues and equity underwriting fees,
coupled with a significant decline in
credit costs. the lowinterest-rate
environment, improvement in equity markets
and volatility in credit markets produced
increased client and portfolio management
revenue in fixed income and equities, as
well as strong returns in global treasury.
market-share gains in equity underwriting
contributed to the increase in investment
banking fees over 2002. ibs return on
allocated capital was 19% for the year.
tss earnings of $520million for the year
were down 16% compared with 2002. revenues
were $4.0billion for the full year, up 3%
from 2002. institutional trust services
and treasury services posted single-digit
revenue growth. investor services revenue
declined year-over-year but showed an
improving trend over the last four
consecutive quarters. return on allocated
capital for tss was 19% for the year.
impb increased earnings and assets under
supervision in 2003. earnings of $268
million for the full year were up 3% from
2002, reflecting an improved credit
portfolio, slightly higher revenues and
the benefits of managed expense growth.
the increase in revenues reflected the
acquisition of retirement plan services,
and increased average equity market
valuations in client portfolios and
brokerage activity, mostly offset by the
impact of institutional net outflows.
investment performance in core
institutional products improved, with all
major asset classes in u.s. institutional
fixed income and equities showing
above-benchmark results. return on
allocated capital was 5% for the year;
return on tangible allocated capital was
20%.
jpmp performance improved significantly,
with private equity gains of $27
million, compared with private equity
losses of $733million for 2002. results
for the direct investments portfolio
improved by $929million from 2002,
driven by realized gains on sales and
declining write-downs in the second half of 2003.
jpmp revenue
was impacted
in 2003 by losses on sales and writedowns
of private third-party fund
investments. jpmp decreased its operating
loss for the year by 64% compared with
2002.
cfs posted record earnings of $2.5
billion, driven by record results and
origination volumes at each of the
national credit businesses mortgage,
credit card and auto. record revenues for
cfs of $14.6billion were up 9% from 2002,
driven by record revenues in chase home
finance. despite significant deposit
growth, chase regional banking revenues
decreased due to deposit spread
compression. cfss return on allocated
capital was 28% for the year.
in 2003, jpmorgan chase revised its
internal management reporting policies to
allocate certain revenues, expenses and
tax-related items that had been recorded
within the corporate segment to the other
business segments. there was no impact on
the firms overall earnings.
for a discussion of the firms segment
results, see pages 2744 of this annual
report.
capital and liquidity management
jpmorgan chase increased capital during
2003. at december31, 2003, the firms
tier 1 capital was $43.2billion, $5.6
billion higher than at december31, 2002.
the tier 1 capital ratio of 8.5% was well
in excess of the minimum regulatory
guidelines, it was 8.2% at year-end 2002.
the firm maintained the quarterly dividend
of $0.34 per share on its common stock.
jpmorgan chase did not repurchase shares
of its common stock in 2003. management
expects to recommend to the board of
directors that the firm resume its share
repurchase program after the completion of
the pending merger with bank one
corporation (see business events below).
the firms liquidity management is
designed to ensure sufficient liquidity
resources to meet all its obligations,
both on- and offbalance sheet, in a wide
range of market environments. the firms
access to the unsecured funding markets
is dependent upon its credit rating.
during 2003, the firm maintained senior
debt ratings of aa-/aa3/a+ at jpmorgan
chase bank and a+/a1/a+ at the parent
holding company. upon the announcement of
the proposed merger with bank one
corporation, moodys and fitch placed the
firms ratings on review for an
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
upgrade, and s&p affirmed all of the
firms ratings. see business events
below.
risk management
the firm made substantial progress in
lowering its risk profile in 2003.
total commercial credit exposure, which
includes loans, derivative receivables,
lending-related commitments and other
assets, declined by $30.2billion, or 7%,
from december31, 2002. increased
financings in the public markets, reduced
loan demand and loan sales drove the
decline. in 2003, the firm implemented a
more stringent exposure-review process and
lower absolute exposure limits for
industry and single-name concentrations,
including investment-grade obligors. the
firm was also more active in managing
commercial credit by selling higher-risk
loans and commitments and entering into
single-name credit default swap hedges.
total consumer loans on a managed basis,
which includes both reported and
securitized loans, increased by $15.7
billion, or 10%, from december31, 2002.
the consumer portfolio is predominantly
u.s.-based. the largest component, 14
family residential mortgage loans, which
are primarily secured by first mortgages,
comprised 43% of the total consumer
portfolio at december31, 2003.
jpmps private equity portfolio declined
by 12% to $7.3billion at december31,
2003, from $8.2billion at december31,
2002. at year-end 2003, the portfolio was
diversified across industry sectors and
geographies  with a higher percentage
invested in more mature leveraged buyouts
and a lower percentage in venture
investments than at year-end 2002. the
carrying value of jpmps portfolio has
decreased year-over-year, consistent with
managements goal to reduce, over time,
the capital committed to private equity.
the firm uses several tools, both
statistical and nonstatistical, to measure
market risk, including value-at-risk
(var), risk identification for large
exposures (rifle), economic value stress
tests and net interest income stress
tests. the firm calculates var daily on
its trading and nontrading activities.
average trading var decreased for
full-year 2003. the year-end trading var
increased compared with year-end 2002 due
to higher var for equity activities. in
2003, trading losses exceeded var on only
one day, a result that is consistent with
the 99% confidence level.
average, maximum, and december31
nontrading var increased in 2003,
primarily due to the increase in market
volatility during the 2003 third quarter
and to the rise in interest rates in the
second half of 2003. there was an
additional day in 2003 in which losses
exceeded var; this was attributable to
certain positions in the mortgage banking
business.
the firm is also committed to maintaining
business practices of the highest quality.
the fiduciary risk committee is
responsible for overseeing that businesses
providing investment or risk management
products and services perform at the
appropriate standard in their
relationships with clients. in addition,
the policy review office oversees the
review of transactions with clients in
terms of appropriateness, ethical issues
and reputation risk, with
the goal that these transactions are
not used to mislead investors or
others.
during the year, the firm revised its
capital allocation methodologies for
credit, operational, business and private
equity risk. this resulted in the
reallocation of capital among the risk
categories and the business segments; the
reallocation did not result in a
significant change in the amount of total
capital allocated to the business segments
as a whole.
for a further discussion of risk
management and the capital allocation
methodology, see pages 45-74 of this
annual report.
business outlook
global economic conditions and financial
markets activity are expected to continue
to improve in 2004. while rising interest
rates may negatively affect the mortgage
and global treasury businesses; on the
positive side, gains in market share,
rising equity values and increased market
activity may benefit many of the firms
other businesses.
the firm expects to see a different mix of
earnings in 2004. ib is targeting higher
issuer and investor client revenue, but
securities gains and net interest income
may be lower. mortgage earnings are likely
to decline from the record set in 2003,
and growth in other retail businesses may
not be sufficient to offset the decline in
mortgage revenue. improved equity markets
and increased m&a activity may provide
increased exit opportunities in private
equity and could result in higher fees in
impb and in the custody business of tss.
commercial net charge-off ratios may be
lower, but credit costs may rise as the
reduction in the allowance for credit
losses slows. the firm expects stable
consumer net charge-off ratios in 2004.
business events
agreement to merge with bank one corporation
on january14, 2004, jpmorgan chase and
bank one corporation (bank one)
announced an agreement to merge. the
merger agreement, which has been approved
by the boards of directors of both
companies, provides for a stock-for-stock
merger in which 1.32 shares of jpmorgan
chase common stock will be exchanged, on a
tax-free basis, for each share of bank one
common stock.
the merged company, headquartered in new
york, will be known as j.p. morgan chase &
co. and will have combined assets of $1.1
trillion, a strong capital base, 2,300
branches in 17 states and top-tier
positions in retail banking and lending,
credit cards, investment banking, asset
management, private banking, treasury and
securities services, middle markets and
private equity. it is expected that cost
savings of $2.2billion (pre-tax) will be
achieved over a three-year period.
merger-related costs are expected to be $3
billion (pre-tax).
the merger is subject to approval by the
shareholders of both institutions as well
as u.s. federal and state and non-u.s.
regulatory authorities. it is expected to
be completed in mid-2004.
for further information concerning the
merger, see note 2 on page 87 of this
annual report.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
results of operations
this section discusses jpmorgan chases
results of operations on a reported basis.
the accompanying financial data conforms
with accounting principles generally
accepted in the united states of america
(gaap) and prevailing industry
practices. the section should be read in
conjunction with the consolidated
financial statements and notes to
consolidated financial statements
beginning on page 82 of this annual
report.
revenues
year ended december 31,
(in millions)
change
investment banking fees
$
2,890
$
2,763
%
trading revenue
4,427
2,675
fees and commissions
10,652
10,387
private equity gains (losses)
(746
)
nm
securities gains
1,446
1,563
(7
)
mortgage fees and related income
(10
)
other revenue
net interest income
12,337
11,526
total revenue
$
33,256
$
29,614
%
investment banking fees
investment banking fees of $2.9billion
rose 5% from 2002. for a discussion of
investment banking fees, which are
primarily recorded in ib, see ib segment
results on pages 2931 of this annual
report.
trading revenue
trading revenue in 2003 of $4.4billion
was up 65% from the prior year. fixed
income and equity capital markets
activities drove growth in both client and
portfolio management revenues. portfolio
management, in particular, was up
significantly from 2002 as a result of
gains in credit, foreign exchange and
equity derivatives activities. trading
revenue, on a reported basis, excludes the
impact of net interest income (nii)
related to ibs trading activities, which
is reported in nii. however, the firm
includes trading-related nii as part of
trading revenue for segment reporting
purposes to better assess the
profitability of ibs trading business.
for additional information on trading
revenue, see ib segment discussion on
pages 2931 of this annual report.
fees and commissions
fees and commissions of $10.7billion in
2003 rose 3% from the prior year as a
result of higher credit card servicing
fees associated with $5.8billion in
growth in average securitized credit card
receivables. also contributing to the
increase from 2002 were higher custody,
institutional trust and other
processing-related service fees. these
fees reflected the more favorable
environment for debt and equity
activities. for a table
showing the components of fees and
commissions, see note 4 on pages 8889
of this annual report.
for additional information on fees and
commissions, see the segment discussions
of tss for custody and institutional trust
service fees, impb for investment
management and service fees, and cfs for
consumer-related fees on pages 3233,
3435 and 3843, respectively, of this
annual report.
private equity gains (losses)
private equity gains of $33million in
2003 reflect significant improvement from
losses of $746million in 2002. for a
discussion of private equity gains
(losses), which are primarily recorded in
jpmp, see jpmp results on pages 3637.
securities gains
in 2003, securities gains of $1.4billion
declined 7% from the prior year. the
decline reflected lower gains realized
from the sale of government and agency
securities in ib and mortgage-backed
securities in chase home finance (chf),
driven by the increasing interest rate
environment beginning in the third quarter
of 2003. ib uses available-for-sale
investment securities to manage, in part,
the asset/liability exposures of the firm;
chf uses these instruments to economically
hedge the value of mortgage servicing
rights (msrs). for a further analysis of
securities gains, see ib and chf on pages
2931 and 3940, respectively, of this
annual report.
mortgage fees and related income
mortgage fees and related income of $892
million in 2003 declined 10% from 2002.
the decline reflects lower mortgage
servicing fees and lower revenues from msr
hedging activities; these were offset by
higher fees from origination and sales
activity and other fees derived from
volume and market-share growth. mortgage
fees and related income, on a reported
basis, excludes the impact of nii and
securities gains and losses related to
chase home finances mortgage banking
activities. for a further discussion of
mortgage-related revenue, see the segment
discussion for chase home finance on pages
3940 and note 4 on page 89 of this annual
report.
other revenue
other revenue of $579million in 2003 rose
26% from the prior year. the increase was
a result of $200million in gains from the
sale of securities acquired in loan
satisfactions (compared with $26million
in 2002), partly offset by lower net
results from corporate and bank-owned life
insurance policies. many other factors
contributed to the change from 2002,
including $73million of write-downs taken
in 2002 for several latin american
investments.
net interest income
nii of $12.3billion was 7% higher than
in 2002. the increase reflected the
positive impact of lower interest rates
on consumer loan originations and
related funding costs. average mortgage
loans in chf rose 32% to $74.1billion, and
average automobile loans and leases in chase auto finance
increased 32% to
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
$41.7 billion. nii was
reduced by a lower volume of commercial
loans and lower spreads on investment
securities. as a component of nii,
trading-related net interest income of
$2.1billion was up 13% from 2002 due to a
change in the composition of, and growth
in, trading assets.
the firms total average interest-earning
assets in 2003 were $590billion, up 6%
from the prior year. the net interest
yield on these assets, on a fully
taxable-equivalent basis, was 2.10%,
compared with 2.09% in the prior year.
noninterest expense
year ended december 31,
(in millions)
change
compensation expense
$
11,695
$
10,983
%
occupancy expense
1,912
1,606
technology and communications expense
2,844
2,554
other expense
5,137
5,111
surety settlement and litigation reserve
1,300
(92
)
merger and restructuring costs
1,210
nm
total noninterest expense
$
21,688
$
22,764
(5
)%
compensation expense
compensation expense in 2003 was 6% higher
than in the prior year. the increase
principally reflected higher
performance-related incentives, and higher
pension and other postretirement benefit
costs, primarily as a
result of changes in actuarial
assumptions. for a detailed discussion of
pension and other postretirement benefit
costs, see note 6 on pages 8993 of this
annual report. the increase pertaining to
incentives included $266million as a
result of adopting sfas 123, and $120
million from the reversal in 2002 of
previously accrued expenses for certain
forfeitable key employee stock awards, as
discussed in note 7 on pages 9395 of this
annual report. total compensation expense
declined as a result of the transfer,
beginning april1, 2003, of 2,800
employees to ibm in connection with a
technology outsourcing agreement. the total number of full-time
equivalent employees at december 31, 2003 was 93,453 compared with
94,335 at the prior year-end.
occupancy expense
occupancy expense of $1.9billion rose 19%
from 2002. the increase reflected costs of
additional leased space in midtown
manhattan and in the south and southwest
regions of the united states; higher real
estate taxes in new york city; and the
cost of enhanced safety measures. also
contributing to the increase were charges
for unoccupied excess real estate of $270
million; this compared with $120million
in 2002, mostly in the third quarter of
that year.
technology and communications expense
in 2003, technology and communications
expense was 11% above the prior-year
level. the increase was primarily due to a
shift in expenses: costs that were
previously associated with compensation
and other expenses shifted, upon the
commencement of the ibm outsourcing
agreement, to technology and
communications expense. also contributing
to the increase were higher costs related
to software amortization. for a further
discussion of the ibm outsourcing
agreement, see support units and corporate
on page 44 of this annual report.
other expense
other expense in 2003 rose slightly from
the prior year, reflecting higher outside
services. for a table showing the
components of other expense, see note 8
on page 96 of this annual report.
surety settlement and litigation reserve
the firm added $100million to the
enron-related litigation reserve in 2003
to supplement a $900million reserve
initially recorded in 2002. the 2002
reserve was established to cover
enron-related matters, as well as certain
other material litigation, proceedings and
investigations in which the firm is
involved. in addition, in 2002 the firm
recorded a charge of $400million for the
settlement of enron-related surety
litigation.
merger and restructuring costs
merger and restructuring costs related to
business restructurings announced after
january1, 2002, were recorded in their
relevant expense categories. in 2002,
merger and restructuring costs of $1.2
billion, for programs announced prior to
january1, 2002, were viewed by
management as nonoperating expenses or
special items. refer to note 8 on pages 9596 of this
annual report for a further discussion of
merger and restructuring costs and for a
summary, by expense category and business
segment, of costs incurred in 2003 and
2002 for programs announced after january
1, 2002.
provision for credit losses
the 2003 provision for credit losses was
$2.8billion lower than in 2002, primarily
reflecting continued improvement in the
quality of the commercial loan portfolio
and a higher volume of credit card
securitizations. for further information
about the provision for credit losses and
the firms management of credit risk, see
the discussions of net charge-offs
associated with the commercial and
consumer loan portfolios and the allowance
for credit losses, on pages 6365 of this annual report.
income tax expense
income tax expense was $3.3billion in
2003, compared with $856million in 2002.
the effective tax rate in 2003 was 33%,
compared with 34% in 2002. the tax rate
decline was principally attributable to
changes in the proportion of income
subject to state and local taxes.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
segment results
jpmorgan chases lines of business are
segmented based on the products and
services provided or the type of customer
serviced and reflect the manner in which
financial information is currently
evaluated by the firms management.
revenues and expenses directly associated
with each segment are included in
determining that segments results.
management accounting and other policies
exist to allocate those remaining expenses
that are not directly incurred by the
segments.
overview
the wholesale businesses of jpmorgan chase
are known globally as jpmorgan and
comprise the investment bank, treasury &
securities services, investment management
& private banking and jpmorgan partners.
the national consumer and middle market
businesses are known as chase and
collectively comprise chase financial
services.
basis of presentation
the firm prepares its consolidated
financial statements, which appear on
pages 8285 of this annual report, using
u.s. gaap and prevailing industry
practices. the financial statements are
presented on a reported basis, which
provides the reader with an understanding
of the firms results that can be
consistently tracked from year to year and
enables a comparison of the firms
performance with other companies u.s.
gaap financial statements.
in addition to analyzing the firms
results on a reported basis, management
looks at results on an operating basis,
which is a non-gaap financial measure, to
assess each of its lines of business and
to measure overall firm results against
targeted goals. the definition of
operating basis starts with the reported
u.s. gaap results and then excludes the
impact of credit card securitizations.
securitization does not change jpmorgan
chases reported versus operating net
income; however, it does affect the
classification of items in the
consolidated statement of income. for a
further discussion of credit card
securitizations, see chase cardmember
services on page 41 of this annual report.
prior to 2003, the firm excluded from its
operating results the impact of merger and
restructuring costs and special items, as
these transactions were viewed by
management as not part of the firms
normal daily business operations or
unusual in nature and, therefore, not
indicative of trends. to be considered a
special item, the nonrecurring gain or
loss had to be at least $75million or
more during 2002. commencing in 2003,
management determined that many of the
costs previously considered nonoperating
were to be deemed operating costs.
however, it is possible that in the
future, management may designate certain
material gains or losses incurred by the
firm to be special items.
the segment results also reflect
revenue- and expense-sharing agreements
between certain lines of business.
revenue and expenses attributed to
shared activities are recognized in each
line of business, and any double
counting is eliminated at the segment
level. these arrangements promote
cross-selling and management of shared
client expenses. they also ensure that
the contributions
of both businesses are fully recognized.
prior-period segment results have been
adjusted to reflect alignment of
management accounting policies or changes
in organizational structure among
businesses. restatements of segment
results may occur in the future.
see note 34 on pages 126-127 of this
annual report for further information
about jpmorgan chases five business
segments.
capital allocation
the firm allocates capital to its business
units utilizing a risk-adjusted
methodology, which quantifies credit,
market, operational and business risks
within each business and additionally, for
jpmp, private equity risk. for a
discussion of those risks, see the risk
management sections on pages 4574 of this
annual report. the firm allocates
additional capital to its businesses
incorporating an asset capital tax on
managed assets and some offbalance sheet
instruments. in addition, businesses are
allocated capital equal to 100% of
goodwill and 50% for certain
jpmorgan is the brand name.jpmorgan chasechase is the brand
name.investment treasury &investmentjpmorgan chase financial banksecurities
management &partnersservices servicesprivate bankingproduct
type:businesses:businesses:business:businesses:advisory institutional trust
investment private equity home financedebt and
equityservicesmanagementinvestments cardmember services underwriting investor
services private bankingauto financemarket-making, treasury services
regional banking trading and investing: middle market  fixed income -
treasury  equitiescorporate lending
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the accompanying summary table provides a reconciliation between the firms
reported and operating results.
year ended december 31,
reported
credit
operating
reported
credit
special
operating
(in millions, except per share data and ratios)
results(a)
card(b)
basis
results(a)
card(b)
items(c)
basis
consolidated income statement
total revenue
$
33,256
$
1,870
$
35,126
$
29,614
$
1,439
$
$
31,053
noninterest expense:
compensation expense (d)
11,695
11,695
10,983
10,983
noncompensation expense (d)
9,993
9,993
10,571
(1,398
)
9,173
merger and restructuring costs
1,210
(1,210
)
total noninterest expense
21,688
21,688
22,764
(2,608
)
20,156
provision for credit losses
1,540
1,870
3,410
(e)
4,331
1,439
5,770
(e)
income before income tax expense
10,028
10,028
2,519
2,608
5,127
income tax expense
3,309
3,309
1,743
net income
$
6,719
$
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
$
1,721
$
3,384
earnings per share  diluted
$
3.24
$
$
3.24
$
0.80
$
$
0.86
$
1.66
return on average common equity (f)
%
%
%
%
(a)
represents condensed results as reported in jpmorgan chases financial
statements.
(b)
represents the impact of credit card securitizations. for securitized
receivables, amounts that normally would be reported as net interest income and
as provision for credit losses are reported as noninterest revenue.
(c)
there were no special items in 2003. for 2002, includes merger and
restructuring costs. for a description of special items, see glossary of terms
on page 131 of this annual report.
(d)
compensation
expense includes $294million and $746million of severance
and related costs at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. noncompensation
expense includes $336million and $144million of severance and related costs
at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
(e)
represents credit costs, which is composed of the provision for
credit losses as well as the credit costs associated with securitized
credit card loans.
(f)
reflects the return on average common equity as
it relates to the firm. return on allocated capital is a similar
metric used by the business segments.
other intangibles generated through
acquisitions. the firm estimates the
portfolio effect on required economic
capital based on correlations of risk
across risk categories. this estimated
diversification benefit is not allocated
to the business segments.
performance measurement
the firm uses the shareholder value added
(sva) framework to measure the
performance of its business segments. to
derive sva, a non-gaap financial measure,
for its business segments, the firm
applies a 12% (after-tax) cost of capital
to each segment, except jpmp  this
business is charged a 15% (after-tax) cost
of capital. the capital elements and
resultant capital charges provide each
business with the financial framework to
evaluate the trade-off between using
capital versus its return to sharehold-
ers. capital charges are an integral part
of the sva measurement for each business.
under the firms model, economic capital
is either underallocated or overallocated
to the business segments, as compared with
the firms total common stockholders
equity. the revenue and sva impact of this over/under
allocation is reported under support units
and corporate. see glossary of terms on
page 131 of this annual report for a
definition of sva and page 44 of this
annual report for more details.
jpmorgan chases lines of business
utilize individual performance metrics
unique to the respective businesses to
measure their results versus those of
their peers. for a further discussion of
these metrics, see each respective
line-of-business discussion in this
annual report.
contribution of businesses
in 2003
operating revenue (loss)consumer 42%wholesale and other 58%consumer
includes:wholesale and other includes:chase home finance12% investment bank41%
chase cardmember services 18% treasury & securities services 12% chase auto
finance2% investment management & private banking8% chase regional banking7%
chase middle market4% jpmorgan partners(1)% other consumer services(1)% support
units and corporate (2)%
operating earnings (losses)
consumer 37%wholesale and other 63%consumer includes:wholesale and other
includes:chase home finance20% investment bank55% chase cardmember services 10%
treasury & securities services 8% chase auto finance3%
investment management & private banking4% chase regional banking1% chase middle market5% jpmorgan
partners(4)% other consumer services(2)% support units and corporate %
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
investment bank
jpmorgan chase is one of the worlds
leading investment banks, as evidenced by
the breadth of its client relationships
and product capabilities. the investment
bank has extensive relationships with
corporations, financial institutions,
governments and institutional investors
worldwide. the firm provides a full range
of investment banking and commercial
banking products and services, including
advising on corporate strategy and
structure, capital raising in equity and
debt markets, sophisticated risk
management, and market-making in cash
securities and derivative instruments in
all major capital markets. the investment
bank also commits the firms own capital
to proprietary investing and trading
activities.
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
and employees)
change
operating revenue:
investment banking fees
$
2,855
$
2,696
%
capital markets and
lending revenue:
trading-related revenue(a)
6,418
4,479
net interest income
2,277
2,642
(14
)
fees and commissions
1,646
1,619
securities gains
1,065
1,076
(1
)
all other revenue
(14
)
nm
total capital markets and
lending revenue
11,585
9,802
total operating revenue
14,440
12,498
operating expense:
compensation expense
4,527
3,974
noncompensation expense
3,596
3,451
severance and related costs
(41
)
total operating expense
8,470
8,012
operating margin
5,970
4,486
credit costs
(181
)
2,393
nm
corporate credit allocation
(36
)
(82
)
operating earnings
$
3,685
$
1,303
shareholder value added:
operating earnings less preferred
dividends
$
3,663
$
1,281
less: cost of capital
2,295
2,390
(4
)
shareholder value added
$
1,368
$
(1,109
)
nm
average allocated capital
$
19,134
$
19,915
(4
)
average assets
510,894
495,464
return on allocated capital
%
%
1,300
bp
overhead ratio
(500
)
compensation as % of revenue(b)
(100
)
full-time equivalent employees
14,772
15,145
(2
)%
(a)
includes net interest income of $2.1
billion and $1.9billion in 2003 and 2002,
respectively.
(b)
excludes severance and
related costs.
operating revenue operating earnings
(in millions)(in millions, except ratios)return on allocated capital
financial results overview
the 2003 performance of ib was positively
influenced by a low interest-rate
environment, a more favorable equities
market and an improving credit market,
partially offset by continued weakness in
m&a activity.
in 2003, ib reported record operating
earnings of $3.7billion, an increase of
183% compared with 2002. revenue growth of
16% far outpaced expense growth of 6%.
credit costs were negative $181million in
2003, compared with $2.4billion in 2002.
return on allocated capital for the year was
19%.
operating revenue of $14.4billion
consisted of investment banking fees for
advisory and underwriting services; capital
markets revenue related to market-making,
trading and investing; and revenue from
corporate lending activities.
year ended december 31,
(in millions)
change
investment banking fees
advisory
$
$
(14
)%
equity underwriting
debt underwriting
1,518
1,483
total
$
2,855
$
2,696
%
investment banking fees of $2.9billion
were up 6%. while advisory fees declined by
14%, reflecting depressed levels of m&a
activity, debt underwriting fees were up
2%. this 2% increase is primarily due to
growth in high yield underwriting and
structured finance fees and reflects a
partial offset of lower loan syndication
fees. the key contributor to the overall
increase in ib fees was equity underwriting
revenue, which was up 48%, reflecting
increases in market share and underwriting
volumes.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
market shares and rankings(a)
december 31,
market share
ranking
market share
ranking
global syndicated loans
%
#1
%
#1
global investment-grade bonds
#2
#2
euro-denominated corporate
international bonds
#6
#4
global equity & equity-related
#4
#8
u.s. equity & equity-related
#4
#6
global announced m&a
#5
#5
(a)
derived from thomson financial
securities data, which reflects subsequent updates to prior-period
information. global announced m&a
based on rank value; all others based on
proceeds, with full credit to each book
manager/equal if joint. because of joint
assignments, market share of all
participants will add up to more than
100%.
the firm improved its ranking in global
equity and equity-related underwriting to
no.4 from no.8 in 2002. it also
maintained its no.2 ranking in
underwriting global investment-grade
bonds, its no.1 ranking in global loan
syndications and its no.5 ranking in
global announced m&a.
capital markets revenue includes trading
revenue, fees and commissions, securities
gains, related net interest income and
other revenue. these activities are
managed on a total-return revenue basis,
which includes operating revenue plus the
change in unrealized gains or losses on
investment securities and hedges (included
in other comprehensive income) and
internally transfer-priced assets and
liabilities. capital markets revenue
includes client and portfolio management
revenues. portfolio management reflects
net gains or losses from ibs proprietary
trading and revenue from risk positions in
client-related market-making activities.
capital markets and lending total-return
revenue of $11.6billion was up 22% from
last year due to strong client and
portfolio management revenue. excluding
global treasury, capital markets and
lending total-return revenue was $9.9
billion, up 25% from the prior year.
fixed income revenue of $7.0billion was
up 28% from last year. the increase was
driven by strong client driven activity in
european and emerging markets, as well as
increased portfolio management revenue in
credit and foreign exchange markets.
global treasury reported record revenue of
$1.7billion, up 11%
reconciliation of capital markets and lending operating revenue to total-return revenue
trading-related
fees and
securities
nii and
total operating
total-return
year ended december 31, 2003 (in millions)
revenue
commissions
gains
other
revenue
revenue(a)
fixed income
$
5,991
$
$
$
$
6,939
$
7,001
global treasury
1,002
1,726
1,684
credit portfolio
(185
)
1,237
1,421
1,421
equities
1,499
1,499
total
$
6,418
$
1,646
$
1,065
$
2,456
$
11,585
$
11,605
year ended december31, 2002 (in millions)
fixed income
$
4,589
$
$
$
$
5,487
$
5,466
global treasury
1,061
1,815
1,513
credit portfolio
(143
)
1,288
1,506
1,506
equities
total
$
4,479
$
1,619
$
1,076
$
2,628
$
9,802
$
9,479
(a)
total-return revenue, a non-gaap financial measure, represents operating
revenue plus the change in unrealized gains or losses on investment securities
and hedges (included in other comprehensive income) and internally
transfer-priced assets and liabilities.
ibs capital markets and lending activities are comprised of the following:
fixed income includes client and portfolio
management revenue related to both
market-making and proprietary risk-taking
across global fixed income markets,
including government and corporate debt,
foreign exchange, interest rate and
commodities markets.
global treasury manages the overall
interest rate exposure and investment
securities portfolio of the firm. it
creates strategic balance by providing a
diversification benefit to the firms
trading, lending and fee-based activities.
credit portfolio revenue includes net
interest income, fees and loan sale
activity for ibs commercial credit
portfolio. credit portfolio revenue also
includes gains or losses on securities
received as
part of a loan restructuring, and changes
in the credit valuation adjustment
(cva), which is the component of the
fair value of a derivative that reflects
the credit quality of the counterparty.
see page 59 of the credit risk management
section of this annual report for a
further discussion of the cva. credit
portfolio revenue also includes the
results of single-name and portfolio
hedging arising from the firms lending
and derivative activities. see pages 6061
of the credit risk management section of
this annual report for a further
discussion on credit derivatives.
equities includes client and portfolio
management revenue related to
market-making and proprietary risk-taking
across global equity products, including
cash instruments, derivatives and
convertibles.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
from last year, driven by positioning to
benefit from interest rate movements and
mortgage basis volatility. credit
portfolio revenue of $1.4billion was down
6% the result of tightening of credit
spreads in the second quarter of 2003, as
well as lower nii, which reflected lower
levels of commercial loans. equities
revenue of $1.5billion was up 51% from
last year due to higher client activity
and portfolio management results in
derivatives and convertibles.
operating expense increased 6% from 2002,
reflecting higher incentives related to
improved financial performance and the
impact of expensing stock options.
noncompensation costs were up 4% from the
prior year due to increases in technology
and occupancy costs. severance and related
costs of $347million were down 41%. the
overhead ratio for 2003 was 59%, compared
with 64% in 2002.
credit costs were negative $181million,
$2.6billion lower than in the prior year,
reflecting improvement in the overall
credit quality of the commercial portfolio
and the restructuring of several
nonperforming commercial loans.
corporate credit allocation
in 2003, ib assigned to tss pre-tax
earnings and allocated capital associated
with clients shared with tss. prior
periods have been revised to reflect this
allocation. the impact to ib of this
change decreased pre-tax operating
results by $36million and
client and nonclient revenue
year ended december 31,
(in millions)
change
client revenue:
investment banking fees
$
2,855
$
2,696
%
capital markets revenue:
trading revenue
4,485
3,840
other capital markets revenue
2,904
2,875
total client revenue
10,244
9,411
nonclient revenue:
treasury revenue
1,726
1,815
(5
)
portfolio management revenue
2,470
1,272
total
nonclient revenue
4,196
3,087
operating revenue
$
14,440
$
12,498
%
average allocated capital by $712million,
and it increased shareholder value added
by $65million.
business outlook
in 2004, the composition of ibs revenues
is expected to change. growth in
client-related revenue may be offset by
potentially lower securities gains and nii. nii may be lower
due to decreased spreads on investment
securities and lower loan volumes. the ib credit
outlook is stable, although credit costs
may be higher than the unusually low
levels seen in 2003.
ib dimensions of 2003 revenue diversification
by business revenueby client segment by geographic regionfixed income capital
markets 48%financial institutions 54%north america 56% treasury 12%diversified
industries 12% europe/middle east debt underwriting 11%31% tmt 11%and africa
equity capital markets 10% natural resources 8% credit portfolio
10%asia/pacific 8% equity underwriting 5%governments 7% advisory
4%consumer/healthcare 5%latin america 5% real estate 3%
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
treasury & securities services
treasury & securities services, a global
leader in transaction processing and
information services to wholesale clients,
is composed of three businesses.
institutional trust services provides a
range of services to debt and equity
issuers and broker-dealers, from
traditional trustee and paying-agent
functions to global securities clearance.
investor services provides securities
custody and related functions, such as
securities lending, investment analytics
and reporting, to mutual funds, investment
managers, pension funds, insurance
companies and banks worldwide. treasury
services provides treasury and cash
management, as well as payment, liquidity
management and trade finance services, to
a diversified global client base of
corporations, financial institutions and
governments.
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
and employees)
change
operating revenue:
fees and commissions
$
2,562
$
2,412
%
net interest income
1,219
1,224
all other revenue
(18
)
total operating revenue
3,992
3,892
operating expense:
compensation expense
1,261
1,163
noncompensation expense
1,895
1,814
severance and related costs
total operating expense
3,217
2,994
operating margin
(14
)
credit costs
corporate credit allocation
(56
)
operating earnings
$
$
(16
)
shareholder value added:
operating earnings
less preferred dividends
$
$
(16
)
less: cost of capital
shareholder value added
$
$
(35
)
average allocated capital
$
2,711
$
2,688
average assets
18,993
17,780
return on allocated capital
%
%
(400
)bp
overhead ratio
assets under custody (in billions)
$
7,597
$
6,336
%
full-time equivalent employees
14,616
14,440
financial results overview
treasury & securities services (tss)
operating earnings decreased by 16% from
2002 while delivering a return on
allocated capital of 19%. increased
operating expense of 7% and a lower
corporate credit allocation contributed to
the lower earnings.
operating revenue increased by 3%, with
growth at institutional trust services
(its) of 7%. its revenue growth came
from debt
product lines, increased volume in asset
servicing and the result of acquisitions
which generated $29million of new revenue
in 2003. treasury services revenue rose
6% on higher trade and commercial payment
card revenue and increased balance-related
earnings, including higher balance
deficiency fees resulting from the lower
interest rate environment. investor
services revenue contracted 4%, the
result of lower nii due to lower interest
rates, coupled with lower foreign exchange
and securities lending revenue.
tss results included a pre-tax gain of
$41million on the sale of a nonstrategic
business in 2003, compared with a pre-tax
gain of $50million on the sale of the
firms interest in a non-u.s. securities
clearing firm in 2002.
operating expense increased by 7%,
attributable to higher severance, the
impact of acquisitions, the cost
associated with expensing of options,
increased pension costs and charges to
provide for losses on subletting unoccupied excess real estate. the
overhead ratio for tss was 81%, compared
with 77% in 2002.
operating revenueoperating earnings(in millions)(in millions, except
ratios)return on allocated capital
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
tss dimensions of 2003 revenue diversification
by business revenuesby client segmentby geographic region(a)nonbank
financialthe americas 64% treasury services 40% institutions 44% investor
services 36%large corporations 21% europe, middle east, banks 11%
institutional trust services 23% & africa 27% middle market 18% public
sector/governments 6%asia 9% other 1%
(a)includes the elimination of revenue related to shared activities with chase
middle market in the amount of $347million.
corporate credit allocation
in 2003, tss was assigned a corporate
credit allocation of pre-tax earnings and
the associated capital related to certain
credit exposures managed within ibs
credit portfolio on behalf of clients
shared with tss. prior periods have been
revised to reflect this allocation. for
2003, the impact to tss of this change
increased pre-tax operating results by $36
million and average allocated capital by
$712million, and it decreased sva by $65
million. pre-tax operating results were
$46million lower than in 2002, reflecting
lower loan volumes and higher related
expenses, slightly offset by a decrease in
credit costs.
business outlook
tss revenue in 2004 is expected to benefit
from improved global equity markets and
from two recent acquisitions: the november
2003 acquisition of the bank one corporate
trust portfolio, and the january2004
acquisition of citigroups electronic
funds services business. tss also expects
higher costs as it integrates these
acquisitions and continues strategic
investments to support business expansion.
year ended december 31,
operating revenue
(in millions)
change
treasury services
$
1,927
$
1,818
%
investor services
1,449
1,513
(4
)
institutional trust services(a)
other(a)(b)
(312
)
(303
)
(3
)
total treasury & securities services
$
3,992
$
3,892
%
(a)
includes a portion of the $41
million gain on sale of a nonstrategic
business in 2003: $1million in
institutional trust services and $40
million in other.
(b)
includes the elimination of revenues
related to shared activities with chase
middle market, and a $50million gain on
sale of a non-u.s. securities clearing
firm in 2002.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
investment management & private banking
investment management & private banking
provides investment management services
to institutional investors, high net
worth individuals and retail customers,
and it provides personalized advice and
solutions to wealthy individuals and
families.
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
and employees)
change
operating revenue:
fees and commissions
$
2,207
$
2,176
%
net interest income
all other revenue
(6
)
total operating revenue
2,878
2,839
operating expense:
compensation expense
1,193
1,125
noncompensation expense
1,235
1,221
total operating expense
2,428
2,346
credit costs
(59
)
pre-tax margin
operating earnings
$
$
shareholder value added:
operating earnings
less preferred dividends
$
$
less: cost of capital
(3
)
shareholder value added
$
(394
)
$
(423
)
tangible
shareholder value added(a)
$
$
average allocated capital
5,454
5,643
(3
)
average assets
33,685
35,729
(6
)
return on
tangible allocated capital(a)
%
%
bp
return on allocated capital
overhead ratio
pre-tax margin ratio(b)
full-time equivalent employees
7,756
7,827
(1
)%
(a)
the firm uses
tangible shareholder value added and
return on tangible allocated capital as additional measures of the economics of
the impb business segment. to derive these measures, the impact of goodwill is excluded.
(b)
measures the percentage of operating earnings before taxes to total
operating revenue.
financial results overview
investment management & private banking
(impb) operating earnings are influenced
by numerous factors, including equity,
fixed income and other asset valuations;
investor flows and activity levels;
investment performance; and expense and
risk management. global economic
conditions rebounded in 2003, as corporate
earnings improved and the credit
environment strengthened. during 2003,
global equity markets rose (as exemplified
by the s&p 500 index, which rose by 26%,
and the msci world index, which rose by
31%), and investor activity levels increased across impbs retail and private
bank client bases,
particularly during the second half of the
year. this global equity market recovery,
on a year-over-year basis, brought 2003s
average annual market levels broadly back
in line with 2002s average. investment
performance in core institutional products
improved with all major asset classes,
with u.s. institutional fixed income and
equities markets showing above-benchmark
results.
impbs operating earnings were 3% higher
than in the prior year, reflecting an
improved credit portfolio, the benefits of
slightly higher revenues and managed
expense growth. quarterly earnings
increased sequentially during the year.
during the second quarter of 2003, the
firm acquired american century retirement
plan services inc., a provider of defined
contribution recordkeeping services, as
part of its strategy to grow its u.s.
retail investment management business. the
business was renamed jpmorgan retirement
plan services (rps). return on tangible
allocated capital was 20%.
operating revenueoperating earnings(in millions)(in millions, except
ratios)$400 $4,000$300$358 $3,000 $3,189$268 $2,878$200$261 $2,000$2,839
$1,000$100$00102 0301 02 03 return on22% 18% 20% tangible allocated capital
operating revenue of $2.9billion was 1%
higher than in the prior year. the
increase was driven by higher fees and
commissions and net interest income. the
growth in fees and commissions reflected
the acquisition of rps and increased
average equity market valuations in client
portfolios, partly offset by institutional
net outflows. the growth in net interest
income reflected higher brokerage account
balances and spreads. the decline in all
other revenue primarily reflected
nonrecurring items in 2002.
operating expense increased by 3%,
reflecting the acquisition of rps, higher
compensation expense, and real estate and
software write-offs, partly offset by the
continued impact of expense management
programs.
the 59% decrease in credit costs
reflected the improvement in the quality
of the credit portfolio and recoveries.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
impb dimensions of 2003 revenue diversification
by product by client segment by geographic regionamericas 63% banking 18%retail
28% asia/pacific 11%brokerage 11%private bank 50%investment management/
europe, middle east, fiduciary 71%institutional 22% & africa 26%
assets under supervision (aus) at
december31, 2003, were $758billion, an
increase of 18% from the prior year-end.
assets under management (aum) increased
by 9% to $559billion, and custody,
brokerage, administration and deposit
accounts increased by 54% to $199billion.
the increase in aum was driven by higher
average equity market valuations in client
portfolios, partly offset by institutional
net outflows. custody, brokerage,
administration and deposits grew by $70
billion, driven by the acquisition of rps
($41billion), higher average equity
market valuations in client portfolios,
and net inflows from private bank clients.
the diversification of aus across product
classes, client segments and geographic
regions helped to mitigate the impact of
market volatility on revenue. the firm
also has a 44% interest in american
century companies, inc., whose aum totaled
$87billion and $72billion at december
31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. these
amounts are not included in the firms aum
total above.
business outlook
looking forward to 2004, impb believes it
is well positioned for a continued global
market recovery. improved investment
performance and the continued execution
of the private bank and retail investment
management strategies are expected to
drive operating earnings growth.
assets under supervision (a)
at december 31, (in billions)
change
asset
class:
liquidity
$
$
%
fixed income
(3
)
equities and other
assets under management
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
total assets under supervision
$
$
%
client segment:
retail
assets under management
$
$
%
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
private bank
assets under management
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
institutional
assets under management
total assets under supervision
$
$
%
geographic region:
americas
assets under management
$
$
(1
)%
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
europe, middle east & africa and asia/pacific
assets under management
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
total assets under supervision
$
$
%
(a)
excludes aum of american century companies, inc.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
jpmorgan partners
jpmorgan partners, the global private
equity organization of jpmorgan chase,
provides equity and mezzanine capital
financing to private companies. it is a
diversified investor, investing in
buyouts and in growth equity and venture
opportunities across a variety of
industry sectors, with the objective of
creating long-term value for the firm and
third-party investors.
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
and employees)
change
operating revenue:
private equity gains (losses):
direct investments
$
$
(583
)
$
private third-party fund investments
(319
)
(150
)
(169
)
total private equity gains (losses)
(733
)
net interest income (loss)
(264
)
(302
)
fees and other revenue
(12
)
total operating revenue
(190
)
(976
)
operating expense:
compensation expense
noncompensation expense
(31
)
total operating expense
(24
)
operating margin
(465
)
(1,275
)
operating losses
$
(293
)
$
(808
)
shareholder value added:
operating earnings
less preferred dividends
$
(300
)
$
(815
)
less: cost of capital
(75
)
shareholder value added
$
(1,169
)
$
(1,759
)
average allocated capital
$
5,789
$
6,293
(8
)%
average assets
8,818
9,677
(9
)
full-time equivalent employees
(11
)
financial results overview
jpmorgan partners (jpmp) recognized
negative operating revenue of $190million
and operating losses of $293million in
2003. opportunities to realize value
through sales, recapitalizations and
initial public offerings (ipos) of
investments, although limited, improved
during the year as the m&a and ipo markets
started to recover.
private equity gains totaled $27million
in 2003, compared with a loss of $733
million in 2002. jpmp recognized gains of
$346million on direct investments and
losses of $319million on sales and
writedowns of private third-party fund
investments.
realized cash gains on direct investments
of $535million increased 18% from the
previous year. realized cash gains were
recognized across all industries but were
primarily realized from the industrial
and consumer retail and services sectors.
in addition, jpmp recorded unrealized
gains of $215million
from
the mark-to-market
(mtm) value of its public
portfolio, primarily in the healthcare infrastructure,
technology and telecommunications
sectors.
jpmps unrealized and realized gains were
partially offset by net write-offs
(realized losses) and write-downs
(unrealized losses) on the direct
portfolio of $404million. these
write-downs and write-offs included $239
million from the technology and
telecommunications sectors.
private equity gains (losses)
year ended december 31,
(in millions)
change
direct
investments:
realized cash gains
$
$
$
write-ups/(write-downs/
write-offs)
(404
)
(825
)
mtm gains (losses)(a)
(210
)
total direct investments
(583
)
private third-party fund
investments
(319
)
(150
)
(169
)
total private equity gains (losses)
$
$
(733
)
(a)
includes mark-to-market gains
(losses)and reversals of mark-to-market
gains (losses)due to public securities
sales.
investment pace, portfolio
diversification and capital under
management
in 2003, increased emphasis was placed on
leveraged buyouts and growth equity
opportunities. jpmps direct investments
for the firms account in 2003 were $773
million, a 19% decline from the prior
year. approximately 67% of direct
investments were in the industrial,
consumer retail and services, life
sciences and healthcare infrastructure
sectors.
jpmp reduced the size of the portfolio by
12%, largely the result of sales of
third-party fund investments, which
declined by $744million.
at december31, 2003, the carrying value
of jpmps public securities portfolio was
$643million, a 24% increase from 2002.
the increase resulted from higher market
valuations and from ipos of certain
portfolio investments, partially offset by
ongoing sales activity.
business outlook
the firm continues to regard jpmp as a
strategic business that will create value
over the long term. jpmp is seeking to sell
selected investments that
are not central to its portfolio strategy, with
the goal that, over time, jpmps private
equity portfolio will represent a lower
percentage of the firms common
stockholders equity.
jpmps private equity portfolio and
financial performance are sensitive to the
level of m&a, ipo and debt financing
activity. improved markets in 2004 could
provide increased exit opportunities and
improved financial performance.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
jpmp investment portfolio
december 31, (in millions)
carrying value
cost
carrying value
cost
direct
investments:
public securities (51 companies)(a)(b)
$
$
$
$
private direct securities (822 companies)(b)
5,508
6,960
5,865
7,316
private third-party fund investments
(252 funds)(b)(c)
1,099
1,736
1,843
2,333
total investment portfolio
$
7,250
$
9,147
$
8,228
$
10,312
% of portfolio to the firms common
equity(d)
%
%
(a)
the quoted public values were $994million and $761million at december31,
2003 and 2002, respectively.
(b)
represents the
number of companies and funds at december31, 2003.
(c)
unfunded commitments to private equity funds were $1.3billion and $2.0
billion at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
(d)
for purposes of calculating this ratio, the
carrying value excludes the
postdecember31, 2002 impact of public mtm valuation adjustments, and the
firms common equity excludes sfas 115 equity balances.
jpmps diversified investment portfolio (% of carrying value)
direct investment portfolio bydirect investment portfolio by geographic region
at december31, 2003investment stage at december31, 2003north america
75%buyout 41% europe, middle east & africa 17%growth equity 37%latin america
5%asia/pacific 3%venture 22%total investment portfolio by industry at december
31,20032002real estate 3%real estate 5%media 4%industrial 28%media 3%industrial
27% life sciences 4% life sciences 2% healthcare infrastructure 6%healthcare
infrastructure 6% consumer retailfinancial services 8%consumer retail financial
services 11% & services 15%& services 12% technology 10% technology 9% funds
15%funds 22% telecommunications 5% telecommunications 5%industrial
includes:industrial includes:packaging 6% packaging 6% general manufacturing
6%general manufacturing 6% industrial services 5% industrial services 4%
automotive 3% distribution 3% other 8%other 8%
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
chase financial services
chase financial services is a major
provider of banking, investment and
financing products and services to
consumers and small and middle market
businesses throughout the united states.
the majority of its revenues and earnings
are produced by its national consumer
credit businesses, chase home finance,
chase cardmember services and chase auto
finance. it also serves as a full-service
bank for consumers and small- and
medium-sized businesses through chase
regional banking and chase middle market.
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except ratios
and employees)
change
operating revenue:
net interest income
$
9,620
$
8,225
%
fees and commissions
3,561
3,489
securities gains
(23
)
mortgage fees and related income
(10
)
all other revenue
(23
)
total operating revenue
14,632
13,426
operating expense:
compensation expense
2,870
2,536
noncompensation expense
4,299
3,943
severance and related costs
(4
)
total operating expense
7,264
6,578
operating margin
7,368
6,848
credit costs
3,431
3,159
operating earnings
$
2,495
$
2,320
shareholder value added:
operating earnings
less preferred dividends
$
2,484
$
2,310
less: cost of capital
1,050
1,034
shareholder value added
$
1,434
$
1,276
average allocated capital
$
8,750
$
8,612
average managed loans(a)
185,761
155,926
average managed assets(a)
215,216
179,635
average deposits
109,802
97,464
return on allocated capital
%
%
bp
overhead ratio
full-time equivalent employees
46,155
43,543
%
(a)
includes credit card receivables that have been securitized.
financial results overview
chase financial services (cfs) operating
earnings are affected by numerous factors,
including u.s. economic conditions, the
volatility and level of interest rates,
and competition in its various product
lines. in response to the continuing
lowinterest rate environment and
competition in the marketplace, in 2003,
cfs focused its efforts on growing or
maintaining market share in its various
businesses, enhancing its online banking
capabilities,
disciplined expense management and
maintaining the credit quality of its loan
portfolios. as a result of
these efforts, 2003 cfs operating
earnings were a record $2.5billion, an
increase of 8% from 2002. return on
allocated capital was 28%, up from 27% in
2002. shareholder value added increased
by 12%.
operating revenue was $14.6billion in
2003, an increase of 9% over 2002. net
interest income increased 17% to $9.6
billion, reflecting the positive impact of
the lower interest rate environment on
consumer loan originations, particularly
in chase home finance (chf), and lower
funding costs. the increase was partly
offset by reduced spreads on deposits. chf
revenue increased by 38% over the prior
year, driven by strong operating revenue
(which excludes msr hedging revenue) and,
to a lesser extent, higher msr hedging
revenue. chase cardmember services (ccs)
revenue increased by 4%, the result of
lower funding costs, growth in average
receivables and higher interchange fees
earned on customer purchases. chase auto
finance (caf) revenue grew 23%, driven
by record originations of almost $28
billion and lower funding costs. chase
regional banking (crb) and chase middle
market (cmm) revenues decreased 9% and
1%, respectively, as a result of lower
deposit spreads from lower interest rates,
partly offset by the effect of
significantly higher deposit volumes
compared with 2002.
operating expense rose 10% to $7.3
billion. the increase in expense reflects
higher business volume and higher
compensation costs. partially offsetting
higher expenses were savings achieved
through six sigma and other productivity
efforts. the overhead ratio increased
slightly compared with a year ago.
credit costs on a managed basis (which
includes securitized credit cards) of $3.4
billion increased by 9% compared with the
prior year. while credit quality remained
stable in 2003, net charge-offs increased
by 2%. the increase in 2003 net
charge-offs was driven by a 19% increase
in average managed loans. for a further
discussion of the consumer credit
portfolio, see credit risk on pages 6162
of this annual report.
chase online enrollees reached 5.2
million, an increase of more than 50%
from year-end 2002. total online payment
transactions increased by 42% to more
than 27million.
operating revenueoperating earnings(in millions)(in millions, except
ratios)$2500 $15,000 $2000$2,495 $12,000$13,426$14,632$2,320 $9,000$10,828$1500
$6,000$1000$1,414 $3,000$500$0$00102 0301 02 03 return on 18% 27% 28% allocated
capital
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
cfss online offerings ended the year ranked no.
3 in credit card and no.6 in banking by
gmez scorecards, a service which
measures the quality of online financial
services offerings. ccs accounts sourced
from the internet channel reached 16% of
new account originations and represented
5% of the active account base in 2003. in
crb, several enhancements to consumer
online offerings  including check
imaging, statement imaging and banking
alerts  resulted in significant
activation of online capabilities by
customers. chf continued its emphasis on
providing online capabilities to its
business-to-business partners and
increased its direct-to-consumer web usage
by more than
100%. in caf, online application
processing reached 95% dealer penetration,
while consumer adoption of chases online
automobile offerings continued to grow.
business outlook
in 2004, cfs anticipates operating revenue
and earnings will be lower, primarily due
to a decrease in production revenue in
chf, as refinancing activity declines from
the record levels set in 2003. while cfs
expects the other retail businesses to
report modest revenue growth and improved
efficiencies, this growth may not offset
the lower mortgage earnings.
chase financial services business results
year ended december 31,
home
cardmember
auto
regional
middle
other
(in millions)
finance
services
finance
banking
market
consumer services(a)
total
operating revenue
$
4,030
$
6,162
$
$
2,576
$
1,430
$
(408
)
$
14,632
operating expense
1,711
2,202
2,383
(195
)
7,264
credit costs
2,904
(2
)
3,431
operating earnings
1,341
(124
)
2,495
operating revenue
$
2,928
$
5,939
$
$
2,828
$
1,451
$
(403
)
$
13,426
operating expense
1,341
2,156
2,229
(237
)
6,578
credit costs
2,753
(11
)
(20
)
3,159
operating earnings
(85
)
2,320
change
operating revenue
%
%
%
(9
)%
(1
)%
(1
)%
%
operating expense
credit costs
nm
(90
)
operating earnings
(80
)
(46
)
(a)
includes the elimination of revenues and expenses related to the shared
activities with treasury services, discontinued portfolios, support services
and unallocated credit costs.
chase home finance
the following table sets forth key revenue
components of chfs business.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
operating revenue
change
home finance:
operating revenue
$
3,800
$
2,751
%
msr hedging revenue:
msr valuation adjustments
(785
)
(4,504
)
hedging gains (losses)
1,015
4,681
(78
)
total revenue(a)
$
4,030
$
2,928
%
(a)
includes mortgage fees and related income, net interest income and
securities gains.
chf is the fourth largest mortgage
originator and servicer in the united
states, with more than four million
customers. chf conducts business in all 50
states and has approximately 17,000
employees in more than 300 locations
nationwide. chf offers an extensive array
of residential mortgage products delivered
across a variety of distribution channels
and customer touch points. chf comprises
three key businesses: production,
servicing and
portfolio lending. the production business
originates and sells mortgages. the
servicing business manages accounts for
chfs four million customers. the
portfolio lending business holds for
investment adjustable-rate first mortgage
loans, home equity and manufactured
housing loans originated and purchased
through the production channels. these
three segments provide chf with balance to
enable it to benefit across varying
business cycles. the production segment is
most profitable when mortgage rates are
declining and origination volume is high.
alternatively, the servicing business
collects more fees when rates are rising
and mortgage prepayments are low.
portfolio lending provides increasing nii,
with growth in home equity and
adjustable-rate first mortgage lending.
the counter-cyclical
(production/servicing) and complementary
(portfolio lending) nature of these
businesses, in combination with financial
risk management, enabled chf to produce
record earnings.
the residential mortgage market had a
record year in 2003, with an estimated
$3.8 trillion in industry-wide
origination volume. the strong market was
driven by historically low interest
rates, higher consumer confidence,
improved housing affordability and
exceptionally strong new and existing
home sales. chf capitalized on this
environment, achieving record levels of
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
loan originations and applications. chfs
production market share grew from 5.8% in
2002 to 7.6% in 2003, primarily due to
successful expansion in first mortgage and
home equity lending through growth in
strategic, higher-margin distribution
channels such as retail, wholesale,
telephone-based and e-commerce.
origination volume totaled a record $284
billion, an increase of 82% from 2002.
home equity volume, a strategic growth
area, increased by 71% from the prior
year. in addition, despite record levels
of loan prepayments in 2003, loans
serviced increased by 10% from year-end
2002 to $470billion at december31, 2003.
chf manages and measures its results from
two key perspectives: its operating
businesses (production/servicing and
portfolio lending) and revenue generated
through managing the interest rate risk
associated with msrs. the table below
reconciles managements perspective on
chfs business results to the reported
gaap line items shown on the consolidated
statement of income and in the related
notes to consolidated financial
statements. while the operating and
hedging activities are interrelated, the
msr hedging function is a risk management
activity subject to significant volatility
as market interest rates and yield curves
fluctuate. as a result, operating business
results are reported separately from
hedging results to gain a better
perspective on each activity.
operating basis revenue
operating
msr hedging
reported
year ended december 31,
(in millions)
net interest income
$
2,204
$
1,208
$
$
$
2,779
$
1,442
securities gains
mortgage fees and
related income
1,596
1,543
(704
)
(555
)
total
$
3,800
$
2,751
$
$
$
4,030
$
2,928
chf achieved record financial performance
in 2003, as total revenue of $4.0billion
increased by 38% from 2002. record
operating earnings of $1.3billion
increased by 48% from 2002.
chfs
operating revenue (excluding msr hedging revenue) of $3.8billion
increased by 38% over 2002. the strong
performance was due to record production
revenue resulting from market-share
growth, record margins and higher home
equity revenue. management expects a
decrease in revenue in 2004, as production
margins are expected to decline due to
lower origination volumes and increased
price competition.
in its hedging activities, chf uses a
combination of derivatives and afs
securities to manage changes in the
market value of msrs. the intent is to
offset any changes in the market value of
msrs with changes in the market value of
the related risk management instrument.
during 2003, negative msr valuation
adjustments of $785million were more
than offset by $1.0billion of aggregate
derivative gains, realized gains on sales
of afs securities and net interest earned
on afs securities. unrealized
gains/(losses) on afs securities were
$(144) million at december31, 2003, and
$377million at december31, 2002. for a
further discussion of msrs, see critical
accounting estimates on page 77 and note
16 on pages 107109 of this annual report.
operating expense of $1.7billion
increased by 28% from 2002 as a result of
growth in origination volume as well as a
higher level of mortgage servicing.
substantial portions of chfs expenses are
variable in nature and, accordingly,
fluctuate with the overall level of
origination and servicing activity. in
addition to increases brought on by higher
business volumes, expenses increased due
to higher performance-related incentives,
as well as strategic investments made to
further expand into higher-margin business
sectors, along with production-related
restructuring efforts initiated in the
fourth quarter of 2003. these increases
were partially offset by continued gains
in productivity and benefits realized from
six sigma initiatives during 2003.
credit costs of $240million for 2003
increased by 26% from 2002 due to a
higher provision for credit losses,
primarily the result of higher loan
balances. credit quality continued to be
strong relative to 2002, as evidenced by
a lower net charge-off ratio and 30+ day
delinquency rate.
business-related metrics
as of or for the year ended december 31,
(in billions, except ratios)
change
origination volume by channel
retail, wholesale, and correspondent
$
$
%
correspondent negotiated transactions
total
$
$
%
origination volume by product
first mortgage
$
$
%
home equity
total
$
$
%
loans serviced
$
$
%
end-of-period outstandings
73.7
63.6
total average loans owned
74.1
56.2
msr carrying value
4.8
3.2
number of customers (in millions)
4.1
4.0
30+ day delinquency rate
1.81
%
3.07
%
(126
)bp
net charge-off ratio
0.18
0.25
(7
)
overhead ratio
(400
)
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
chase cardmember services
ccs is the fourth largest u.s. credit card
issuer, with $52.3billion in managed
receivables and $89.7billion in total
volume (customer purchases, cash advances
and balance transfers). in addition, ccs
is the largest u.s. merchant acquirer (an
entity that contracts with merchants to
facilitate the acceptance of transaction
cards), with annual sales volume in excess
of $260billion, through a joint venture
with first data merchant services.
ccss operating results exclude the impact
of credit card securitizations. ccs
periodically securitizes a portion of its
credit card portfolio by transferring a
pool of credit card receivables to a
trust, which sells securities to
investors. ccs receives fee revenue for
continuing to service those receivables
and additional revenue from any interest
and fees on the receivables in excess of
the interest paid to investors, net of
credit losses and servicing fees. ccs
reports credit costs on a managed or
operating basis. credit costs
on an operating basis are composed of the
provision for credit losses in the
consolidated statement of income (which
includes a provision for credit card
receivables in the consolidated balance
sheet) as well as the credit costs
associated with securitized credit card
loans. as the holder of the residual
interest in the securitization trust, ccs
bears its share of the credit costs for
securitized loans. in jpmorgan chases
consolidated financial statements, credit
costs associated with securitized credit
card loans reduce the noninterest income
remitted to the firm from the
securitization trust. this income is
reported in credit card fees, in fees
and commissions, over the life of the
securitization.
securitization does not change ccss
reported versus operating net income;
however, it does affect the classification
of items on the consolidated statement of
income. the abbreviated financial information presented below is prepared on a managed
basis and includes the effect of
securitizations.
year ended december 31,
effect of
effect of
(in millions)
reported
securitizations
operating
reported
securitizations
operating
revenue
$
4,292
$
1,870
$
6,162
$
4,500
$
1,439
$
5,939
expense
2,202
2,202
2,156
2,156
credit costs
1,034
1,870
2,904
1,314
1,439
2,753
operating earnings
average loans
18,514
32,365
50,879
22,565
26,519
49,084
average assets
19,176
32,365
51,541
23,316
26,519
49,835
operating earnings increased by 3% over
2002 to $679million, driven by higher
revenue, partially offset by higher credit
costs and expenses. the operating
environment reflected continued
competitive pricing, a record level of
bankruptcy filings and low receivables
growth. this was partly the result of
mortgage refinancing activity, which
permitted consumers to use cash received
in their mortgage refinancings to pay down
credit card debt. ccs was able to grow
earnings and originate a record number of
new accounts by offering rewards-based
products, improving operating efficiency,
delivering high-level customer service and
improving retention and card usage.
management believes that the shift towards
rewards-based products positions ccs to
capture consumer wallet share in a highly
competitive, commoditized marketplace. in
2003, ccs launched several new rewards
products, including the chaseperfect card,
the marathon co-branded card and the gm
small business card.
operating revenue increased by 4% to $6.2
billion. net interest income increased by
2%, reflecting lower funding costs, partly
offset by a lower yield. the 4% growth in
average receivables was in line with
industry trends. noninterest revenue
increased by 6%, primarily reflecting
higher interchange revenue, partially
offset by higher rebate costs. the
increase in interchange revenue reflects
higher purchase volume due to new account
growth and the movement towards higher
spending using rewards-based products.
during 2003, ccs originated 4.2million
new accounts via multiple distribution
channels. ccs continues
to make progress in cross-selling
accounts to other cfs customers (13% of
new account originations). these
multiple-relationship accounts generate
more revenue and comprise 11% of the
active account base.
operating expense of $2.2billion
increased by 2%, reflecting disciplined
expense management and six sigma and
productivity efforts. growth in expenses
was primarily due to volume-related costs.
credit costs were $2.9billion, an
increase of 5% from 2002. the increase in
credit costs primarily reflected 4% higher
net charge-offs due to an increase in
average outstandings. conservative risk
management and rigorous collection
practices contributed to ccss stable
credit quality.
business-related metrics
as of or for the year ended december 31,
(in billions, except ratios)
change
end-of-period outstandings
$
52.3
$
51.1
%
average outstandings
50.9
49.1
total volume (a)
89.7
84.0
new accounts (in millions)
4.2
3.7
active accounts (in millions)
16.5
16.5
total accounts (in millions)
30.8
29.2
30+ day delinquency rate
4.68
%
4.67
%
bp
net charge-off ratio
5.89
5.89
overhead ratio
(a)
sum of total customer purchases, cash advances and balance transfers.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
chase auto finance
caf is the largest u.s. bank originator of
automobile loans and leases, with more
than 2.9million accounts. in 2003, caf
had a record number of automobile loan and
lease originations, growing by 10% over
2002 to $27.8billion. loan and lease
receivables of $43.2billion at december
31, 2003, were 16% higher than at the
prior year-end. despite a challenging
operating environment reflecting slightly
declining new car sales in 2003 and
increased competition, cafs market share
among automobile finance companies
improved to 6.1% in 2003 from 5.7% in
2002. the increase in market share was the
result of strong organic growth and an
origination strategy that allies the
business with manufacturers and dealers.
cafs relationships with several major car
manufacturers contributed to 2003 growth,
as did cafs dealer relationships, which
increased from approximately 12,700
dealers in 2002 to approximately 13,700
dealers in 2003.
in 2003, operating earnings were $205
million, 23% higher compared with 2002.
the increase in earnings was driven by
continued revenue growth and improved
operating efficiency. in 2003, cafs
operating revenue grew by 23% to $842
million. net interest income grew by 33%
compared with 2002. the increase was
driven by strong operating performance
due to higher average loans and leases
outstanding, reflecting continued strong
origination volume and lower funding
costs.
operating expense of $292million
increased by 18% compared with 2002. the
increase in expenses was driven by higher
average
loans outstanding, higher origination
volume and higher performance-based
incentives. cafs overhead ratio improved
from 36% in 2002 to 35% in 2003, as a
result of strong revenue growth, continued
productivity gains and disciplined expense
management.
credit costs increased 18% to $205
million, primarily reflecting a 32%
increase in average loan and lease
receivables. credit quality continued to
be strong relative to 2002, as evidenced
by a lower net charge-off ratio and 30+
day delinquency rate.
caf also comprises chase education
finance, a top provider of
government-guaranteed and private loans
for higher education. loans are provided
through a joint venture with sallie mae, a
government-sponsored enterprise and the
leader in funding and servicing education
loans. chase education finances
origination volume totaled $2.7billion,
an increase of 4% from last year.
business-related metrics
as of or for the year ended december 31,
(in billions, except ratios)
change
loan and lease receivables
$
43.2
$
37.4
%
average loan and lease receivables
41.7
31.7
automobile origination volume
27.8
25.3
automobile market share
6.1
%
5.7
%
bp
30+ day delinquency rate
1.46
1.54
(8
)
net charge-off ratio
0.41
0.51
(10
)
overhead ratio
(100
)
chase regional banking
crb is the no.1 bank in the new york
tri-state area and a top five bank in
texas (both ranked by retail deposits),
providing payment, liquidity, investment,
insurance and credit products and
services to three primary customer
segments: small business, affluent and
retail. within these segments, crb serves
326,000 small businesses, 433,000
affluent consumers and 2.6million
mass-market consumers.
crbs continued focus on expanding
customer relationships resulted in a 14%
increase in core deposits (for this purpose, core deposits are total deposits
less time deposits) from december31,
2002, and a 77% increase in the cross-sell
of chase credit products over 2002. in
2003, mortgage and home equity
originations through crbs distribution
channels were $3.4billion and $4.7
billion, respectively. branch-originated
credit cards totaled 77,000, contributing
to 23% of crb customers holding chase
credit cards. crb is compensated by cfss
credit businesses for the home finance and
credit card loans it originates and does
not retain these balances.
while crb continues to position itself for
growth, decreased deposit spreads related
to the low-rate environment and increased
credit costs resulted in an 80% decline in
crb operating earnings from 2002. this
decrease was partly offset by an 8%
increase in total average deposits.
operating revenue of $2.6billion
decreased by 9% compared with 2002. net
interest income declined by 11% to $1.7
billion, primarily attributable to the
lower interest rate environment.
noninterest revenue decreased 6% to $927
million due to lower deposit service fees,
decreased debit card fees and one-time
gains in 2002. crbs revenue does not
include funding profits earned on its
deposit base; these amounts are included
in the results of global treasury.
operating expense of $2.4billion
increased by 7% from 2002. the increase
was primarily due to investments in
technology within the branch network; also
contributing were higher compensation
expenses related to increased staff levels
and higher severance costs as a result of
continued restructuring. this increase in
operating
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
expense was partly offset by six sigma
and other productivity efforts. crbs
overhead ratio increased to 93% in 2003
from 79% in 2002, reflecting both the
decline in revenues and an increase of
expenses.
credit costs of $77million increased by
$88million compared with 2002 primarily
driven by the release of the allowance
for loan losses in 2002.
business-related metrics
as of or for the year ended december 31,
change
total average deposits (in billions)
$
75.1
$
69.8
%
total client assets (a)(in billions)
108.7
103.6
number of branches
number of atms
1,730
1,876
(8
)
overhead ratio
%
%
1,400
bp
(a)
deposits, money market funds and/or investment assets (including
annuities).
chase middle market
cmm is a premier provider of commercial
banking and corporate financial services
to companies with annual sales of $10
million to $1billion, as well as to
not-for-profit, real estate and
public-sector entities. cmm maintains a
leadership position in the new york
tri-state market and select texas markets;
it also leverages its expertise in
distinct industry segments, such as
technology, corporate mortgage finance,
entertainment and certain regional
markets, such as chicago, los angeles,
boston and denver.
the cmm relationship management model
brings customized solutions to more than
12,000 middle market companies, utilizing
the products and services of the entire
firm. products and services include cash
management, lines of credit, term loans,
structured finance, syndicated lending,
m&a advisory, risk management,
international banking services, lease
financing and asset-based lending. cmm is
organized by geography, industry and
product to deliver greater value to
customers. cmms 2003 and 2002 results
included 100% of the revenues and expenses
attributed to the shared activities with
treasury services. see segment results on
page 27 of this annual report for a
discussion of the firms revenue and
expense-sharing agreements among business
segments.
cmms operating earnings of $324million
increased by 3% compared with 2002.
operating revenue of $1.4billion
decreased by 1% compared with the prior
year. nii was down 5% due to lower
spreads, partly offset by 17% higher
deposits
and 3% higher loans compared with 2002.
noninterest revenue increased by 6%,
primarily reflecting higher deposit
service and corporate finance fees.
deposit service fees increased, as the
lower interest rate environment resulted
in reduced values of customers
compensating balances; consequently,
customers paid incremental fees for
deposit services.
operating expense was $871million, an
increase of 4% compared with 2002. the
increase in expenses was due to higher
severance costs and higher
performance-based incentives, partly
offset by savings from six sigma and other
productivity initiatives.
credit costs of $7million were down 90%
from the prior year. this decrease was
due to a lower required allowance and 36%
lower net charge-offs, reflecting strong
credit quality.
the focus for 2004 will be on generating
revenue growth through
effective cross-selling, the delivery of
superior client service and the management of credit quality and expenses.
business-related metrics
as of or for the year ended december 31,
(in billions, except ratios)
change
total average loans
$
14.1
$
13.7
%
total average deposits
28.2
24.1
nonperforming average loans as
a % of total average loans
1.19
%
1.89
%
(70)
bp
net charge-off ratio
0.49
0.78
(29
)
overhead ratio
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
support units and corporate
selected financial data
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except employees)
change
operating revenue
$
(626
)
$
(626
)
$
operating expense
(73
)
credit costs
(8
)
pre-tax loss
(784
)
(685
)
(99
)
income tax benefit
operating earnings (losses)
$
$
(313
)
average allocated capital
$
1,150
$
(1,783
)
2,933
average assets
20,737
21,591
(854
)
shareholder value added
(10
)
full-time equivalent employees
9,838
13,023
(3,185
)
the support units and corporate sector
includes technology, legal, audit,
finance, human resources, risk
management, real estate management,
procurement, executive management and
marketing groups within corporate. the
technology and procurement services
organizations seek to provide services to
the firms businesses that are
competitive with comparable third-party
providers in terms of price and service
quality. these units use the firms
global scale and technology to gain
efficiencies through consolidation,
standardization, vendor management and
outsourcing.
support units and corporate reflects the
application of the firms management
accounting policies at the corporate
level. these policies allocate the costs
associated with technology, operational
and staff support services to the business
segments, with the intent to recover all
expenditures associated with these
services. other items are retained within
support units and corporate based on
policy decisions, such as the over/under
allocation of economic capital, the
residual component of credit costs and
taxes. business segment revenues are
reported on a tax-equivalent basis, with
the offset reflected in support units and
corporate.
during 2003, the firm reviewed its
management accounting policies, which
resulted in the realignment of certain
revenues and expenses from the corporate
segment to other business segments. the
policy refinements ranged from updating
expense-allocation methodologies to
revising transfer pricing policies to more
clearly reflect the actual interest income
and expense of the firm. the impact of
these changes was allocated among the
business segments; prior periods have been
revised to reflect the current
methodologies.
for 2003, support units and corporate had
operating earnings of $44million,
compared with an operating loss of $313
million in 2002, driven primarily by
income tax benefits not allocated to the
business segments.
in allocating the allowance (and
provision) for credit losses, each
business is responsible for its credit
costs. although the support units and
corporate sector has no traditional credit
assets, the residual component of the
allowance, which is available for losses
in any business segment, is maintained at
the corporate level. for a further
discussion of the residual component, see
allowance for credit losses on pages 64-65
of this annual report.
average allocated capital was $2.9
billion higher than 2002, reflecting a
reduction in risks and economic capital
allocated to the business segments.
in december2002, jpmorgan chase entered
into a seven-year agreement with ibm to
outsource portions of the firms internal
technology infrastructure services.
commencing april1, 2003, 2,800 employees
were transferred to ibm in connection with
this agreement. the agreement is expected
to transform the firms technology
infrastructure through increased cost
variability, access to the best research
and innovation, and improved service
levels. by moving from a traditional
fixed-cost approach to one with increased
capacity and cost variability, the firm
expects to be able to respond more quickly
to changing market conditions.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
risk and capital management
risk management at jpmorgan chase is
guided by several principles,
including:
defined risk governance
independent oversight
continual evaluation of risk appetite,
managed through risk limits
portfolio diversification
risk assessment and measurement,
including value-at-risk analysis and
portfolio stress testing
performance measurement (sva)that
allocates risk-adjusted capital to
business units and charges a cost against
that capital.
risk management and oversight begins with
the risk policy committee of the board of
directors, which reviews the governance of
these activities, delegating the
formulation of policy and day-to-day risk
oversight and management to the office of
the chairman and to two corporate risk committees: the
capital committee and risk management
committee.
the capital committee, chaired by the
chief financial officer, focuses on
firm-wide capital planning, internal
capital allocation and liquidity
management. the risk management committee,
chaired by the chief risk officer, focuses
on credit risk, market risk, operational
risk, business risk, private equity risk
and fiduciary risk. both risk committees
have decision-making authority, with major
policy decisions and risk exposures
subject to review by the office of the
chairman.
in addition to the risk policy committee,
the audit committee of the board of
directors is responsible for oversight of
guidelines and policies to govern the
process by which risk assessment and
management is undertaken. in addition,
the audit committee reviews with
management the system of internal
controls and financial reporting that is
relied upon to provide reasonable
assurance of compliance with the firms
operational risk management processes.
the firms use of sva, which incorporates
a risk-adjusted capital methodology as its
primary performance measure, has
strengthened its risk management
discipline by charging the businesses the
cost of capital linked to the risks
associated with their respective
activities.
for a discussion of capital allocation
methodologies, see the respective risk
management sections on pages 4674 of
this annual report.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
capital and liquidity management
capital management
jpmorgan chases capital management
framework helps to optimize the use of
capital by:
determining the amount of capital commensurate with:
-
internal assessments of risk as
estimated by the firms economic
capital allocation model
-
the firms goal to limit losses, even
under stress conditions
-
targeted
regulatory ratios and credit ratings
-
the firms liquidity management
strategy.
directing capital investment to
activities with the most favorable
risk-adjusted returns.
available versus required capital
yearly averages
(in billions)
common stockholders equity
$
43.0
$
41.4
economic risk capital:
credit risk
13.1
14.0
market risk
4.5
4.7
operational risk
3.5
3.5
business risk
1.7
1.8
private equity risk
5.4
5.8
economic risk capital
28.2
29.8
goodwill / intangibles
8.9
8.8
asset capital tax
4.1
3.9
capital against nonrisk factors
13.0
12.7
total capital allocated to business activities
41.2
42.5
diversification effect
(5.1
)
(5.3
)
total required internal capital
36.1
37.2
firm capital in excess of required capital
$
6.9
$
4.2
economic risk capital: jpmorgan chase
assesses capital adequacy utilizing
internal risk assessment methodologies.
the firm assigns economic capital based
primarily on five risk factors: credit
risk, market risk, operational risk and
business risk for each business, and
private equity risk, principally for jpmp.
the methodologies quantify these risks and
assign capital accordingly. these
methodologies are discussed in the risk
management sections of this annual report.
a review of the firms risk and capital
measurement methodologies was completed in
2003, resulting in the reallocation of
capital among the risk categories and
certain business segments. the new capital
measurement methodologies did not result
in a significant change in the total
capital allocated to the business segments
as a whole.
prior periods have been adjusted to
reflect the revised capital measurement
methodologies. for a further discussion of
these new methodologies, see capital
allocation for credit risk, operational
risk and business risk, and private equity
risk on pages 52, 73 and 74, respectively,
of this annual report. internal capital
allocation methodologies may change in the
future to reflect refinements of economic
capital methodologies.
capital also is assessed against business
units for certain nonrisk factors.
businesses are assessed capital equal to
100% of any goodwill and 50% for certain
other intangibles generated through
acquisitions. additionally, jpmorgan chase
assesses an asset capital tax against
managed assets and some off-balance sheet
instruments. these assessments recognize
that certain minimum regulatory capital
ratios must be maintained by the firm.
jpmorgan chase also estimates the
portfolio effect on required economic
capital based on correlations of risk
across risk categories. this estimated
diversification benefit leads to a
reduction in required economic capital for
the firm.
the total required economic capital for
jpmorgan chase as determined by its models
and after considering the firms estimated
diversification benefits is then compared
with available common stockholders equity
to evaluate overall capital utilization.
the firms policy is to maintain an
appropriate level of excess capital to
provide for growth and additional
protection against losses.
the firms capital in excess of that which
is internally required as of december31,
2003, increased by $2.7billion over
december31, 2002. the change was
primarily due to an increase in average
common stockholders equity of $1.6
billion and to a $1.3billion reduction in
average capital allocated to business
activities, principally in relation to
credit risk and private equity risk.
credit risk capital decreased by $0.9
billion from the prior year, primarily due
to a reduction in commercial exposures,
improvement in the credit quality of the
commercial portfolio and an increase in
hedging of commercial exposures using
single-name credit derivatives. private
equity risk decreased primarily as a
result of the reduction in jpmps private
equity portfolio.
regulatory capital: jpmorgan chases
primary federal banking regulator, the
federal reserve board, establishes capital
requirements, including well-capitalized
standards and leverage ratios, for the
consolidated financial holding company and
its state-chartered banks, including
jpmorgan chase bank. the office of the
comptroller of the currency establishes
similar capital requirements and standards
for the firms national bank subsidiaries,
including chase manhattan bank usa, n.a.
as of december31, 2003, the financial
holding company and its banking
subsidiaries maintained capital levels
well in excess of the minimum capital
requirements.
at december31, 2003, the tier 1 and total
capital ratios were 8.5% and 11.8%,
respectively, and the tier 1 leverage
ratio was 5.6%. the capital committee
reviews the firms capital levels and
policies regularly in light of changing
economic conditions and business needs. at
december31, 2003, total capital of
jpmorgan chase (the sum of tier 1 and tier
2 capital) was $59.8billion, an increase
of $5.3billion from december31, 2002.
this increase reflected a $5.6billion
increase in tier 1 capital, primarily
driven by a $3.8billion increase in
retained earnings (net income less common
and preferred dividends) generated during the
period, $1.1billion in tier 1 trust
preferred net issuance and $1.3billion in
net stock issuances related to employee
stock-based benefit plans. this increase
was partially offset by a higher deduction
for goodwill and nonqualifying
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
intangible assets primarily due to
an acquisition in the fourth quarter of
2003. there was minimal impact to the
firms tier 1 and total capital ratios due
to the adoption of fin 46, as the federal
reserve board provided interim regulatory
capital relief related to asset-backed
commercial paper conduits and trust
preferred vehicles. the effect of fin 46
on the firms leverage ratio at december
31, 2003, was a reduction of approximately
13 basis points as no regulatory capital
relief was provided for leverage
calculations. the firm revised its
calculation of risk-weighted assets during
the third quarter of 2003; capital ratios
for periods ended prior to june30, 2003,
have not been recalculated. additional
information regarding the firms capital
ratios and a more detailed discussion of
federal regulatory capital standards are
presented in note 26 on pages 114-115 of
this annual report.
stock repurchases: the firm did not
repurchase any shares of its common stock
during 2003. management expects to
recommend to the board of directors that
the firm resume its share repurchase
program after the completion of the
pending merger with bank one.
dividends: dividends declared in any
quarter are determined by jpmorgan chases
board of directors. the dividend is
currently $0.34 per share per quarter.
liquidity management
in managing liquidity, management
considers a variety of liquidity risk
measures as well as market conditions,
prevailing interest rates, liquidity
needs and the desired maturity profile
of its liabilities.
overview
liquidity risk arises from the general
funding needs of the firms activities and
in the management of its assets and
liabilities. jpmorgan chase recognizes the
importance of sound liquidity management
as a key factor in maintaining strong
credit ratings and utilizes a liquidity
framework intended to maximize liquidity
access and minimize funding costs. through
active liquidity management, the firm
seeks to ensure that it will be able to
replace maturing obligations when due and
fund its assets at appropriate maturities
and rates in all market environments.
liquidity management framework
the capital committee sets the overall
liquidity policy for the firm, reviews the
contingency funding plan and recommends
balance sheet targets for the firm. the
liquidity risk committee, reporting to the
capital committee, identifies and monitors
liquidity issues, provides policy guidance
and maintains an evolving contingency
plan. the balance sheet committee, which
also reports to the capital committee,
identifies and monitors key balance sheet
issues, provides policy guidance and
oversees adherence to policy.
jpmorgan chase utilizes liquidity
monitoring tools to help maintain
appropriate levels of liquidity through
normal and stress periods. the firms
liquidity analytics rely on managements
judgment about jpmorgan chases ability to
liquidate assets or use them as collateral
for borrowings. these analytics also
involve estimates and assumptions, taking
into account credit risk managements
historical data on
the funding of loan commitments (e.g.,
commercial paper back-up facilities),
liquidity commitments to spes, commitments
with rating triggers and collateral
posting requirements. for further
discussion of spes and other off-balance
sheet arrangements, see off-balance sheet
arrangements and contractual cash
obligations on pages 49-50 as well as note
1, note 13 and note 14 on pages 86-87,
100-103 and 103-106, respectively, of this
annual report.
the firms three primary measures of liquidity are:
holding company short-term surplus:
measures the parent holding companys
ability to repay all obligations with a
maturity under one year at a time when the
ability of the firms banks to pay
dividends to the parent holding company is
constrained.
cash capital surplus: measures the
firms ability to fund assets on a fully
collateralized basis, assuming access to
unsecured funding is lost.
basic surplus: measures jpmorgan chase
banks ability to sustain a 90-day stress
event that is specific to the firm where
no new funding can be raised to meet
obligations as they come due.
each of the firms liquidity surplus
positions, as of december31, 2003,
indicates that jpmorgan chases long-dated
funding, including core deposits, exceeds
illiquid assets and that the firms
obligations can be met if access to
funding is temporarily impaired.
an extension of the firms ongoing
liquidity management is its contingency
funding plan, which is intended to help
the firm manage through liquidity stress
periods. the plan considers temporary and
long-term stress scenarios and forecasts
potential funding needs when access to
unsecured funding is severely limited or
nonexistent. these scenarios take into
account both on-and off-balance sheet
exposures, evaluating access to funds by
the parent holding company, jpmorgan chase
bank and chase manhattan bank usa, n.a.,
separately.
funding
credit ratings: the cost and availability
of unsecured financing are influenced by
credit ratings. a reduction in these
ratings could adversely affect the firms
access to liquidity sources, and could
increase the cost of funding or trigger
additional collateral requirements.
critical factors in maintaining high
credit ratings include: a stable and
diverse earnings stream; strong capital
ratios; strong credit quality and risk
management controls; diverse funding
sources; and strong liquidity monitoring
procedures.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the credit ratings of jpmorgan chases
parent holding company and jpmorgan chase
bank as of december31, 2003, were as
follows:
jpmorgan chase
jpmorgan chase bank
short-term
senior
short-term
senior
debt
long-term debt
debt
long-term debt
moodys
p-1
a1
p-1
aa3
s&p
a-1
a+
a-1+
aa-
fitch
f1
a+
f1
a+
upon the announcement of the proposed
merger with bank one, moodys and fitch
placed the ratings of the firm under review
for possible upgrade, while s&p affirmed
the firms ratings.
balance sheet: the firms total assets
increased to $771billion at december31,
2003, from $759billion at december31,
2002. the december31, 2003, balance sheet
includes the effect of adopting fin 46,
which added $10billion to total assets,
including $5.8billion in commercial loans
primarily associated with multi-seller
asset-backed commercial paper conduits.
commercial loans declined $14.2billion,
excluding the impact of adopting fin 46,
as a result of weaker loan demand, as well
as the firms ongoing efforts to reduce
commercial exposure. consumer loans
increased $11.6billion, led by strong
growth in mortgage and automobile loans,
driven by the favorable rate environment
throughout 2003. credit card loans
declined modestly, affected by increased
securitization activity and higher levels
of payments from cash redeployed from
consumer mortgage refinancings. the
securities portfolio declined due to
changes in positioning related to
structural interest rate risk management.
the continued growth in deposits
contributed to the decline in securities
sold under repurchase agreements.
sources of funds: the diversity of the
firms funding sources enhances financial
flexibility and limits dependence on any
one source, thereby minimizing the cost of
funds. jpmorgan chase has access to funding
markets across the globe and across a broad
investor base. liquidity is generated using
a variety of both short-term and long-term
instruments, including deposits, federal
funds purchased, repurchase agreements,
commercial paper, bank notes, medium- and
long-term debt, capital securities and
stockholders equity. a major source of
liquidity for jpmorgan chase bank is
provided by its large core deposit base.
for this purpose, core deposits include all u.s. domestic
deposits insured by the fdic, up to the
legal limit of $100,000 per depositor. in
addition to core deposits, the firm
benefits from substantial, stable deposit
balances originated by tss through the
normal course of its business.
additional funding flexibility is provided
by the firms ability to access the
repurchase and asset securitization
markets. these alternatives are evaluated
on an ongoing basis to achieve the
appropriate balance of secured and
unsecured funding. the ability to
securitize loans, and the associated gains
on those securitizations, are principally
dependent on the credit quality and yields
of the assets securitized and are generally
not dependent on the
credit ratings of the
issuing entity. transactions between the
firm and its securitization structures are
reflected in jpmorgan chases financial
statements; these relationships include
retained interests in securitization
trusts, liquidity facilities and derivative
transactions. for further details, see
notes 13 and 14 on pages 100-103 and
103-106, respectively, of this annual report.
issuance: corporate credit spreads
narrowed in 2003 across industries and
sectors, reflecting the market perception
that credit risks were improving sharply
throughout the year, as the number of
downgrades declined, corporate balance
sheet cash positions increased, and
corporate profits exceeded expectations.
jpmorgan chases credit spreads
outperformed relative to peer spreads
following the enron settlement, reflecting
reduced headline risk and improved
earnings performance. this resulted in a
positive overall shift in fixed income
investor sentiment toward jpmorgan chase,
as evidenced by increased investor
participation in debt transactions and
extension of debt maturities. the firm
took advantage of its narrowing credit
spreads by issuing long-term debt and
capital securities opportunistically
throughout the year.
during 2003, jpmorgan chase issued
approximately $17.2billion of long-term
debt and capital securities. during the
year, $8.3billion of long-term debt and
capital securities matured or was
redeemed. in addition, in 2003 the firm
securitized approximately $13.3billion of
residential mortgage loans, $8.8billion
of credit card loans and $4.5billion of
automobile loans, resulting in pre-tax
gains on securitizations of $168million,
$44million and $13million, respectively.
for a further discussion of loan
securitizations, see note 13 on pages
100-103 of this annual report.
during 2003, the firm adopted fin 46 and,
as a result, deconsolidated the trusts
that issue trust preferred securities.
this could have significant implications
for the firms capital, because it may
change the way the federal reserve board
views the tier 1 status of trust preferred
securities. on july2, 2003, the federal
reserve board issued a supervisory letter
instructing banks and bank holding
companies to continue to include trust
preferred securities in tier 1 capital.
based on the terms of this letter and in
consultation with the federal reserve
board, the firm continues to include its
trust preferred securities in tier 1
capital. however, there can be no
assurance that the federal reserve board
will continue to permit trust preferred
securities to count as tier 1 capital in
the future. for a further discussion, see
note 18 on pages 110-111 of this annual
report.
derivatives are used in liquidity risk
management and funding to achieve the
firms desired interest rate risk profile.
the firm enters into derivatives contracts
to swap fixed-rate debt to floating-rate
obligations and to swap floating-rate debt
to fixed-rate obligations. derivatives
contracts are also used to hedge the
variability in interest rates that arises
from other floating-rate financial
instruments and forecasted transactions,
such as the rollover of short-term assets
and liabilities.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
off-balance sheet arrangements and
contractual cash obligations
special-purpose entities
special-purpose entities (spes),
special-purpose vehicles (spvs), or
variable-interest entities (vies), are
an important part of the financial
markets, providing market liquidity by
facilitating investors access to specific
portfolios of assets and risks. spes are
not operating entities; typically they are
established for a single, discrete
purpose, have a limited life and have no
employees. the basic spe structure
involves a company selling assets to the
spe. the spe funds the asset purchase by
selling securities to investors. to
insulate investors from creditors of other
entities, including the seller of the
assets, spes are often structured to be
bankruptcy-remote. spes are critical to
the functioning of many investor markets,
including, for example, the market for
mortgage-backed securities, other
asset-backed securities and commercial
paper. jpmorgan chase is involved with
spes in three broad categories of
transactions: loan securitizations
(through qualifying spes), multi-seller
conduits, and client intermediation.
capital is held, as appropriate, against
all spe-related transactions and related
exposures such as derivative transactions
and lending-related commitments.
the firm has no commitments to issue its
own stock to support any spe transaction,
and its policies require that transactions
with spes be conducted at arms length and
reflect market pricing. consistent with
this policy, no jpmorgan chase employee is
permitted to invest in spes with which the
firm is involved where such investment
would violate the firms worldwide rules
of conduct. these rules prohibit employees
from self-dealing and prohibit employees
from acting on behalf of the firm in
transactions with which they or their
family have any significant financial
interest.
for certain liquidity commitments to spes,
the firm could be required to provide
funding if the credit rating of jpmorgan
chase bank were downgraded below specific
levels, primarily p-1, a-1 and f1 for
moodys, standard & poors and fitch,
respectively. the amount of these
liquidity commitments was $34.0billion at
december31, 2003. if jpmorgan chase bank
were required to provide funding under
these commitments, the firm could be
replaced as liquidity provider.
additionally, with respect to the
multi-seller conduits and structured
commercial loan vehicles for which
jpmorgan chase bank has extended liquidity
commitments, the bank could facilitate the
sale or refinancing of the assets in the
spe in order to provide liquidity.
of these liquidity commitments to spes,
$27.7billion is included in the firms
total other unfunded commitments to extend
credit included in the table on the
following page. as a result of the
consolidation of multi-seller conduits in
accordance with fin 46, $6.3billion of
these commitments are excluded from the
table, as the underlying assets of the spe
have been included on the firms
consolidated balance sheet.
the following table summarizes certain
revenue information related to vies with
which the firm has significant
involvement, and qualifying spes:
year ended december 31, 2003
qualifying
(in millions)
vies
(a)
spes
total
revenue
$
$
$
1,058
(a)
includes consolidated and nonconsolidated asset-backed commercial
paper conduits for a consistent presentation of 2003 results.
the revenue reported in the table above
represents primarily servicing fee income.
the firm also has exposure to certain vie
vehicles arising from derivative
transactions with vies; these transactions
are recorded at fair value on the firms
consolidated balance sheet with changes in
fair value (i.e., mark-to-market gains and
losses) recorded in trading revenue. such
mtm gains and losses are not included in
the revenue amounts reported in the table
above.
for a further discussion of spes and the
firms accounting for spes, see note 1 on
pages 86-87, note 13 on pages 100-103,
and note 14 on pages 103-106 of this
annual report.
contractual cash obligations
in the normal course of business, the firm
enters into various contractual
obligations that may require future cash
payments. contractual obligations at
december31, 2003, include long-term debt,
trust preferred capital securities,
operating leases, contractual purchases
and capital expenditures and certain other
liabilities. for a further discussion
regarding long-term debt and trust
preferred capital securities, see note 18
on pages 109-111 of this annual report.
for a further discussion regarding
operating leases, see note 27 on page 115
of this annual report.
the accompanying table summarizes jpmorgan
chases off-balance sheet lending-related
financial instruments and significant
contractual cash obligations, by remaining
maturity, at december31, 2003.
contractual purchases include commitments
for future cash expenditures, primarily
for services and contracts involving
certain forward purchases of securities
and commodities. capital expenditures
primarily represent future cash payments
for real estate-related obligations and
equipment. contractual purchases and
capital expenditures at december31, 2003,
reflect the minimum contractual obligation
under legally enforceable contracts with
contract terms that are both fixed and
determinable. excluded from the following
table are a number of obligations to be
settled in cash, primarily in under one
year. these obligations are reflected on
the firms consolidated balance sheet and
include deposits; federal funds purchased
and securities sold under repurchase
agreements; other borrowed funds;
purchases of debt and equity instruments
that settle within standard market
timeframes (e.g. regular-way); derivative
payables that do not require physical
delivery of the underlying instrument; and
certain purchases of instruments that
resulted in settlement failures.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase &
co.
off-balance sheet lending-relatedfinancial instruments
under
1-3
4-5
after
by remaining maturity at december 31,
2003 (in millions)
1 year
years
years
5 years
total
consumer-related
$
151,931
$
$
$
23,868
$
176,923
commercial-related:
other unfunded commitments to extend credit(a)(b)
92,840
54,797
23,573
5,012
176,222
standby letters of credit and guarantees(a)
17,236
12,225
4,451
1,420
35,332
other letters of credit(a)
1,613
2,094
4,204
total commercial-related
111,689
67,480
30,118
6,471
215,758
total lending-related commitments
$
263,620
$
67,984
$
30,738
$
30,339
$
392,681
contractual cash obligations
by remaining maturity at december 31,
2003 (in millions)
long-term debt
$
6,633
$
15,187
$
12,548
$
13,646
$
48,014
trust preferred capital securities
6,768
6,768
fin 46 long-term beneficial interests(c)
1,652
2,429
operating leases(d)
1,467
1,189
4,772
8,233
contractual purchases and capital expenditures
11,920
12,407
other liabilities(e)
4,069
(f)
4,946
total
$
19,803
$
17,841
$
14,177
$
30,976
$
82,797
(a)
net of risk
participations totaling $16.5billion at december31, 2003.
(b)
includes unused advised lines of credit totaling $19billion at december
31, 2003, which are not legally binding. in regulatory filings with the federal reserve board, unused advised lines are
not reportable.
(c)
included on the consolidated balance sheet in
beneficial interests issued by consolidated variable
interest entities.
(d)
excludes benefit of
noncancelable sublease rentals of $283million at
december31, 2003.
(e)
includes deferred annuity contracts and expected funding for pension and
other postretirement benefits for 2004. funding requirements for pension and
postretirement benefits after 2004 are excluded due to the significant
variability in the assumptions required to project the timing of future cash
payments.
(f)
certain deferred compensation obligations amounting to $3.5billion are
reported in the after 5years column because the actual payment date cannot
be specifically determined due to the significant variability in the
assumptions required to project the timing of future cash payments.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
credit risk management
credit risk is the risk of loss from obligor or counterparty default. the firm
is exposed to credit risk through its lending (e.g., loans and lending-related
commitments), trading and capital markets activities. credit risk management
practices are designed to preserve the independence and integrity of the
risk-assessment process. processes in place are intended to ensure that credit
risks are adequately assessed, properly approved, continually monitored and
actively managed. risk is managed at both the individual transaction and
portfolio levels. the firm
assesses and manages all credit exposures, whether they arise from transactions
recorded on- or offbalance sheet.
credit risk organization
in early 2003, the credit risk policy and global credit
management functions were combined to form global credit risk management
consisting of the five primary functions listed in the organizational chart
below.
credit risk organization
chief risk officer
oversees risk management
global credit
risk management
chief credit risk officer
commercialconsumer
credit risk creditpolicy andspecial creditscfs consumer
management portfolio groupstrategy groupgroupcredit risk
management
approves all credit expo-  actively manages the  formulates credit policies,  actively manages  approves and
sure; approval authority risk in the firms creditlimits, allowance appropri- criticized commercialmonitors credit risk
varies based on aggregate positions from traditionalateness and guidelinesexposures in workouts
monitors external economic
size of clients credit lending and derivativeand restructurings
independently audits, trends to predict emerging
exposure and the size, trading activities, through
monitors and assessesrisks in the consumer
maturity and risk level the purchase or sale of
risk ratings and riskportfolio
of a transaction credit derivative hedges,
management processes
other market instruments  formulates credit policies,
assigns risk ratings
and secondary market  addresses country risk, limits, allowance appropri-
collaborates with client loan salescounterparty risk andateness and guidelines
executives to monitorcapital allocation method-
credit quality via ongoing  manages derivatives
ologies with market risk
and periodic reviews collateral risk
management
of client documentation,
financial data and
industry trends
business strategy and risk management
commercial
the firms business strategy for its large corporate commercial portfolio
remains primarily one of origination for distribution. the majority of the
firms wholesale loan originations in ib continue to be distributed into the
marketplace, with residual holds by the firm averaging less than 10%. the
commercial loan port-
folio declined by 9% in 2003, reflecting a combination of continued weak loan
demand, the firms ongoing goal of reducing commercial credit concentrations
and refinancings into more liquid capital markets. the firms sva discipline
discourages the retention of loan assets that do not generate a positive return
above the cost of risk-adjusted capital. sva remains a critical discipline in
making loans and commitments, particularly when combined with other credit and
capital management
disciplines.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
to measure commercial credit risk, the firm estimates the likelihood of obligor
or counterparty default; the amount of exposure should the obligor or the
counterparty default; and the loss severity given a default event. based on
these factors and related market-based inputs, the firm estimates both expected
and unexpected losses for each segment of the portfolio. expected losses are
statistically-based estimates of credit losses over time, anticipated as a
result of obligor or counterparty default. they are used to set risk-adjusted
credit loss provisions. however, expected credit losses are not the sole
indicators of risk. if losses were entirely predictable, the expected loss rate
could be factored into pricing and covered as a normal and recurring cost of
doing business. unexpected losses represent the potential volatility of actual
losses relative to the expected level of losses and are the basis for the
firms credit risk capital-allocation process.
in 2003, the firm significantly modified its approach to commercial credit risk
management to further enhance risk management discipline, improve returns and
liquidity and use capital more efficiently. three primary initiatives were
launched during the year: improved single-name and industry concentration
management, through a revised threshold and limit structure; a revised capital
methodology; and increased portfolio management activity utilizing credit
derivatives and loan sales. the firm manages capital and exposure
concentrations by obligor, risk rating, industry and geography. the firm has
reduced by one-half the number of clients whose credit exposure exceeded the
narrowest definition of concentration limits during 2003, through focused
client planning and portfolio management activities.
a comprehensive review of the firms wholesale credit risk management
infrastructure was completed in 2003. as a result, the firm has commenced a
multi-year initiative to reengineer specific components of the credit risk
infrastructure, including creation of a simpler infrastructure with more
standardized hardware and software platforms. the goal of the initiative is to
enhance the firms ability to provide immediate and accurate risk and exposure
information; actively manage credit risk in the residual portfolio; support
client relationships; manage more quickly the allocation of economic capital;
and support compliance with basel ii initiatives.
consumer
consumer credit risks are monitored at the aggregate cfs level and within each
line of business (mortgages, credit cards, automobile finance, small business
and consumer banking).
consumer credit risk management uses sophisticated portfolio modeling, credit
scoring and decision-support tools to project credit risks and establish
underwriting standards. risk parameters are established in the early stages of
product development, and the cost of credit risk is an integral part of product
pricing and evaluating profit dynamics. losses generated by consumer loans are
more predictable than for commercial loans, but are subject to cyclical and
seasonal factors. the frequency of loss is higher on consumer loans than on
corporate loans but the severity of losses is typically lower and more
manageable, depending on whether loans are secured or not. in addition, common
measures of credit quality derived from historical loss experience can be used
to predict con-
sumer losses. likewise, underwriting principles and philosophies are common
among lenders focusing on borrowers of similar credit quality. for these
reasons, consumer credit risk management focuses on trends and concentrations
at the portfolio level, where problems can be remedied through changes in
underwriting policies and adherence to portfolio guidelines. consumer credit
risk management also monitors key risk attributes, including borrower credit
quality, loan performance (as measured by delinquency) and losses (expected
versus actual). the monthly and quarterly analysis of trends around these
attributes is monitored against business expectations and industry benchmarks.
capital allocation for credit risk
unexpected credit losses drive the allocation of credit risk capital by
portfolio segment.
in the commercial portfolio, capital allocations are differentiated by risk
rating, loss severity, maturity, correlations and assumed exposure at default.
in 2003, the firm revised its methodology for the assessment of credit risk
capital allocated to the commercial credit portfolio, more closely aligning
capital with current market conditions. specifically, the new approach employs
estimates of default likelihood that are derived from current market parameters
and is intended to capture the impact of both defaults and declines in market
value due to credit deterioration. this approach is intended to reflect more
accurately
current risk conditions, as well as to enhance the management of commercial
credit risk by encouraging the utilization of the growing market in credit
derivatives and secondary market loan sales. see the capital management section
on pages 4647 of this annual report.
within the consumer businesses, capital allocations are differentiated by
product and product segment. for the consumer portfolio, consumer products are
placed into categories with homogenous credit characteristics, from which
default rates and charge-offs can be estimated. credit risk capital is
allocated based on the unexpected loss inherent in those categories.
commercial and consumer credit portfolio
jpmorgan chases total credit exposure (which includes $34.9billion of
securitized credit cards) was $730.9billion at december31, 2003, a 2%
increase from year-end 2002. the increase reflected a change in the portfolios
composition: a $41.5billion increase in consumer exposure, partially offset by
a $30.2billion decrease in commercial exposure.
managed consumer loans increased by $15.7billion, primarily resulting from
higher levels of residential mortgage and automobile originations, while
lending-related commitments increased by $25.8billion, primarily in the home
finance and credit card businesses.
commercial exposure decreased by 7% to $382.7billion as of year-end 2003, the
result of an $8.5billion decrease in loans and a $22.4billion decrease in
lending-related commitments. the decrease in loans outstanding reflected weaker
demand, as well as the firms ongoing credit management activities, including
$5.2billion in loan and commitment sales. this was partially offset
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
by a $5.8billion increase related to vies consolidated in accordance with fin 46.
the decrease in lending-related commitments was due to an overall contraction
in lending demand and reflected a $6.3billion decline due to the adoption of
fin 46. for further discussion of fin 46, see note 14 on pages 103106 of this
annual report.
the firm also views its credit exposure on an economic basis, which is the
basis upon which it allocates credit capital to the lines of business. the
principal difference between the firms credit exposure on a reported basis and
economic credit exposure relates to the way the firm views its credit exposure
to derivative receivables and lending-related commitments.
for derivative receivables, the firm measures its economic credit exposure
using the average exposure (avg) metric. this is a measure of the expected
mtm value of the firms derivative receivables at future time periods,
including the benefit of collateral. the three-year average of the avg metric
is the firms economic measure of derivative risk since three years is the
average remaining life of the derivatives portfolio; it was $34billion as of
december31, 2003. for more information, see the derivative contracts section
of this annual report.
the following table reconciles derivative receivables on a mtm basis with the
firms economic credit exposure basis, a non-gaap financial measure.
reconciliation of
derivative receivables to economic credit exposure
as of december 31, (in billions)
derivative receivables:
derivative receivables mtm
$
$
collateral held against derivatives
(36
)
(30
)
derivative receivables  net current exposure
reduction in exposure to 3-year average exposure
(14
)
(19
)
economic credit exposure
$
$
for commercial lending-related commitments, the firm measures its economic
credit exposure using a loan equivalent amount for each commitment, rather
than the contractual amount of the lending-related commitment. the contractual
amount represents the maximum possible credit risk should the counterparty draw
down the commitment and subsequently default. however, most of these
commitments expire without a default occurring or without being drawn. as a
result, the total contractual amount of these instruments is not, in the firms
view, representative of the firms actual future credit exposure or funding
requirements. in determining the firms economic credit exposure to commercial
lending-related commitments, the firm has established a loan-equivalent
amount for each commitment. the loan-equivalent amount represents the portion
of the unused commitment or other contingent exposure that is likely, based on
average portfolio historical experience, to become outstanding in the event of
a default by the obligor. it is this amount that, in managements view,
represents the firms economic credit exposure to the obligor. the aggregate
amount of its economic credit exposure associated with commercial
lending-related commitments was $106.9billion in 2003, compared with $115.5
billion in 2002.
the following table reconciles commercial lendingrelated commitments on a gaap
basis with the firms economic credit exposure basis, a non-gaap financial
measure.
reconciliation of
commercial lending-related commitments to economic credit exposure
as of december 31, (in billions)
commercial lending-related commitments:
reported amount
$
$
loan equivalent (leq) adjustment
(109
)
(123
)
economic credit exposure
$
$
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the following table presents jpmorgan chases credit portfolio as of december
31, 2003 and 2002:
commercial and consumer credit portfolio
approximate period-end
as of december 31,
credit exposure
economic credit exposure
allocated credit capital
(in millions)
commercial
loans
(a)(b)
$
83,097
(i)
$
91,548
$
83,097
$
91,548
derivative
receivables (b)
83,751
83,102
34,130
34,189
other receivables
total commercial credit-related assets
166,956
174,758
117,335
125,845
lending-related commitments  (a)(c)
215,758
(j)
238,120
106,872
115,495
total commercial credit exposure
$
382,714
$
412,878
$
224,207
$
241,340
$
8,200
$
13,300
consumer
loans  reported (a)(d)
$
136,421
$
124,816
$
136,421
$
124,816
loans securitized (d)(e)
34,856
30,722
34,856
30,722
total managed consumer loans
171,277
155,538
171,277
155,538
lending-related commitments (f)
176,923
151,138
176,923
151,138
total consumer credit exposure
$
348,200
$
306,676
$
348,200
$
306,676
$
3,400
$
3,300
total credit portfolio
managed loans
$
254,374
$
247,086
$
254,374
$
247,086
derivative receivables
83,751
83,102
34,130
34,189
other receivables
total managed credit-related assets
338,233
330,296
288,612
281,383
total lending-related commitments
392,681
389,258
283,795
266,633
total credit portfolio
$
730,914
$
719,554
$
572,407
$
548,016
$
11,600
$
16,600
credit derivative hedges notional (g)
$
(37,282
)
$
(33,767
)
$
(37,282
)
$
(33,767
)
$
(1,300
)
$
(1,200
)
collateral held against derivative receivables (h)
(36,214
)
(30,410
)
na
na
(a)
amounts are presented gross of the allowance for credit losses.
(b)
loans are presented gross of collateral held. derivative receivables credit exposure is presented gross of collateral held.
(c)
includes unused advised lines of credit totaling $19billion at december
31, 2003, and $22billion at december31, 2002, which are not legally binding.
in regulatory filings with the board of governors of the federal reserve
system, unused advised lines are not reportable.
(d)
at december31, 2003, credit card securitizations included $1.1billion of
accrued interest and fees on securitized credit card loans that were classified
in other assets, consistent with the fasb staff position, accounting for
accrued interest receivable related to securitized and sold receivables under
sfas 140. prior to march31, 2003, this balance was classified in credit card
loans.
(e)
represents securitized credit cards. for a further discussion of credit
card securitizations, see page 41 of this annual report.
(f)
credit exposure and economic credit exposure to consumer lendingrelated
commitments are presented on the same basis; in the firms view, this is a
conservative measure as it represents the firms maximum exposure.
(g)
represents hedges of commercial credit exposure that do not qualify for
hedge accounting under sfas 133.
(h)
on an economic credit exposure basis, collateral is considered na, as it
is already accounted for in derivative receivables.
(i)
includes $5.8billion of exposure related to consolidated vies in
accordance with fin 46, of which $4.8billion is associated with multi-seller
asset-backed commercial paper conduits.
(j)
total commitments related to asset-backed commercial paper conduits
consolidated in accordance with fin 46 are $9.8billion, of which $3.5billion
is included in lending-related commitments. the remaining $6.3billion of
commitments to these vies is excluded, as the underlying assets of the vehicles
are reported as follows: $4.8billion in loans and $1.5billion in
available-for-sale securities.
as of december31, 2003, total economic credit exposure was $572.4billion,
compared with $548.0billion as of year-end 2002. economic credit exposure for
2003 was $572.4billion compared with 2003 credit exposure of $730.9billion.
the firms allocated credit capital (including the benefit from credit
derivative hedges) decreased significantly during 2003, to
$10.3billion at december31, 2003, from $15.4billion at year-end 2002. the
$5.1billion decrease was related to lower exposure in the commercial
portfolio, hedging and loan sale activities, and significantly improved credit
quality in the loan portfolio.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
commercial credit portfolio
the following table summarizes the maturity and ratings profiles of the
commercial portfolio as of december31, 2003 and 2002. the ratings scale is
based on the firms internal risk ratings, and is presented on an
s&pequivalent basis.
at december31, 2003, 83% of the total commercial credit exposure of $383
billion was considered investment-grade, an improvement from 80% at year-end
2002. there was improvement across all components of credit exposure, most
significantly
in loans, as commercial criticized exposure declined by 47%, while the total
commercial loan balance declined by 9%.
under the firms economic view of credit exposure, the portion of the portfolio
that was deemed investment-grade improved to 80% as of december31, 2003, from
74% at year-end 2002. in addition to the improved credit quality of loans and
lending-related commitments, the investment-grade component of derivative
receivables improved to 91% at year-end 2003 from 85% at the end of 2002.
commercial exposure
maturity profile(a)
ratings profile
total % of ig-
investment-grade ("ig")
noninvestment-grade
economic
as of december 31, 2003
aaa
a+
bbb+
bb+
ccc+
total %
credit
(in billions, except ratios)
<1 year
15 years
> 5 years
total
to aa-
to a-
to bbb-
to b-
& below
total
of ig
exposure
loans (b)
%
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
%
derivative receivables
lending-related commitments (c)(d)
total exposure  (e)
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
%
credit derivative hedges notional (f)
%
%
%
%
$
(10
)
$
(12
)
$
(12
)
$
(2
)
$
(1
)
$
(37
)
%
%
total % of ig-
investment-grade ("ig")
noninvestment-grade
economic
as of december 31, 2002
aaa
a+
bbb+
bb+
ccc+
total %
credit
(in billions, except ratios)
<1 year
15 years
> 5 years
total
to aa-
to a-
to bbb-
to b-
& below
total
of ig
exposure
loans
%
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
%
derivative receivables
lending-related commitments
total exposure
%
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
%
credit derivative hedges notional (f)
%
%
%
%
$
(9
)
$
(10
)
$
(10
)
$
(4
)
$
(1
)
$
(34
)
%
%
(a)
the maturity profile of loans and lending-related commitments is based upon
remaining contractual maturity. the maturity profile of derivative receivables
is based upon the maturity profile of average exposure. see page 59 of this
annual report for a further discussion.
(b)
includes $5.8billion of exposure related to consolidated vies in
accordance with fin 46, of which $4.8billion is associated with multi-seller
asset-backed commercial paper conduits.
excluding the impact of fin 46, the total percentage of investment-grade would
have been 62%.
(c)
based on economic credit exposure, the maturity profile for the <1year,
15years and >5years would have been 38%, 58% and 4%, respectively. see
page 53 of this annual report for a further discussion of economic credit
exposure.
(d)
total commitments related to asset-backed commercial paper conduits
consolidated in accordance with fin 46 are $9.8billion, of which $3.5billion
is included in lending-related commitments. the remaining $6.3billion of
commitments to these vies is excluded, as the underlying assets of the vehicles
are reported as follows: $4.8billion in loans and $1.5billion in
available-for-sale securities.
(e)
based on economic credit exposure, the
maturity profile for <1year, 15years and >5years would have been 36%,
46% and 18%, respectively. see page 53 of this annual report for a further
discussion.
(f)
ratings are based on the underlying referenced assets.
commercial exposure  selected industry concentrations
during 2003, the firm undertook a thorough analysis of industry risk
correlations. as a result, the firm developed a new industry structure,
intended to provide stronger linkages between exposures with common risk
attributes. the firm expects these changes to enhance its ability to manage
industry risks consistently across regions and lines of business. the
implementation
of the new industry structure resulted in shifts in credit exposure, with
increases in some industries due to consolidation and decreases in others as a
result of realignments. in managing industry risk, the firm recognizes
customers that have multiple industry affiliations in each industry category.
however, the following table ranks exposures only by a customers primary
industry affiliation to prevent double counting.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the industry distribution of the firms commercial credit exposure (loans,
derivative receivables and lending-related commitments) under the new industry
structure, as of december31, 2003 and 2002, was as follows:
collateral
ratings profile of credit exposure
held
noninvestment-grade
credit
against
as of december 31, 2003
credit
investment-
criticized
criticized
net
derivative
derivative
(in millions, except ratios)
exposure(a)
grade
noncriticized
performing
nonperforming(b)
charge-offs(c)
hedges(d)
receivables
top 10 industries
commercial banks
$
47,063
%
$
1,786
$
$
$
$
(10,231
)
$
(24,740
)
asset managers
21,794
3,899
(245
)
(1,133
)
securities firms and exchanges
15,599
2,582
(1,369
)
(4,168
)
finance companies and lessors
15,589
(2,307
)
(82
)
utilities
15,296
1,714
(1,960
)
(176
)
real estate
14,544
4,058
(718
)
(182
)
state and municipal governments
14,354
(405
)
(12
)
media
14,075
3,285
1,307
(1,678
)
(186
)
consumer products
13,774
3,628
(1,104
)
(122
)
insurance
12,756
(2,149
)
(854
)
other selected industries
telecom services
10,924
2,204
(2,941
)
(402
)
automotive
7,268
1,536
(2,313
)
all other
179,678
31,658
3,441
(9,862
)
(4,157
)
total
$
382,714
%
$
57,782
$
6,487
$
2,370
$
$
(37,282
)
$
(36,214
)
collateral
ratings profile of credit exposure
held
noninvestment-grade
credit
against
as of december 31, 2002
credit
investment-
criticized
criticized
net
derivative
derivative
(in millions, except ratios)
exposure (a)
grade
noncriticized
performing
nonperforming(b)
charge-offs(c)
hedges(d)
receivables
top 10 industries(e)
commercial banks
$
42,247
%
$
2,188
$
$
$
$
(8,370
)
$
(18,212
)
asset managers
24,867
5,328
(276
)
(1,153
)
securities firms and exchanges
17,512
1,667
(551
)
(3,680
)
finance companies and lessors
18,977
1,220
(2,322
)
(133
)
utilities
17,717
2,096
2,146
(2,708
)
(33
)
real estate
11,614
3,611
(692
)
(115
)
state and municipal governments
11,973
(1,273
)
(8
)
media
17,566
4,680
1,918
(1,178
)
(611
)
consumer products
12,376
3,157
(1,179
)
(85
)
insurance
14,800
(2,478
)
(778
)
other selected industries
telecom services
15,604
5,077
(436
)
automotive
8,192
2,055
(2
)
(1,148
)
all other
199,433
33,028
6,095
1,384
(11,156
)
(5,602
)
total
$
412,878
%
$
64,981
$
12,509
$
4,069
$
2,093
$
(33,767
)
$
(30,410
)
(a)
credit exposure is
net of risk participations, and excludes the benefit of credit
derivative hedges and collateral held against derivative receivables or loans.
(b)
nonperforming assets exclude nonaccrual loans held for sale (hfs) of $52
million and $18million at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. hfs loans
are carried at the lower of cost or market, and declines in value are recorded
in other revenue.
(c)
represents net charge-offs on loans and lending-related commitments.
amounts in parentheses represent net recoveries.
(d)
represents notional
amounts only; these hedges do not qualify for hedge accounting under sfas 133.
(e)
based on the 2003 determination of top 10 industries.
selected industry discussion
presented below is a discussion of several industries to which the firm has
significant exposure and which it continues to
monitor because of actual or potential credit concerns.
commercial banks: the industry represents the largest segment of the firms
commercial credit exposure, and 96% of the credit exposure is rated
investment-grade. collateral held against $33.3billion in derivative
receivables is valued at $24.7billion.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
utilities: the firm significantly reduced its credit exposure to
this segment over the last twelve months, from $17.7billion to $15.3
billion, a 14% decline. this reduction was achieved by significant
refinancing activity in nonbank capital markets, restructurings in the
industry and a decline in client demand for lending activity.
criticized credit exposures, primarily related to u.s. customers, were
reduced by 65%, to $998million. utilities became a top-10 industry as
a result of the new industry structure, which consolidated several
related sectors.
media: total credit exposure declined by 20% to $14.1billion. the
quality of the portfolio was enhanced by a reduction in criticized
exposures, primarily in the european cable sector, which increased the
proportion of investment-grade exposures from 58% to 65% of the
portfolio. overall, criticized exposures were reduced by 36%, to $1.7
billion. media became a top-10 industry as a result of the new industry
structure, which consolidated several related sectors.
telecom services: in 2003, the telecommunications industry
worldwide improved its financial picture significantly after severe
capital and liquidity constraints in 2002. overall, credit exposures
declined by 30% to $10.9billion during the year; 75% of the credit
exposure is considered investment-grade compared with 59% in 2002.
criticized exposures were reduced by 59% during the year, the result of
capital markets refinancings, other restructurings and acquisitions of
weaker market participants by stronger companies.
automotive: in 2003, automotive companies accessed nonbank capital
markets, reducing the firms credit exposure by $924million. while
total credit exposure to this industry is significant, more than half
of the exposure is undrawn. at december31, 2003, 76% of this portfolio
was rated investment-grade, an increase from 2002.
all other: all other at december31, 2003 included $180billion of
credit exposure to 21 industry segments. exposures related to
special-purpose entities and high net worth individuals totaled 38% of
this category. special-purpose entities provide secured financing
(generally backed by receivables, loans or bonds) originated by
companies in a diverse group of industries which are not highly
correlated. the remaining all other exposure is well diversified across
other industries, none of which comprise more than 3% of total
exposure.
commercial criticized exposure
exposures deemed criticized generally represent a ratings profile similar to a
rating of ccc+/caa1 and lower, as defined by standard & poors/moodys. as of
year-end 2003, the total $8.9billion in criticized exposure represented 2% of
total commercial credit exposure and was down $7.7billion, or 47%, from
december31, 2002. the significant decrease was due to improved economic
conditions, restructurings and capital markets refinancings during the year, in
particular in the telecom services, media and utilities industries.
commercial criticized exposure trends(a)
(in billions)
chemicals/plastics telecom servicesall other metals/miningmedia technologyutilities
$16.6 $1.2 $15 $14.6 $1.2 $0.9 $1.4 $12.8 $1.0 $0.8 $1.4 $11.3 $2.6 $0.9
$0.7 $1.2 $0.8 $10 $2.5 $8.9 $0.9 $2.9 $2.6 $0.6 $2.0 $2.5 $0.6 $0.6 $1.3 $1.7
$1.2 $5 $1.0 $7.3 $6.8 $6.0 $5.2 $4.4
$0
12/31/02 3/31/03 6/30/03 9/30/03 12/31/03
(a)industries shown represent the top five by criticized exposure at the
period indicated.
the top five industries shown above total 50% of the total commercial
criticized exposure at december31, 2003. no industry below the top five is
larger than 5% of the total.
criticized exposure  industry concentrations
december31, 2003
machinery & consumer products 5% equipment mfg. 5%
airlines 4%
emerging markets 3% retail 3% metal/mining 3% real estate 3%
top 5 50% under 3% 24%
enron-related exposure
the firms exposure to enron and enron-related entities was reduced by 11%
during the year, from $688million at december31, 2002, to $609million at
december31, 2003. the reduction was primarily due to the maturation of $50
million of debtor-in-possession financing and repayments on secured exposures.
at december31, 2003, secured exposure of $270million is performing and is
reported on an amortized cost basis.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
country exposure
the firm has a comprehensive process for
measuring and managing its country
exposures and risk. exposures to a country
include all credit-related lending,
trading and investment activities, whether
cross-border or locally funded. in
addition to monitoring country exposures,
the firm uses stress tests to measure and
manage the risk of extreme loss associated
with sovereign crises.
the table below presents the firms
exposure to selected countries. the
selection of countries is based on the
materiality of the firms exposure and its
view of actual or potentially adverse
credit conditions. exposure amounts are
adjusted for credit enhancements (e.g.,
guarantees and letters of credit) provided
by third parties located outside the
country if the enhancements fully cover
the country risk, as well as the
commercial risk. in
addition, the benefit of collateral,
credit derivative hedges and other short
credit or equity trading positions are
reflected. total exposure includes
exposure to both government and
private-sector entities in a country.
the slight decrease in exposure to brazil
over the prior year-end was due to
reductions in loans. the decline in
mexican exposure when compared with the
prior year was primarily due to loan
maturities and reductions in counterparty
exposure on derivatives. the reduction in
south korea was due to a combination of
loan maturities and trading activities.
hong kongs exposure declined due to lower
counterparty exposure on
derivatives. the increase in russian
exposure was due to cross-border and local
trading positions and short-term lending.
selected country exposure
at december 31,
at december 31, 2003
cross-border
total
total
(in billions)
lending (a)
trading (b)
other (c)
total
local (d)
exposure
exposure
brazil
$
0.2
$
0.4
$
0.6
$
1.2
$
0.8
$
2.0
$
2.1
mexico
0.6
0.5
0.2
1.3
0.2
1.5
2.2
south korea
0.6
0.4
0.3
1.3
0.9
2.2
2.7
hong kong
0.7
0.1
0.9
1.7
1.7
2.2
russia
0.1
0.5
0.6
0.1
0.7
0.5
(a)
lending includes loans and accrued interest receivable, interest-bearing
deposits with banks, acceptances, other monetary assets, issued letters of
credit and undrawn commitments to extend credit.
(b)
trading includes (1)issuer exposure on cross-border debt and equity instruments, held in both
trading and investment accounts, adjusted for the impact of issuer hedges,
including credit derivatives; and (2)counterparty exposure on derivative and
foreign exchange contracts as well as security financing trades (resale
agreements and securities borrowed).
(c)
other represents mainly local exposure funded cross-border.
(d)
local exposure is defined as exposure to a country denominated in local
currency, booked and funded locally.
derivative contracts
in the normal course of business, the firm
utilizes derivative instruments to meet
the needs of customers, to generate
revenues through trading activities, to
manage exposure to fluctuations in
interest rates, currencies and other
markets and to manage its own credit risk.
the firm uses the same credit risk
management procedures to assess and
approve potential credit
exposures when entering into derivative
transactions as those used for
traditional lending.
the following table summarizes the
aggregate notional amounts and the
reported derivative receivables (i.e., the
mtm or fair value of derivative contracts
after taking into account the effects of
legally enforceable master netting
agreements) at each of the dates
indicated:
notional amounts and derivative receivables mtm
notional
amounts (a)
derivative receivables mtm
as of december 31, (in billions)
interest rate contracts
$
31,252
$
23,591
$
$
foreign exchange contracts
1,582
1,505
equity
credit derivatives
commodity
total notional and credit exposure
33,764
25,805
collateral held against derivative receivables
na
na
(36
)
(30
)
exposure net of collateral
$
33,764
$
25,805
$
$
(a)
the notional amounts represent the gross sum of long and short third-party
notional derivative contracts, excluding written options and foreign exchange
spot contracts.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
the $34 trillion of notional principal of
the firms derivative contracts
outstanding at december31, 2003,
significantly exceeds the possible credit
losses that could arise from such
transactions. for most derivative
transactions, the notional principal
amount does not change hands; it is simply
used as a reference to calculate payments.
in terms of current credit risk exposure,
the appropriate measure of risk is the mtm
value of the contract. the mtm exposure
represents the cost to replace the
contracts at current market rates should
the counterparty default. when jpmorgan
chase has more than one transaction
outstanding with a counterparty, and a
legally enforceable master netting
agreement exists with the counterparty,
the mtm exposure, less collateral held,
represents, in the firms view, the
appropriate measure of current credit risk
with that counterparty as of the reporting
date. at december31, 2003, the mtm value
of derivative receivables (after taking
into account the effects of legally
enforceable master netting agreements) was
$84billion. further, after taking into
account $36billion of collateral held by
the firm, the net current mtm credit
exposure was $48billion.
while useful as a current view of credit
exposure, the net mtm value of the
derivative receivables does not capture
the potential future variability of that
credit exposure. to capture the potential
future variability of credit exposure,
the firm calculates, on a
client-by-client basis, three measures of
potential derivatives-related credit
loss: peak, derivative risk equivalent
(dre) and average exposure (avg).
this last measure is used as the basis
for the firms economic credit exposure
as defined on page 53 of this annual
report. these measures all incorporate
netting and collateral benefits where
applicable.
peak exposure to a counterparty is an
extreme measure of exposure
calculated at a 97.5% confidence level.
however, the total potential future credit
risk embedded in the firms derivatives
portfolio is not the simple sum of all
peak client credit risks. this is because,
at the portfolio level, credit risk is
reduced by the fact that when offsetting
transactions are done with separate
counterparties, only one of the two trades
can generate a credit loss even if both
counterparties were to default
simultaneously. the firm refers to this
effect as market diversification, and the
market-diversified peak (mdp) measure is
a portfolio aggregation of counterparty
peak measures, representing the maximum
losses at the 97.5% confidence level that
would occur if all counterparties
defaulted under any one given market
scenario and timeframe.
derivative risk equivalent exposure is a
measure that expresses the riskiness of
derivative exposure on a basis intended to
be equivalent to the riskiness of loan
exposures. this is done by equating the
unexpected loss in a derivative
counterparty exposure (which takes into consideration both
the loss volatility and the credit rating of the
counterparty) with the unexpected loss
in a loan exposure (which takes into consideration only the credit
rating of the
counterparty). dre is a less extreme
measure of the potential credit loss than
peak, and is the primary measure used by
the firm for credit approval of derivative
transactions.
finally, as described on page 53 of this
annual report, average exposure is a
measure of the expected mtm value of the
firms derivative receivables at future
time periods. the three-year average of
the avg is the basis of the firms
economic credit exposure, while avg
exposure over the total life of the
derivative contract is used as the
primary metric for pricing purposes and
is used to calculate credit capital and
the credit valuation adjustment (cva).
the chart below shows the exposure
profiles to derivatives over the next 10
years as calculated by the mdp, dre and
avg metrics. all three measures generally
show declining exposure after the first
year, if no new trades were added to the
portfolio.
the mtm value of the firms derivative
receivables incorporates an adjustment to
reflect the credit quality of
counterparties. this is called cva and was
$635million as of december31, 2003,
compared with $1.3billion at december31,
2002. the cva is based on the firms avg
to a counterparty, and on the
counterpartys credit spread in the
credit derivatives market. the primary
components of changes in cva are credit
spreads, new deal activity or unwinds, and
changes in the underlying market
environment. the cva decrease in 2003 was
primarily due to the dramatic reduction in
credit spreads during the year. for a
discussion of the impact of cva on trading
revenue, see portfolio management activity
on pages 60-61 of this annual report.
the firm believes that active risk
management is essential to controlling
the dynamic credit risk in the
derivatives portfolio. the firm hedges
its exposure to changes in cva by
entering into credit derivative
transactions, as well as interest rate,
foreign exchange, equity and commodity
derivatives transactions.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the table below summarizes the ratings
profile, as of december31, 2003, of the
firms balance sheet derivative receivables
mtm, net of cash and other highly liquid
collateral:
ratings profile of derivative receivables mtm
rating equivalent
exposure net
% of exposure
(in millions)
of collateral (a)
net of collateral
aaa to aa-
$
24,697
%
a+ to a-
7,677
bbb+ to bbb-
7,564
bb+ to b-
6,777
ccc+ and below
total
$
47,537
%
(a)
total derivative receivables exposure
and collateral held by the firm against
this exposure were $84billion and $36
billion, respectively. the $36billion
excludes $8billion of collateral
delivered by clients at the initiation of
transactions; this collateral secures
exposure that could arise in the existing
portfolio of derivatives should the mtm of
the clients transactions move in the
firms favor. the $36billion also
excludes credit enhancements in the form
of letters of credit and surety
receivables.
the firm actively pursues the use of
collateral agreements to mitigate
counterparty credit risk in derivatives.
the percentage of the firms derivatives
transactions subject to collateral
agreements increased to 78% on december
31, 2003, from 67% on december31, 2002.
the increase of collateralized
transactions was driven largely by new
collateral agreements. the firm held $36
billion of collateral as of december31,
2003, compared with $30billion as of
december31, 2002. the firm posted $27
billion of collateral at year-end 2003,
compared with $19billion at the end of
2002.
certain derivative and collateral
agreements include provisions that require
both the firm and the counterparty, upon
specified downgrades in their respective
credit ratings, to post collateral for the
benefit of the other party. the impact on
required collateral of a single-notch
ratings downgrade to jpmorgan chase bank,
from its current rating of aa- to a+,
would have been an additional $1.3billion
of collateral as of december31, 2003. the
impact of a six-notch ratings downgrade to
jpmorgan chase bank (from aa- to bbb-)
would have been $3.7billion of additional
collateral from levels as of december31,
2003. the amount of additional collateral
required upon downgrade moves in tandem
with the mark-to-market value of the
derivatives portfolio and ranged (with
respect to a six-notch downgrade) from
$3.4billion to $4.2billion throughout
2003, as the level of u.s. interest rates
changed. certain derivatives contracts
also provide for termination of the
contract, generally upon jpmorgan chase
bank being downgraded, at the
then-existing mtm value of the derivative
receivables.
use of credit derivatives
the following table presents the notional
amounts of credit derivatives protection
bought and sold at december31, 2003 and
2002:
credit derivative positions
portfolio management
dealer/client
notional amount
notional amount
december 31,
protection
protection
protection
protection
(in millions)
bought (a)
sold
bought
sold
total
$
37,349
$
$
264,389
$
275,888
$
577,693
$
34,262
$
$
158,794
$
172,494
$
366,045
(a)
includes $2.2billion and $10.1billion at 2003 and 2002, respectively, of
portfolio credit derivatives.
jpmorgan chase has limited counterparty
exposure as a result of credit derivatives
transactions. of the $84billion of total
derivative receivables at december31,
2003, approximately $3billion, or 4%, was
associated with credit derivatives, before
the benefit of collateral. the use of
credit derivatives to manage exposures does
not reduce the reported level of assets on
the balance sheet or the level of reported
offbalance sheet commitments.
portfolio management activity
in managing its commercial credit
exposure, the firm purchases single-name
and portfolio credit derivatives to hedge
its exposures. as of december31, 2003,
the notional outstanding amount of
protection purchased via single-name and
portfolio credit derivatives was $35
billion and $2billion, respectively. the
firm also diversifies its exposures by
providing (i.e., selling) small amounts of
credit protection, which increases
exposure to industries or clients where
the firm has little or no client-related
exposure. this activity is not material to
the firms overall credit exposure; credit
protection sold totaled $67million in
notional exposure at december31, 2003.
use of single-name and portfolio credit derivatives
notional amount of protection bought
december 31, (in millions)
credit derivative hedges of:
loans and lending-related commitments
$
22,471
$
25,222
derivative receivables
14,878
9,040
total
$
37,349
$
34,262
the credit derivatives used by jpmorgan
chase for its portfolio management
activities do not qualify for hedge
accounting under sfas 133. these
derivatives are marked to market in trading
revenue. the mtm value incorporates both
the cost of hedge premiums and changes in
value due to movement in spreads and credit
events, whereas the loans and
lending-related commitments being hedged
are accounted for on an accrual basis in
net interest income and assessed for
impairment in the provision for credit
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
losses. this asymmetry in accounting
treatment between loans and
lending-related commitments and the credit
derivatives utilized in the portfolio
management activities causes earnings
volatility that is not representative of
the true changes in value of the firms
overall credit exposure. the mtm treatment
of both the firms credit derivative
hedges (short credit positions) and the
cva, which reflects the credit quality of
derivatives counterparty exposure (long
credit positions), provides some natural
offset. additionally, the firm actively
manages its commercial credit exposure
through loan sales. during 2003, the firm sold
$5.2billion of loans and commitments, of
which $1.3billion was criticized.
the 2003 portfolio management activity
resulted in $191million of losses
included in trading revenue. these losses
included $746million related to credit
derivatives that were used to hedge the
firms credit exposure, of which
approximately $504million was associated
with credit derivatives used to hedge
accrual lending activities and the
remainder primarily hedged the credit risk
of mtm derivative receivables. the losses
were generally driven by an overall global
tightening of credit spreads. the $746
million loss was largely offset by $555
million of trading revenue gains primarily
related to the decrease in the mtm value
of the cva due to credit spread
tightening. during 2003, the quarterly
portfolio management trading revenue
results ranged from a net loss of $12
million in the third quarter to a net loss
of $119million in the second quarter.
dealer/client activity
jpmorgan chases dealer activity in credit
derivatives is client-driven. the business
acts as a market-maker in single-name
credit derivatives and also structures
more complex transactions for clients
investment or risk management purposes.
the credit derivatives trading function
operates within the same framework as
other market-making desks. risk limits are
established and closely monitored.
as of december31, 2003, the total
notional amounts of protection purchased
and sold by the dealer business were $264
billion and $276billion, respectively.
the mismatch between these notional
amounts is attributable to the firm
selling protection on large, diversified,
predominantly investment-grade portfolios
(including the most senior tranches) and
then hedging these positions by buying
protection on the more subordinated
tranches of the same portfolios. in
addition, the firm may use securities to
hedge certain derivative positions.
consequently, while there is a mismatch in
notional amounts of credit derivatives,
the firm believes the risk positions are
largely matched.
consumer credit portfolio
the firms managed consumer loan portfolio
totaled $171.3billion at december31,
2003, an increase of 10% from 2002.
consumer lendingrelated commitments
increased by 17% to $176.9billion at
december31, 2003. the following table
presents a summary of consumer credit
exposure on a managed basis:
consumer portfolio
as of december 31, (in millions)
u.s. consumer:
14 family residential
mortgages  first liens
$
54,460
$
49,357
home equity
19,252
14,643
14 family residential mortgages
73,712
64,000
credit card  reported  (a)
16,793
19,677
credit card securitizations  (a)(b)
34,856
30,722
credit card  managed
51,649
50,399
automobile financings
38,695
33,615
other consumer  (c)
7,221
7,524
total managed consumer loans
$
171,277
$
155,538
lending-related commitments:
14 family residential mortgages
28,846
20,016
credit cards
141,143
123,461
automobile financings
2,603
1,795
other consumer
4,331
5,866
total lending-related commitments
$
176,923
$
151,138
total consumer credit exposure
$
348,200
$
306,676
(a)
at december31, 2003, credit card
securitizations included $1.1billion of
accrued interest and fees on securitized
credit card loans that were classified in
other assets, consistent with fasb
staff position, accounting for accrued
interest receivable related to
securitized and sold receivables under
sfas 140. prior to march31, 2003, this
balance was classified in credit card
loans.
(b)
represents the portion of jpmorgan
chases credit card receivables that have
been securitized.
(c)
consists of installment loans (direct and indirect
types of consumer finance), student loans,
unsecured revolving lines of credit and
non-u.s. consumer loans.
jpmorgan chases consumer portfolio
consists primarily of 14 family
residential mortgages, credit cards and
automobile financings. the consumer
portfolio is predominantly u.s.-based. the
following pie graph provides a summary of
the consumer portfolio by loan type at
year-end 2003 and each loan types net
charge-off rate.
the firms largest component, 14 family
residential mortgage loans is primarily
secured by first mortgages, and at december 31, 2003
comprised 43% of the total consumer
portfolio. the risk of these loans is the
probability the consumer will default and
that the value of the home will be
insufficient to cover the mortgage plus
carrying costs. mortgage loans for 14
family residences at december31, 2003,
increased by 10% compared with last year
to $54.5billion. home equity loans and
home equity lines of credit totaled $19.3
billion at december31, 2003, an increase
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
of $4.6billion, or 31%, from 2002. these
loans and lines are secured by first and
second mortgages. the risks are similar to
those of first mortgages; however, loss
severity can increase when the firm is in a
second-lien position. as of december31,
2003, 88% of home equity loans and lines of
credit were secured by second liens.
borrowers with home equity lines of credit
are approved for a line of credit for up to
10years. the firm has a future funding
liability in situations where the borrower
does not make use of the line of credit
immediately but has the right to draw down
the commitment at any time. as of december
31, 2003, outstandings under home equity
lines were $16.6billion and
unused commitments were $23.4billion
(included in the $28.8billion of 14
family residential mortgage lending-related
commitments). the business actively manages
the unused portion of these commitments and
freezes a commitment when the borrower
becomes delinquent. these accounts are then
subject to proactive default management,
with the objective of minimizing potential
losses.
the firm analyzes its credit card
portfolio on a managed basis, which
includes credit card receivables on the
consolidated balance sheet and those that
have been securitized. credit card
customers are initially approved for a
specific revolving credit line. for open
accounts (those in good standing and able
to transact), the difference between the
approved line and the balance outstanding
in the customers account is referred to
as open-to-buy. the firm is exposed to
changes in the customers credit standing
and therefore must calculate the aggregate
size of this unused exposure and manage
the potential credit risk. the size of the
credit line and resulting open-to-buy
balance is adjusted by the firm based on
the borrowers payment and general credit
performance. managed credit card
receivables increased by $1.3billion, or
2%, during 2003. the managed net
charge-off rate of 5.87% was unchanged
from 2002.
automobile financings grew by 15% to
approximately $38.7billion, while the net
charge-off rate improved from 0.57% in
2002 to 0.45% in 2003.
the following chart presents the geographical concentration of the u.s.
consumer loans by region for the years ended december31, 2003 and 2002.
the following table presents the geographical concentration of
consumer loans by product for the years ended december31, 2003 and 2002.
consumer loans by geographic region (a)
14 family residential
managed credit
automobile
mortgages
card loans
financings
as of december 31, (in millions)
new york city
$
14,624
$
12,026
$
3,058
$
3,007
$
2,904
$
2,801
new york (excluding new york city)
1,863
2,452
3,045
3,002
1,013
remaining northeast
11,474
10,053
8,971
8,817
8,308
7,206
total northeast
27,961
24,531
15,074
14,826
12,225
10,943
southeast
10,343
9,531
9,922
9,589
5,827
5,467
midwest
5,349
4,834
9,976
9,654
7,862
5,839
texas
3,776
3,978
4,535
4,336
3,780
3,877
southwest (excluding texas)
1,551
1,661
2,482
2,399
1,384
1,181
california
19,786
14,501
6,177
6,229
5,486
4,748
west (excluding california)
4,946
4,964
3,483
3,366
2,131
1,560
non-u.s.
total
$
73,712
$
64,012
$
51,649
$
50,399
$
38,695
$
33,615
(a)
this table excludes other consumer loans of $7.2billion and $7.5billion
at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
commercial and consumer nonperforming exposure and net charge-offs
the following table presents a summary of credit-related nonperforming, past
due and net charge-off information for the dates indicated:
as of or for the year ended
nonperforming
nonperforming assets
past due 90 days and
average annual
december 31,
assets (i)
as a % of total
over and accruing
net charge-offs
net charge-off rate
(in millions, except ratios)
commercial
loans (a)
$
2,009
$
3,672
2.42
%
4.01
%
$
$
$
$
1,881
0.91
%
1.93
%
derivative receivables
0.30
0.35
na
na
na
na
other receivables
na
na
na
na
na
na
total commercial
credit-related assets
2,370
4,069
1.42
2.33
1,881
0.91
1.93
lending-related commitments
na
na
na
na
na
na
0.09
total commercial credit
exposure
$
2,370
$
4,069
0.62
%
0.99
%
$
$
$
$
2,093
0.26
%
0.62
%
consumer
u.s. consumer:
14 family residential
mortgages  first liens
$
$
0.46
%
0.52
%
$
$
$
$
0.04
%
0.11
%
home equity
0.29
0.36
0.06
0.05
14 family residential
mortgages
0.41
0.49
0.04
0.10
credit card
reported  (b)(c)
0.07
0.08
1,072
1,389
6.32
6.42
credit card
securitizations  (b)(d)
1,870
1,439
5.64
5.43
credit card  managed
0.02
0.03
1,127
1,081
2,942
2,828
5.87
5.87
automobile financings
0.31
0.35
0.45
0.57
other
consumer  (e)
0.91
1.01
2.45
2.41
total managed consumer loans
0.29
0.33
1,148
1,103
3,326
3,234
1.96
2.30
lending-related commitments
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
total consumer credit
exposure
$
$
0.14
%
0.17
%
$
1,148
$
1,103
$
3,326
$
3,234
1.00
%
1.15
%
total credit portfolio
managed loans
$
2,509
$
4,193
0.99
%
1.70
%
$
1,194
$
1,160
$
4,142
$
5,115
1.60
%
2.15
%
derivative receivables
0.30
0.35
na
na
na
na
other receivables
na
na
na
na
na
na
total managed credit-related
assets
2,870
4,590
0.85
1.39
1,194
1,160
4,142
5,115
1.60
2.15
total lending-related commitments
na
na
na
na
na
na
0.06
assets
acquired in loan satisfactions  (f)
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
total
credit portfolio (g)
$
3,086
$
4,780
0.42
%
0.66
%
$
1,194
$
1,160
$
4,142
$
5,327
0.64
%
0.86
%
credit derivatives hedges
notional (h)
$
(123
)
$
(66
)
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
(a)
average annual net charge-off rate would have been 0.97% for the year ended
december31, 2003, excluding the impact of the adoption of fin 46.
(b)
at december31, 2003, credit card securitizations included $166million of
accrued interest and fees on securitized credit card loans past due 90days and
over and accruing that were classified in other assets, consistent with the
fasb staff position, accounting for accrued interest receivable related to
securitized and sold receivables under sfas 140. prior to march31, 2003, this
balance was classified in credit card loans. at december31, 2003, none was
nonperforming.
(c)
in connection with
charge-offs, during 2003 and 2002, $372million and
$387million, respectively, of accrued credit card interest and
fees were reversed and recorded as a reduction of interest income and
fee revenue.
(d)
represents securitized credit cards. for a further discussion of credit
card securitizations, see page 41 of this annual report.
(e)
consists of installment loans (direct and indirect types of consumer
finance), student loans, unsecured revolving lines of credit and non-u.s.
consumer loans.
(f)
includes $9million and $14million of commercial assets acquired in loan
satisfactions, and $207million and $176million of consumer assets acquired in
loan satisfactions at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
(g)
at december 31,
2003 and 2002, excludes $2.3billion and $3.1billion,
respectively, of residential mortgage receivables in foreclosure
status that are insured by government agencies. these amounts are excluded as
reimbursement is proceeding normally, and are recorded in other assets.
(h)
represents single
name credit derivative hedges of commercial credit exposure that do not qualify for
hedge accounting under sfas 133.
(i)
nonperforming assets exclude nonaccrual hfs loans of $97million and $43
million at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. nonaccrual commercial hfs
loans were $52million and $18million, and nonaccrual consumer hfs loans were
$45million and $25million at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
nonperforming assets decreased by $1.7
billion, or 35%, during the year ended
december31, 2003, to $3.1billion. the
decrease was due to activity in the
commercial portfolio: total reductions,
including repayments, loan sales and net
charge-offs exceeded new additions,
resulting in net reductions of $1.7
billion. by contrast, there were
commercial net additions during 2002. a
decline in exposure to the telecom
services, utilities and media industries
accounted for more than half of the
overall $1.7billion decrease.
commercial
commercial nonperforming loans decreased
by 45%, to $2.0billion as of december
31, 2003, from $3.7billion at year-end
2002. over the same period, nonperforming
commercial loans as a percentage of total
commercial loans fell to 2.42% from
4.01%. commercial loan net charge-offs in
2003 were $816million, compared with
$1.9billion in 2002, the result of
improved credit quality in the portfolio
and increased recoveries resulting from
restructurings. there were no net
charge-offs of commercial lendingrelated
commitments in 2003, compared with $212
million in 2002. the average annual net
charge-off rate for commercial loans
improved significantly, to 0.91% in 2003
from 1.93% in 2002.
commercial net charge-offs in 2004 are
expected to decline, but at a slower
pace than in the second half of 2003.
consumer
the $21million decrease in consumer
nonperforming loans reflected improved
credit quality in the portfolio. while net
charge-offs increased by $92million
during the year reflecting a 10% growth in the portfolio, the average annual net
charge-off rate declined to 1.96% from
2.30% during 2002.
in 2004, the amount of gross charge-offs
is expected to increase due to growth in
outstandings, but net charge-off rates are
expected to remain stable.
allowance for credit losses
jpmorgan chases allowance for credit
losses is intended to cover probable
credit losses, including losses where the
asset is not specifically identified or
the size of the loss has not been
determined. at least quarterly, the firms
risk management committee reviews the
allowance for credit losses relative to
the risk profile of the firms credit
portfolio and current economic conditions.
the allowance is adjusted based on that
review if, in managements judgment,
changes are warranted. the allowance
includes specific and expected loss
components and a residual component. for
further discussion of the components of
the allowance for credit losses, see
critical accounting estimates used by the
firm on pages 7576 and note 12 on page
100 of this annual report. at december31,
2003, management deemed the allowance for
credit losses to be appropriate to absorb
losses that currently may exist but are
not yet identifiable.
summary of changes in the allowance
(in millions)
commercial
consumer
residual
total
commercial
consumer
residual
total
loans:
beginning balance at january 1
$
2,216
$
2,360
$
$
5,350
$
1,724
$
2,105
$
$
4,524
net charge-offs
(816
)
(1,456
)
(2,272
)
(1,881
)
(1,795
)
(3,676
)
provision for loan losses
(30
)
1,491
1,579
2,371
1,589
4,039
other
(138
)(c)
(134
)
ending balance at december 31
$
1,371
(a)
$
2,257
$
$
4,523
$
2,216
(a)
$
2,360
$
$
5,350
lending-related commitments:
beginning balance at january 1
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
net charge-offs
(212
)
(212
)
provision for lending-related commitments
(47
)
(39
)
(17
)
other
ending balance at december 31
$
(b)
$
$
$
$
(b)
$
$
$
(a)
includes $917million and $454million of commercial specific and
commercial expected loss components, respectively, at december31, 2003.
includes $1.6billion and $613million of commercial specific and commercial
expected loss components, respectively, at december31, 2002.
(b)
includes $172million and $105million of commercial specific and
commercial expected loss components, respectively, at december31, 2003.
includes $237million and $87million of commercial specific and commercial
expected loss components, respectively, at december31, 2002.
(c)
includes $138million related to the transfer of the allowance for accrued
interest and fees on securitized credit card loans.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
credit costs
for the year ended december 31
(in millions)
commercial
consumer
residual
total
commercial
consumer
residual
total
provision for loan losses
$
(30
)
$
1,491
$
$
1,579
$
2,371
$
1,589
$
$
4,039
provision for lending-related commitments
(47
)
(39
)
(17
)
securitized credit losses
1,870
1,870
1,439
1,439
total managed credit costs
$
(77
)
$
3,361
$
$
3,410
$
2,680
$
3,028
$
$
5,770
loans
the commercial specific loss component
of the allowance was $917million at
december31, 2003, a decrease of 43%
from year-end 2002. the decrease was
attributable to the improvement in the
credit quality of the commercial loan
portfolio, as well as the reduction in
the size of the portfolio.
the commercial expected loss component of
the allowance was $454million at december
31, 2003, a decrease of 26% from year-end
2002. the decrease reflected an
improvement in the average quality of the
loan portfolio, as well as the improving
credit environment, which affected inputs
to the expected loss model.
the consumer expected loss component of
the allowance was $2.3billion at december
31, 2003, a decrease of 4% from year-end
2002. although the consumer managed loan
portfolio increased by 10%, the businesses
that drove the increase, home finance and
auto finance, have collateralized products
with lower expected loss rates.
the residual component of the allowance
was $895million at december31, 2003.
the residual component, which
incorporates managements judgment,
addresses uncertainties that are not
considered in the formula-based
commercial specific and expected
components of the allowance for credit
losses.
the $121million increase addressed
uncertainties in the economic environment
and concentrations in the commercial loan
portfolio that existed during the first
half of 2003. in the second half of the
year, as commercial credit quality
continued to improve and the commercial
allowance declined further, the residual
component was reduced as well. at december
31, 2003, the residual component
represented approximately 20% of the total
allowance for loan losses, within the
firms target range of between 10% and
20%. the firm anticipates that if the
current positive trend in economic
conditions and credit quality continues,
the commercial and residual components
will continue to be reduced.
lending-related commitments
to provide for the risk of loss inherent
in the credit-extension process,
management also computes specific and
expected loss components as well as a
residual component for commercial
lendingrelated commitments. this is
computed using a methodology similar to
that used for the commercial loan
portfolio, modified for expected
maturities and probabilities of drawdown.
the allowance decreased by 11% to $324
million as of december31, 2003, due to
improvement in the criticized portion of
the firms lending-related commitments.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
market risk management
market risk represents the potential loss
in value of portfolios and financial
instruments caused by adverse movements in
market variables, such as interest and
foreign exchange rates, credit spreads,
and equity and commodity prices. jpmorgan
chase employs comprehensive and rigorous
processes intended to measure, monitor and
control market risk.
market risk organization
market risk management (mrm) is an
independent function that identifies,
measures, monitors and controls market
risk. it seeks to facilitate efficient
risk/return decisions and to reduce
volatility in operating performance. it
strives to make the firms market risk
profile transparent to senior management,
the board of directors and regulators.
the chart below depicts the mrm
organizational structure and describes
the responsibilities of the groups
within mrm.
mrm works in partnership with the
business segments, which are expected to
maintain strong risk discipline at all
levels. for
example, risk-taking businesses have
middle office functions that act
independently from trading personnel and
are responsible for
verifying risk exposures they take. weekly
meetings are held between mrm and the
heads of risk-taking businesses, to
discuss and decide on risk exposures in
the context of the market environment and
client flows.
key terms:
var: worst-case loss expected within the confidence level; while larger
losses are possible, they have a correspondingly lower probability of actually
occurring
full-revaluation var: method that prices each financial instrument
separately, based on the actual pricing models used by the lines of business;
compared with sensitivity-based var, which only approximates the impact of
market moves on financial instrument prices
backtesting: validating a model by comparing its predictions with actual
results
confidence level: the probability that actual losses will not exceed
estimated var; the greater the confidence level, the higher the var
j.p.morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
there are also groups that report to the
chief financial officer with some
responsibility for market risk-related
activities. for example, within the
finance area, the valuation control
functions are responsible for ensuring the
accuracy of the valuations of positions
that expose the firm to market risk.
positions that expose the firm to market
risk are classified into two categories.
trading risk includes positions held as
part of a business whose strategy is to
trade, make markets or take positions for
the firms own trading account; gains and
losses in these positions are reported in
trading revenue. nontrading risk includes
mortgage banking positions held for
longer-term investment and positions used
to manage the firms asset/liability
exposures. in most cases, unrealized gains
and losses in these positions are
accounted for at fair value, with the
gains and losses reported in net income or
other comprehensive income.
tools used to measure risks
because no single measure can reflect all
aspects of market risk, the firm uses
several measures, both statistical and
nonstatistical, including:
statistical risk measures
-
value-at-risk (var)
-
risk identification for large exposures (rifle)
nonstatistical risk measures
-
economic-value stress tests
-
net interest income stress tests
-
other measures of position size and sensitivity to market moves
value-at-risk
jpmorgan chases statistical risk measure,
var, gauges the potential loss from
adverse market moves in an ordinary market
environment and provides a consistent
cross-business measure of
risk profiles and levels of risk
diversification. var is used to compare
risks across businesses, to monitor limits
and to allocate economic capital to the
business segments. var provides risk
transparency in a normal trading
environment.
each business day, the firm undertakes a
comprehensive var calculation that
includes both trading and nontrading
activities. jpmorgan chases var
calculation is highly granular, comprising
more than 1.5million positions and
240,000 pricing series (e.g., securities
prices, interest rates, foreign exchange
rates). for a substantial portion of its
exposure, the firm has implemented
full-revaluation var, which, management
believes, generates the most accurate
results.
to calculate var, the firm uses
historical simulation, which measures
risk across instruments and portfolios in
a consistent, comparable way. this
approach assumes that historical changes
in market value are representative of
future changes. the simulation is based
on market data for the previous 12
months.
the firm calculates var using a one-day
time horizon and a 99% confidence level.
this means the firm would expect to
incur losses greater than that predicted
by var estimates only once in every 100
trading days, or about 2.5 times a year.
all statistical models involve a degree of
uncertainty, depending on the assumptions
they employ. the firm prefers historical
simulation, because it involves fewer
assumptions about the distribution of
portfolio losses than parameter-based
methodologies. in addition, the firm
regularly assesses the quality of the
market data, since their accuracy is
critical to computing var. nevertheless,
because var is based on historical market
data, it may not accurately reflect future
risk during environments in which market
volatility is changing. in addition, the
var measure on any particular day may not
be indicative of future risk levels, since
positions and market conditions may both
change over time.
while var is a valuable tool for
evaluating relative risks and aggregating
risks across businesses, it only measures
the potential volatility of daily
revenues. profitability and risk levels
over longer time periods  a fiscal
quarter or a year  may be only loosely
related to the average value of var over
those periods. first, while var measures
potential fluctuations around average
daily revenue, the average itself could
reflect significant gains or losses; for
example, from client revenues that
accompany risk-taking activities. second,
large trading revenues may result from
positions taken over longer periods of
time. for example, a business may maintain
an exposure to rising or falling interest
rates over a period of weeks or months. if
the market exhibits a long-term trend over
that time, the business could experience
large gains or losses, even though revenue
volatility on each individual day may have
been small.
var backtesting
to evaluate the soundness of its var
model, the firm conducts daily backtesting
of var against actual financial results,
based on daily market riskrelated
revenue. market riskrelated revenue is
defined as the daily change in value of
the mark-to-market trading portfolios plus
any trading-related net interest income,
brokerage commissions, underwriting fees
or other revenue. the firms definition of
market riskrelated revenue is consistent
with the federal reserve boards
implementation of the basel committees
market risk capital rules. the histogram
below illustrates the firms
daily market riskrelated revenue for
trading businesses for 2003. the chart
shows that the firm posted positive daily
market riskrelated revenue on 235 out of
260days in 2003, with 170days exceeding
$25million. losses were sustained on 25
days; nine of those days were in the third
quarter, primarily driven by poor overall
trading results. the largest daily trading
loss during the year was $100million.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the inset in the histogram examines the 25
days on which the firm posted trading
losses and depicts the amount by which var
was greater than the actual loss on each
day. there was one day on which trading
losses exceeded var by approximately 10%,
a performance statistically consistent
with the firms 99% confidence level.
during the third quarter, there was an
additional day
on which the firms losses exceeded var;
these losses were attributable to
certain positions in the mortgage
banking business, which were then
included in the firms trading
portfolio, but which are now included in
the nontrading portfolio with other
mortgage banking positions.
economic-value stress testing
while var reflects the risk of loss due to
unlikely events in normal markets, stress
testing captures the firms exposure to
unlikely but plausible events in abnormal
markets. stress testing is equally
important as var in measuring and
controlling risk. stress testing enhances
the understanding of the firms risk
profile and loss potential and is used for
monitoring limits, cross-business risk
measurement and economic capital
allocation.
economic-value stress tests measure the
potential change in the value of the
firms portfolios. applying economic-value
stress tests helps the firm understand how
the economic value of its balance sheet
(not the amounts reported under gaap)
would change under certain scenarios. the
firm conducts economic-value stress tests
for both its trading and its nontrading
activities, using the same scenarios for
both.
the firm stress tests its portfolios at
least once a month using multiple
scenarios. several macroeconomic
event-related scenarios are evaluated
across the firm, with shocks to roughly
10,000 market
prices specified for each scenario.
additional scenarios focus on the risks
predominant in individual business
segments and include scenarios that focus
on the potential for adverse moves in
complex portfolios.
scenarios are continually reviewed and
updated to reflect changes in the firms
risk profile and economic events.
stress-test results, trends and
explanations are provided each month to
the firms senior management and to the
lines of business, to help them better
measure and manage risks and to understand
event risk-sensitive positions.
the firms stress-test methodology assumes
that, during an actual stress event, no
management action would be taken to change
the risk profile of portfolios. this
assumption captures the decreased
liquidity that often occurs with abnormal
markets and results, in the firms view,
in a conservative stress-test result.
it is important to note that var results
cannot be directly correlated to
stress-test loss results for three
reasons. first, stress-test losses are
calculated at varying dates each month,
while var is
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
performed daily and disclosed at the
period-end date. second, var and stress
tests are two distinct risk measurements
yielding very different loss potentials.
thus, although the same trading portfolios
are used for both tests, var is based on a
distribution of one-day historical losses
measured over the most recent one year; by
contrast, stress testing subjects the
portfolio to more extreme, larger moves
over a longer time horizon (e.g., 2-3
weeks). third, as var and stress tests are
distinct risk measurements, the impact of
portfolio diversification can vary
greatly. for var, markets can change in
patterns over a one-year time horizon,
moving from highly correlated to less so;
in stress testing, the focus is on a
single event and the associated
correlations in an extreme market
situation. as a result, while var over a
given time horizon can be lowered by a
diversification benefit in the portfolio,
this benefit would not necessarily
manifest itself in stress-test scenarios,
which assume large, coherent moves across
all markets.
net interest income stress testing
the var and stress-test measures described
above illustrate the total economic
sensitivity of the firms balance sheet to
changes in market variables. the effect of
interest rate exposure on reported net
income is also critical. the firm conducts
simulations of net interest income for its
nontrading activities under a variety of
interest rate scenarios, which are
consistent with the scenarios used for
economic-value stress testing.
net interest income stress tests measure
the potential change in the firms nii
over the next 12months. these stress
tests highlight exposures to various
interest rate-sensitive factors, such as
rates
(e.g., the prime lending rate), pricing
strategies on deposits and changes in
product mix. these stress tests also take
into account forecasted balance sheet
changes, such as asset sales and
securitizations, as well as prepayment
and reinvestment behavior.
rifle
in addition to var, jpmorgan chase employs
the risk identification for large
exposures (rifle) methodology as another
statistical risk measure. the firm
requires that all market risk-taking
businesses self-assess their risks to
unusual and specific events. individuals
who manage risk positions, particularly
complex positions, identify potential
worst-case losses that could arise from an
unusual or specific event, such as a
potential tax change, and estimate the
probabilities of such losses. through the
firms rifle system, this information is
then directed to the appropriate level of
management, thereby permitting the firm to
identify further earnings vulnerabilities
not adequately covered by var and stress
testing.
nonstatistical risk measures
nonstatistical risk measures other than
stress testing include net open positions,
basis point values, option sensitivities,
position concentrations and position
turnover. these measures provide
additional information on an exposures
size and the direction in which it is
moving. nonstatistical measures are used
for monitoring limits, one-off approvals
and tactical controls.
the table below shows both trading and nontrading var by risk type, together
with the corporate total. details of the var exposures are discussed in the
trading risk and nontrading risk sections below.
var by risk type
2002(b)
as of or for the year
average
minimum
maximum
at
average
minimum
maximum
at
ended december 31, (in millions)
var
var
var
december 31
var
var
var
december 31
by risk type:
interest rate
$
63.9
$
43.1
$
109.9
$
83.7
$
67.6
$
50.1
$
94.7
$
59.6
foreign exchange
16.8
11.0
30.2
23.5
11.6
4.4
21.2
18.4
equities
18.2
6.7
51.6
45.6
14.4
5.4
32.7
8.4
commodities
2.9
1.7
4.9
3.3
3.6
1.6
13.3
1.9
hedge fund investments
4.8
3.2
8.7
5.5
3.2
2.5
3.6
3.2
less: portfolio diversification
(38.0
)
nm
nm
(58.4
)
(28.8
)
nm
nm
(26.9
)
total trading var(a)
$
68.6
$
43.2
$
114.7
$
103.2
$
71.6
$
57.0
$
102.8
$
64.6
nontrading activities
151.8
81.5
286.0
203.8
97.3
68.9
139.3
107.7
less: portfolio diversification
(45.5
)
nm
nm
(25.7
)
(48.6
)
nm
nm
(61.0
)
total var
$
174.9
$
83.7
$
331.4
$
281.3
$
120.3
$
87.6
$
160.2
$
111.3
(a)
amounts exclude var related to the firms private equity business. for a discussion of private equity risk management, see
page 74 of this annual report.
(b)
amounts have been revised to reflect the reclassification of certain mortgage banking positions from the trading portfolio to the nontrading portfolio.
nm-
because the minimum and maximum may occur on different days for different
risk components, it is not meaningful to compute a portfolio diversification
effect. in addition, jpmorgan chases average and period-end vars are less than
the sum of the vars of its market risk components, due to risk offsets
resulting from portfolio diversification.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
trading risk
major risks
interest rates: interest rate risk (which
includes credit spread risk) involves the
potential decline in net income or
financial condition due to adverse changes
in market interest rates, which may result
in changes to nii, securities valuations,
and other interest-sensitive revenues and
expenses.
foreign exchange, equities and commodities:
these risks involve the potential decline
in net income or financial condition due to
adverse changes in foreign exchange,
equities or commodities markets, whether
due to proprietary positions taken by the
firm, or
due to a decrease in the level of client
activity.
hedge fund investments: the firm invests in
numerous hedge funds that have various
strategic goals, investment strategies,
industry concentrations, portfolio sizes
and management styles. fund investments are
passive long-term investments. individual
hedge funds may have exposure to interest
rate, foreign exchange, equity and
commodity risk within their portfolio risk
structures.
trading var
the largest contributor to trading var was
interest rate risk. before portfolio
diversification, interest rate risk
accounted for roughly 60% of the average
trading portfolio var. the diversification
effect, which on average reduced the daily
average trading portfolio var by $38
million in 2003, reflects the fact that the
largest losses for different positions and
risks do not typically occur at the same
time. the risk of a portfolio of positions
is therefore usually less than the sum of
the risks of the positions themselves. the
degree of diversification is determined
both by the extent to which different
market variables tend to move together, and
by the extent to which different businesses
have similar positions.
the increase in year-end var was driven by
an increase in the var for equities risk,
which was attributable to a significant
increase in customer-driven business in
equity options. in general, over the course
of a year, var exposures can vary
significantly as trading positions change
and market volatility fluctuates.
economic-value stress testing
the following table represents the
worst-case potential economic-value
stress-test loss (pre-tax) in the firms
trading portfolio as predicted by
stress-test scenarios:
trading economic value stress-test loss results  pre-tax
as of or for
the year ended
2002(a)
december 31,
at
at
(in millions)
avg.
min.
max.
dec. 4
avg.
min.
max.
dec. 5
stress-test loss  pre-tax
$
(508
)
$
(255
)
$
(888
)
$
(436
)
$
(405
)
$
(103
)
$
(715
)
$
(219
)
(a)
amounts have been revised to reflect the reclassification of
certain mortgage banking positions from the trading portfolio to the
nontrading portfolio.
the potential stress-test loss as of
december4, 2003, is the result of the
equity market collapse stress scenario,
which is broadly modeled on the events of
october1987. under this scenario, global
equity markets suffer a sharp reversal
after a long sustained rally; equity prices
decline globally; volatilities for
equities, interest rates and credit
products increase dramatically for short
maturities and less so for longer
maturities; sovereign bond yields decline
moderately; and swap spreads and credit
spreads widen moderately.
nontrading risk
major risk  interest rates
the execution of the firms core business
strategies, the delivery of products and
services to its customers, and the
discretionary positions the firm undertakes
to risk-manage structural exposures give
rise to interest rate risk in its
nontrading activities.
this exposure can result from a variety of
factors, including differences in the
timing between the maturity or repricing of
assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet
instruments. changes in the level and shape
of interest rate curves may also create
interest rate risk, since the repricing
characteristics of the firms assets do not
necessarily match those of its liabilities.
the firm is also exposed to basis risk,
which is the difference in the repricing
characteristics of two floating-rate
indices, such as the prime rate and 3-month
libor. in addition, some of the firms
products have embedded optionality that may
have an impact on pricing and balance
levels.
the firm manages exposure in its structural
interest rate activities on a consolidated,
corporate-wide basis. business units
transfer their interest rate risk to global
treasury through a transfer pricing system,
which takes into account the elements of
interest rate exposure that can be hedged
in financial markets. these elements
include current balance and contractual
rates of interest, contractual principal
payment schedules, expected prepayment
experience, interest rate reset dates and
maturities and rate indices used for
re-pricing. all transfer pricing
assumptions are reviewed on a semiannual
basis and must be approved by the firms
capital committee.
the firms mortgage banking activities also
give rise to complex interest rate risks.
the interest rate exposure from the firms
mortgage banking activities is a result of
option and basis risks. option risk arises
from prepayment features in mortgages and
msrs, and from the probability of newly
originated mortgage commitments actually
closing. basis risk results from different
relative movements between mortgage rates
and other interest rates. these risks are
managed through hedging programs specific
to the different mortgage banking
activities. potential changes in the market
value of msrs and increased amortization
levels of msrs are managed via a risk
management program that attempts to offset
changes in the market value of msrs with
changes in the market value of derivatives
and investment securities. a similar
approach is implemented to manage the
interest rate and option risks associated
with the firms mortgage origination
business.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
nontrading var
for nontrading activities that involve
market risk, var measures the amount of
potential change in their economic value;
however, it is not a measure of reported
revenues, since those activities are not
marked to market through earnings.
the increase in average, maximum and
december31 nontrading portfolio var was
primarily attributable to the increase in
market volatility during the 2003 third
quarter, and to the rise in interest rates
in the second half of 2003, which increased
the sensitivity of mortgage instruments to
the basis risk between mortgage rates and
other interest rates.
economic-value stress testing
the firm conducts both economic-value and
nii stress tests on its nontrading
activities. economic-value stress tests
measure the potential change in the value
of these portfolios under the same
scenarios used to evaluate the trading
portfolios.
the following table represents the
potential worst-case economic-value
stress-test loss (pre-tax) in the firms
nontrading portfolio as predicted by
stress-test scenarios:
nontrading economic-value stress-test loss results  pre-tax
as of or for
the year ended
december 31,
at
at
(in millions)
avg.
min.
max.
dec. 4
avg.
min.
max.
dec. 5
stress-test loss  pre-tax
$
(637
)
$
(392
)
$
(1,130
)
$
(665
)
$
(967
)
$
(523
)
$
(1,566
)
$
(556
)
the potential stress-test loss as of
december4, 2003, is the result of the
credit crunch stress scenario, which is
broadly based on the events of 1997-98.
under that scenario, political instability
in emerging markets leads to a flight to
quality; sovereign bond yields decline
moderately; the u.s. dollar declines
against the euro and japanese yen; credit
spreads widen sharply; mortgage spreads
widen; and equity prices decline
moderately.
net interest income stress testing
the following table shows the change in the
firms nii over the next 12months that
would result from uniform increases or
decreases of 100 basis points in all
interest rates. it also shows the largest
decline in the firms nii under the same
stress-test scenarios utilized for the
trading portfolio. at year-end 2003,
jpmorgan chases largest potential nii
stress-test loss was estimated at $160
million, primarily the result of increased
funding costs.
nontrading nii stress-test loss results  pre-tax
december 31, (in millions)
+/- 100bp parallel change
$
(160
)
$
(277
)
other stress-test scenarios
(88
)
(133
)
nonstatistical measures
the firm also calculates exposures to
directional interest rate changes and to
changes in the spread between the swap
curve and other basis risks. at year-end,
the market value of the firms nontrading
positions did not have a significant
exposure to increases or decreases in
interest rates. however, the firms
non-trading positions maintain an exposure
to the spread between mortgage rates and
swap rates; at year-end the firm was
exposed to a widening of this spread.
capital allocation for market risk
the firm allocates market risk capital
guided by the principle that
capital should reflect the extent to which
risks are present in businesses. daily
var, monthly stress-test results and other
factors determine appropriate capital
charges for major business segments. the
var measure captures a large number of
one-day price moves, while stress tests
capture a smaller number of very large
price moves. the firm allocates market
risk capital to each business segment
according to a formula that weights that
segments var and stress-test exposures.
risk monitoring and control
limits
market risk is primarily controlled through
a series of limits. the sizes of the limits
reflect the firms risk appetite after
extensive analyses of the market
environment and business strategy. the
analyses examine factors such as market
volatility, product liquidity, business
track record, and management experience and
depth.
the firm maintains different levels of
limits. corporate-level limits encompass
var calculations and stress-test loss
advisories. similarly, business-segment
levels include limits on var calculations,
nonstatistical measurements and p&l loss
advisories. businesses are responsible for
adhering to established limits, against
which exposures are monitored and reported
daily. an exceeded limit is reported
immediately to senior management, and the
affected business unit must take
appropriate action to comply with the
limit. if the business cannot do this
within an acceptable timeframe, senior
management is consulted on the appropriate
action.
mrm regularly reviews and updates risk
limits, and the firms risk management
committee reviews and approves risk
limits at least twice a year. mrm further
controls the firms exposure by
specifically designating approved
financial instruments for each business
unit.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
qualitative review
mrm also performs periodic reviews of both
businesses and products with exposure to
market risk in order to assess the ability
of the businesses to control market risk.
the business managements strategy, market
conditions, product details and
effectiveness of risk controls are
reviewed. specific recommendations for
improvements are made to management.
model review
many of the firms financial instruments
cannot be valued based on quoted market
prices but are instead valued using
pricing models. such models are used for
management of risk positions, such as
reporting risk against limits, and for
valuation. the firm reviews the models it
uses to assess model appropriateness and
consistency across businesses. the model
reviews consider a
number of issues: appropriateness of the
model, assessing the extent to which it
accurately reflects the characteristics of
the transaction and captures its
significant risks; independence and
reliability of data sources;
appropriateness and adequacy of numerical
algorithms; and sensitivity to input
parameters or other assumptions which
cannot be priced from the market.
reviews are conducted for new or changed
models, as well as previously accepted
models. re-reviews assess whether there
have been any material changes to the
accepted models; whether there have been
any changes in the product or market that
may impact the models validity; and
whether there are theoretical or
competitive developments that may require
reassessment of the models adequacy. for
a summary of valuations based on models,
see critical accounting estimates used by
the firm on pages 76-77 of this annual
report.
operational risk management
operational risk is the risk of loss
resulting from inadequate or failed
processes or systems, human factors, or
external events.
overview
operational risk is inherent in each of
the firms businesses and support
activities. operational risk can manifest
itself in various ways, including errors,
business interruptions, inappropriate
behavior of employees and vendors that do
not perform in accordance with
outsourcing arrangements. these events
can potentially result in financial
losses and other damage to the firm,
including reputational harm.
to monitor and control operational risk,
the firm maintains a system of
comprehensive policies and a control
framework designed to provide a sound and
well controlled operational environment.
the goal is to keep operational risk at
appropriate levels, in light of the firms
financial strength, the characteristics of
its businesses, the markets in which it
operates, and the competitive and
regulatory environment to which it is
subject.
notwithstanding these control measures,
the firm incurs operational losses. the
firms approach to operational risk
management is intended to mitigate such
losses.
operational risk management practices
throughout 2003, jpmorgan chase continued
to execute a multi-year plan, begun in
2001, for an integrated approach that
emphasizes active management of
operational risk throughout the firm. the
objective of this effort is to supplement
the traditional control-based approach to
operational risk with risk measures, tools
and disciplines that are risk-specific,
consistently applied and utilized
firm-wide. key themes for this effort are
transparency of information, escalation of
key issues and accountability for issue
resolution. ultimate responsibility for
the firms operational risk management
practices resides with the chief risk
officer. the components are:
governance structure: the governance
structure provides the framework for the
firms operational risk management
activities. primary responsibility for
managing operational risk rests with
business managers. these individuals are
responsible for establishing and
maintaining appropriate internal control
procedures for their respective
businesses.
the operational risk committee, which
meets quarterly, is composed of senior
operational risk and finance managers from
each of the businesses. in addition, each
of the businesses must maintain business
control committees to oversee their
operational risk management practices.
self-assessment process: in 2003, jpmorgan
chase continued to refine its firm-wide
self-assessment process. the goal of the
process was for each business to identify
the key operational risks specific to its
environment and assess the degree to which
it maintained appropriate controls. action
plans were developed for control issues
identified, and businesses are to be held
accountable for tracking and resolving
these issues on a timely basis.
self-assessments were completed by the
businesses through the use of horizon, a
software application developed by the
firm. with the aid of horizon, all
businesses were required to perform
semiannual self-assessments in 2003. going
forward, the firm will utilize the
self-assessment process as a dynamic risk
management tool.
operational risk-event monitoring: the
firm has a process for reporting
operational risk-event data, permitting
analyses of errors and losses as well as
trends. such analyses, performed both at a
line-of-business level and by risk event
type, enable identification of root causes
associated with risk events faced by the
businesses. where available, the internal
data can be supplemented with external
data for comparative analysis with
industry patterns. the data reported will
enable the firm to back-test against
self-assessment results.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
integrated reporting: the firm is
presently designing an operational risk
architecture model to integrate the above
individual components into a unified,
web-based tool. when fully implemented,
this model will enable the firm to enhance
its reporting and analysis of operational
risk data, leading to improved risk
management and financial performance.
audit alignment: in addition to conducting
independent internal audits, the firms
internal audit group provided guidance on
the design and implementation of the
operational risk framework. this guidance
has helped further the firm-wide
implementation of the framework, which in
turn has led to a stronger overall control
environment. the internal audit group
utilizes the business self-assessment
results to help focus its internal audits
on operational control issues. the group
also reviews the effectiveness and
accuracy of the business self-assessment
process during the conduct of its audits.
operational risk categories
for purposes of analysis and aggregation,
the firm breaks operational risk events
down into five primary categories:
clients, products and business practices
fraud, theft and unauthorized activity
execution and processing errors
employment practices and workplace safety
physical asset and infrastructure damage
compliance with sarbanes-oxley section404
the firm intends to use, as much as
possible, its existing corporate
governance and operational risk management
practices to satisfy the requirements of
section404 of the sarbanes-oxley act
regarding internal control over financial
reporting. the firm is currently in the process
of evaluating the requirements of section 404 and of implementing additional procedures into
its existing practices. the
firm intends to be in full
compliance with the requirements of the
act when they become effective in 2004.
for a further discussion on the act, see
page 79 of this annual report.
capital allocation for operational and business risk
during 2003, the firm implemented a new
risk-based capital allocation methodology
which estimates operational and business
risk independently, on a bottoms-up
basis, and allocates capital to each
component. implementation of the new
methodology in 2003 resulted in an
overall lower amount of capital allocated
to the lines of business with respect to
operational and business risks.
the operational risk capital model is
based on actual losses and potential
scenario-based stress losses, with
adjustments to the capital calculation to
reflect changes in the quality of the
control environment and with a potential
offset for the use of risk-transfer
products. the firm believes the model is
consistent with the proposed basel ii
accord and expects to propose it eventually
for qualification under the advanced
measurement approach for operational risk.
business risk is defined as the risk
associated with volatility in the firms
earnings due to factors not captured by
other parts of its economic-capital
framework. such volatility can arise from
ineffective design or execution of
business strategies, volatile economic or
financial market activity, changing client
expectations and demands, and
restructuring to adjust for changes in the
competitive environment. for business
risk, capital is allocated to each
business based on historical revenue
volatility and measures of fixed and
variable expenses. earnings volatility
arising from other risk factors, such as
credit, market, or operational risk, is
excluded from the measurement of business
risk capital, as those factors are
captured under their respective risk
capital models.
reputation and fiduciary risk
a firms success depends not only on its
prudent management of credit, market,
operational and business risks, but
equally on the maintenance of its
reputation among many constituents
clients, investors, regulators, as well
as the general public  for business
practices of the highest quality.
attention to its reputation has always
been a key aspect of the firms practices,
and maintenance of reputation is the
responsibility of everyone at the firm.
jpmorgan chase bolsters this individual
responsibility in many ways: the worldwide
rules of conduct, training, policies and
oversight functions that approve
transactions. these oversight functions
include a conflicts office, which examines
transactions with the potential to create
conflicts of interest or role for the
firm.
in addition, the firm maintains a
fiduciary risk management committee
(frmc) to oversee fiduciary-related
risks that may produce significant losses
or reputational damage, and that are not
covered elsewhere by the corporate risk
management oversight structure. the
primary goal of the fiduciary risk
management function is to ensure that a
business, in providing investment or risk
management products or services, performs
at the appropriate standard relative to
its relationship with a client, whether it
be fiduciary or nonfiduciary in nature. a
particular focus of the frmc is the
policies and practices that address a
businesss responsibilities to a client,
including the policies and practices that
address client suitability determination,
disclosure obligations and performance
expectations with respect to the
investment and risk management products or
services being provided. in this way, the
frmc provides oversight of the firms
efforts to measure, monitor and control
the risks that may arise in the delivery
of such products or services to clients,
as well as those stemming from its
fiduciary responsibilities undertaken on
behalf of employees.
the firm has an additional structure to
account for potential adverse effects on
its reputation from transactions with
clients, especially complex derivatives
and structured finance transactions. this
structure, implemented in 2002, reinforces
the firms procedures for examining
transactions in terms of appropriateness,
ethical issues and reputational risk, and
it intensifies the firms
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
scrutiny of the purpose and effect of its
transactions from the clients point of
view, with the goal that these
transactions are not used to mislead
investors or others. the structure
operates at three levels: as part of every
businesss transaction approval process;
through review by regional policy review
committees; and through oversight by the
policy review office.
business transaction approval
primary responsibility for adherence to
the policies and procedures designed to
address reputation risk lies with the
business units conducting the transactions
in question. the firms transaction
approval process requires review and
sign-off from, among others, internal
legal/compliance, conflicts, tax and
accounting policy groups. transactions
involving an spe established by the firm
receive particular scrutiny and must
comply with a special-purpose vehicle
policy, designed to ensure that every such
entity is properly approved, documented,
monitored and controlled.
regional policy review committees
business units are also required to submit
to regional policy review committees
proposed transactions that may heighten
reputation
risk  particularly a clients motivation
and its intended financial disclosure of
the transaction. the committees approve,
reject or require further clarification
on or changes to the transactions. the
members of these committees are senior
representatives of the business and
support units in the region. the
committees may escalate transaction
review to the policy review office.
policy review office
the policy review office is the most
senior approval level for client
transactions involving reputation risk
issues. the mandate of the office is to
opine on specific transactions brought by
the regional committees and consider
changes in policies or practices relating
to reputation risk. the head of the office
consults with the firms most senior
executives on specific topics and provides
regular updates. aside from governance and
guidance on specific transactions, the
objective of the policy review process is
to reinforce a culture, through a case
study approach, that ensures that all
employees, regardless of seniority,
understand the basic principles of
reputation risk control and can recognize
and address issues as they arise.
private equity risk management
risk management
jpmp employs processes for risk
measurement and control of private equity
risk that are similar to those used for
other businesses within the firm. the
processes are coordinated with the firms
overall approach to market and
concentration risk. private equity risk is
initially monitored through the use of
industry and geographic limits.
additionally, to manage the pace of new
investments, a ceiling on the amount of
annual private equity investment activity
has been established.
jpmps public equity holdings create a
significant exposure to general declines
in the equity markets. to gauge that
risk, var and stress-test exposures are
calculated in the same way as they are
for the firms trading and nontrading
portfolios. jpmp management undertakes
frequent reviews of its public security
holdings as part of a disciplined
approach to sales and hedging issues.
hedging programs are limited but are
considered when
practical and as circumstances dictate.
over time, the firm may change the nature
and type of hedges it enters into, as
well as close hedging positions
altogether.
capital allocation for private equity risk
internal capital is allocated to jpmps
public equities portfolio based on stress
scenarios which reflect the potential
loss inherent in the portfolio in the
event of a large equity market decline.
capital is also allocated for liquidity
risk, which results from the contractual
sales restrictions to which some holdings
are subject. for private equities,
capital is allocated based on a long-term
equity market stress scenario that is
consistent with the investment time
horizons
associated with these holdings. for these
investments, additional capital is
allocated against the risk of an
unexpectedly large number of write-offs
or write-downs. the firm refined its
methodology for measuring private equity
risk during the second quarter of 2003.
it now assigns a moderately higher amount
of capital for the risk in the private
equity portfolio, most of which is
assigned to jpmp.
critical accounting estimates used by the firm
the firms accounting policies and use of
estimates are integral to understanding
the reported results. the firms most
complex accounting estimates require
managements judgment to ascertain the
valuation of assets and liabilities. the
firm has established detailed policies and
control procedures intended to ensure
valuation methods, including any judgments
made as part of such methods, are well
controlled, independently reviewed and
applied consistently from period to
period.
in addition, the policies and procedures are
intended to ensure that the process for
changing methodologies occurs in an
appropriate manner. the firm believes its
estimates for determining the valuation
of its assets and liabilities are
appropriate.
the following is a brief description of
the firms critical accounting estimates
involving significant management valuation
judgments.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
allowance for credit losses
jpmorgan chases allowance for credit
losses covers the commercial and consumer
loan portfolios as well as the firms
portfolio of commercial lending-related
commitments. the allowance for loan losses
is intended to adjust the value of the
firms loan assets for probable credit
losses as of the balance sheet date in
accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. management also
computes an allowance for lending-related
commercial commitments using a methodology
similar to that used for the commercial
loan portfolio. for a further discussion
of the methodologies used in establishing
the firms allowance for credit losses,
see note 12 on page 100 of this annual
report.
commercial loans and lending-related commitments
the methodology for calculating both the
allowance for loan losses and the
allowance for lending-related commitments
involves significant judgment. first and
foremost, it involves the early
identification of credits that are
deteriorating. second, it involves
management judgment to derive loss
factors.
the firm uses a risk rating system to
determine the credit quality of its loans.
commercial loans are reviewed for
information affecting the obligors
ability to fulfill its obligations. in
assessing the risk rating of a particular
loan, among the factors considered include
the obligors debt capacity and financial
flexibility, the level of the obligors
earnings, the amount and sources of
repayment, the level and nature of
contingencies, management strength, and
the industry and geography in which the
obligor operates. these factors are based
on an evaluation of historical information
and current information as well as
subjective assessment and interpretation.
emphasizing one factor over another or
considering additional factors that may be
relevant in determining the risk rating of
a particular loan, but which are not
currently an explicit part of the firms
methodology, could impact the risk rating
assigned by the firm to that loan.
management also applies its judgment to
derive loss factors associated with each
credit facility. these loss factors are
determined by facility structure,
collateral and type of obligor. wherever
possible, the firm uses independent,
verifiable data or the firms own
historical loss experience in its models
for estimating these loss factors. many
factors can affect managements estimates
of specific loss and expected loss,
including volatility of default
probabilities, rating migrations and loss
severity. for example, judgment is
required to determine how many years of
data to include when estimating the
possible severity of the loss. if a full
credit cycle is not captured in the data,
then estimates may be inaccurate.
likewise, judgment is applied to determine
whether the loss-severity factor should be
calculated as an average over the entire
credit cycle or whether to apply the
loss-severity factor implied at a
particular point in the credit cycle. the
application of different loss-severity
factors would change the amount of the
allowance for credit losses
determined appropriate by the firm.
similarly, there are judgments as to which
external data on default probabilities
should be used, and when they should be
used. choosing data that are not
reflective of the firms specific loan
portfolio characteristics could affect
loss estimates.
as noted above, the firms allowance for
loan losses is sensitive to the risk
rating assigned to a loan. assuming a
one-notch downgrade in the firms internal
risk ratings for all its commercial loans,
the allowance for loan losses for the
commercial portfolio would increase by
approximately $470million at december31,
2003. furthermore, assuming a 10% increase
in the loss severity on all downgraded
non-criticized loans, the allowance for
commercial loans would increase by
approximately $50million at december31,
2003. these sensitivity analyses are
hypothetical and should be used with
caution. the purpose of these analyses is
to provide an indication of the impact
risk ratings and loss severity have on the
estimate of the allowance for loan losses
for commercial loans. it is not intended
to imply managements expectation of
future deterioration in risk ratings or
changes in loss severity. given the
process the firm follows in determining
the risk ratings of its loans and
assessing loss severity, management
believes the risk ratings and loss
severities currently assigned to
commercial loans are appropriate.
furthermore, the likelihood of a
one-notch downgrade for all commercial
loans within a short timeframe is
remote.
consumer loans
the consumer portfolio is segmented into
three main business lines: chase home
finance, chase cardmember services and
chase auto finance. for each major
portfolio segment within each line of
business, there are three primary factors
that are considered in determining the
expected loss component of the allowance
for loan losses: period-end outstandings,
expected loss factor and average life. the
various components of these factors, such
as collateral, prepayment rates, credit
score distributions, collections and the
historical loss experience of a business
segment, differ across business lines. for
example, credit card revolving credit has
significantly higher charge-off ratios
than fixed mortgage credit.
determination of each factor is based
primarily on statistical data and
macroeconomic assumptions.
residual component
managements judgments are also applied
when considering uncertainties that relate
to current macroeconomic and political
conditions, the impact of currency
devaluation on cross-border exposures,
changes in underwriting standards,
unexpected correlations within the
portfolio or other factors. for example,
judgment as to political developments in a
particular country will affect
managements assessment of potential loss
in the credits that have exposure to that
country. a separate allowance component,
the residual component, is maintained to
cover these uncertainties, at december31,
2003, in the
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
commercial portfolio. it is anticipated
that the residual component will range
between 10% and 20% of the total
allowance for credit losses.
fair value of financial instruments
a portion of jpmorgan chases assets and
liabilities are carried at fair value,
including trading assets and liabilities,
afs securities and private equity
investments. held-for-sale loans and
mortgage servicing rights are carried at
the lower of fair value or cost. at
december31, 2003, approximately $346
billion of the firms assets were
recorded at fair value.
fair value of a financial instrument is
defined as the amount at which the
instrument could be exchanged in a current
transaction between willing parties, other
than in a forced or liquidation sale. the
majority of the firms assets reported at
fair value are based on quoted market
prices or on internally developed models
that are based on independently sourced
market parameters, including interest rate
yield curves, option volatilities and
currency rates.
the valuation process takes into
consideration factors such as liquidity
and concentration concerns and, for the
derivative portfolio, counterparty credit
risk. see the discussion of cva on page
59 of this annual report. management
applies judgment in determining the
factors used in the valuation process.
for example, there is often limited
market data to rely on when estimating
the fair value of a large or aged
position. similarly, judgment must be
applied in estimating prices for less
readily observable external parameters.
finally, other factors such as model
assumptions, market dislocations and
unexpected correlations can affect
estimates of fair value. imprecision in
estimating these factors can impact the
amount of revenue or loss recorded for a
particular position.
trading and available-for-sale portfolios
substantially all of the firms securities
held for trading and investment purposes
(long positions) and securities that the
firm has sold to other parties but does
not own (short positions) are
valued based on quoted market prices.
however, certain securities are less
actively traded and, therefore, are not
always able to be valued based on quoted
market prices. the determination of their
fair value requires management judgment,
as this determination may require
benchmarking to similar instruments or
analyzing default and recovery rates.
as few derivative contracts are listed on
an exchange, the majority of the firms
derivative positions are valued using
internally developed models that use as
their basis readily observable market
parameters  that is, parameters that are
actively quoted and can be validated to
external sources, including
industry-pricing services. certain
derivatives, however, are valued based on
models with significant unobservable
market parameters  that is, parameters
that may be estimated and are, therefore,
subject to management judgment to
substantiate the model valuation. these
instruments are normally either less
actively traded or trade activity is
one-way. examples include long-dated
interest rate or currency swaps, where
swap rates may be unobservable for longer
maturities; and certain credit products,
where correlation and recovery rates are
unobservable.
management judgment includes recording
fair value adjustments (i.e.,
reductions) to model valuations to
account for parameter uncertainty when
valuing complex or less actively traded
derivative transactions.
the table below summarizes the firms
trading and afs portfolios by valuation
methodology at december31, 2003:
trading assets
trading liabilities
securities
securities
afs
purchased(a)
derivatives(b)
sold(a)
derivatives(b)
securities
fair value based on:
quoted market prices
%
%
%
%
%
internal models with significant observable market parameters
internal models with significant unobservable market parameters
total
%
%
%
%
%
(a)
reflected as debt and equity instruments on the firms consolidated balance sheet.
(b)
based on gross mtm values of the firms derivatives portfolio (i.e., prior to netting positions pursuant to fin 39), as cross-product netting is not
relevant to an analysis based on valuation methodologies.
to ensure that the valuations are
appropriate, the firm has various controls
in place. these include: an independent
review and approval of valuation models;
detailed review and explanation for profit
and loss analyzed daily and over time;
decomposing the model valuations for
certain structured derivative instruments
into their components and benchmarking
valuations, where possible, to similar
products; and validating valuation
estimates through actual cash settlement.
as markets and products develop and the
pricing for certain derivative products
becomes
more transparent, the firm refines its
valuation methodologies. the valuation
control group within the finance area is
responsible for reviewing the accuracy of
the valuations of positions taken within
the investment bank.
for a discussion of market risk
management, including the model review
process, see market risk management on
pages 66-72 of this annual report. for
further details regarding the firms
valuation methodologies, see note 31 on
pages 120-123 of this annual report.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
loans held-for-sale
the fair value of loans in the
held-for-sale portfolio is generally
based on observable market prices of
similar instruments, including bonds,
credit derivatives and loans with similar
characteristics. if market prices are not
available, fair value is based on the
estimated cash flows, adjusted for credit
risk that is discounted using a rate
appropriate for each maturity that
incorporates the effects of interest rate
changes.
private equity investments
valuation of private investments held by
jpmp requires significant management
judgment due to the absence of quoted
market prices, inherent lack of liquidity
and long-term nature of such assets.
private investments are initially valued
based on cost. the carrying values of
private investments are adjusted from cost
to reflect both positive and negative
changes evidenced by financing events with
third-party capital providers. in
addition, these investments are subject to
ongoing impairment reviews by jpmps
senior investment professionals. a variety
of factors are reviewed and monitored to
assess impairment including, but not
limited to, operating performance and
future expectations, industry valuations
of comparable public companies, changes in
market outlook and the third-party
financing environment over time. the
valuation control group within the finance
area is responsible for reviewing the
accuracy of the
carrying values of private investments
held by jpmp. for additional information
about private equity investments, see
the private equity risk management
discussion on page 74 and note 15 on
page 106 of this annual report.
msrs and certain other retained interests
msrs and certain other retained interests
from securitization activities do not
trade in an active, open market with
readily observable prices. for example,
sales of msrs do occur, but the precise
terms and conditions are typically not
readily available. accordingly, the firm
estimates the fair value of msrs and
certain other retained interests using a
discounted future cash flow model. the
model considers portfolio characteristics,
contractually specified servicing fees and
prepayment assumptions, delinquency rates,
late charges, other ancillary revenues,
costs to service and other economic
factors. the firm compares its fair value
estimates and assumptions to observable
market data where available, to recent
market activity and to actual portfolio
experience. management believes that the
fair values and related assumptions are
comparable to those used by other market
participants. for a further discussion of
the most significant assumptions used to
value these retained interests, as well as
the applicable stress tests for those
assumptions, see notes 13 and 16 on pages
100-103 and 107-109, respectively, of this
annual report.
nonexchange-traded commodity contracts at fair value
in the normal course of business, jpmorgan
chase trades nonex-change-traded commodity
contracts. to determine the fair value of
these contracts, the firm uses various
fair value estimation techniques, which
are primarily based on internal models
with significant observable market
parameters. the firms nonex-
change-traded commodity contracts are
primarily energy-related contracts. the
following table summarizes the changes in
fair value for nonexchange-traded
commodity contracts for the year ended
december31, 2003:
for the year ended december 31, 2003 (in millions)
asset position
liability position
net fair value of contracts outstanding at january1, 2003
$
1,938
$
effect of legally enforceable master netting agreements
1,279
1,289
gross fair value of contracts outstanding at january1, 2003
3,217
2,128
contracts realized or otherwise settled during the period
(2,559
)
(2,465
)
fair value of new contracts
changes in fair values attributable to changes in valuation techniques and assumptions
other changes in fair value
1,370
1,716
gross fair value of contracts outstanding at december31, 2003
2,331
1,670
effect of legally enforceable master netting agreements
(834
)
(919
)
net fair value of contracts outstanding at december31, 2003
$
1,497
$
the following table indicates the schedule of maturities of nonexchange-traded
commodity contracts at december31, 2003:
at december 31, 2003 (in millions)
asset position
liability position
maturity less than 1year
$
$
maturity 1-3years
1,128
maturity 4-5years
maturity in excess of 5years
gross fair value of contracts outstanding at december31, 2003
2,331
1,670
effects of legally enforceable master netting agreements
(834
)
(919
)
net fair value of contracts outstanding at december31, 2003
$
1,497
$
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
accounting and reporting developments
accounting for stock-based compensation
effective january1, 2003, jpmorgan chase
adopted sfas 123, which establishes the
accounting for stock-based compensation
and requires that all such transactions,
including stock options, be accounted for
at fair value and be recognized in
earnings. awards outstanding as of
december31, 2002, if not subsequently
modified, continue to be accounted for
under apb 25. for a further discussion on
the adoption of sfas 123, see note 7 on
pages 93-95 of this annual report.
consolidation of variable interest entities
in january2003, the fasb issued fin 46.
entities that would be assessed for
consolidation under fin 46 are typically
referred to as special-purpose entities
(spes), although non-spe-type entities
may also be subject to the guidance. fin
46 requires a variable interest entity
(vie) to be consolidated by a company if
that company is subject to a majority of
the risk of loss from the variable
interest entitys activities or entitled
to receive a majority of the entitys
residual returns, or both. effective
february1, 2003, the firm implemented fin
46 for vies created or modified after
january31, 2003, in which the firm has an
interest.
effective july1, 2003, the firm adopted
the provisions of fin 46 for all vies
originated prior to february1, 2003,
excluding certain investments made by
jpmp. the fasb provided a specific
deferral for nonregistered investment
companies until the proposed statement of
position on the clarification of the scope
of the investment company audit guide is
finalized, which is expected to occur in
mid-2004. the firm has deferred
consolidation of $2.7billion of
additional assets related to jpmp as of
december31, 2003. for further details
regarding fin 46, refer to note 14 on
pages 103-106 of this annual report.
in december2003, the fasb issued a
revision to fin 46 (fin 46r) to address
various technical corrections and
implementation issues that have arisen
since its issuance. the provisions of fin
46r are effective for financial periods
ending after march15, 2004, thus the firm
will implement the new provisions
effective march31, 2004. as fin 46r was
recently issued and contains provisions
that the accounting profession continues
to analyze, the firms assessment of the
impact of fin 46r on all vies with which it
is involved is ongoing. however, at this
time and based on managements current
interpretation, the firm does not believe
that the implementation of fin 46r will
have a material impact on the firms
consolidated financial statements,
earnings or capital resources.
accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of both liabilities and equity
in may2003, the fasb issued sfas 150,
which establishes
standards for how an issuer classifies and
measures in its statement of financial
position certain financial instruments
with characteristics of both liabilities
and equity. it requires that an issuer
classi-
fy a financial instrument that is within
its scope as a liability (or an asset in
some circumstances), because that
financial instrument embodies an
obligation of the issuer. initially, sfas
150 was effective for all financial
instruments entered into or modified after
may31, 2003, and was otherwise effective
beginning july1, 2003. in november2003,
the fasb deferred the effective date of
the statement with respect to mandatorily
redeemable financial instruments of
certain nonpublic entities and for certain
mandatorily redeemable noncontrolling
interests. the implementation of sfas 150
did not have a material impact on the
firms consolidated financial statements.
derivative instruments and hedging activities
in april2003, the fasb issued sfas 149,
which amends and clarifies the accounting
for derivative instruments, including
certain derivative instruments embedded in
other contracts, and for hedging
activities under sfas 133. specifically,
sfas 149 clarifies the circumstances under
which a contract with an initial net
investment meets the characteristics of a
derivative, and when a derivative contains
a financing component that warrants
special reporting in the consolidated
statement of cash flows. sfas 149 is
generally effective for contracts entered
into or modified after june30, 2003;
implementation did not have a material
effect on the firms consolidated
financial statements in 2003.
accounting for costs associated with exit or disposal activities
in june2002, the fasb issued sfas 146,
which establishes new accounting for costs
associated with exit or disposal
activities initiated after december31,
2002. sfas 146 requires a liability for a
cost associated with an exit or disposal
activity to be recorded when that
liability is incurred and can be measured
at fair value. under the previous rules,
if management approved an exit plan in one
quarter, the costs of that plan generally
would have been recorded in the same
quarter even if the costs were not
incurred until a later quarter. in
contrast, under sfas 146, some costs may
qualify for immediate recognition, while
other costs may be incurred over one or
more quarters. the impact of sfas 146 will
generally be to spread out the timing of
the recognition of costs associated with
exit or disposal activities.
impairment of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities
in november2003, the emerging issues task
force (eitf) reached a consensus on
certain additional quantitative and
qualitative disclosure requirements in
connection with its deliberations of issue
03-1, the impairment model for
available-for-sale and held-to-maturity
securities under sfas 115. see note 9 on
page 97 of this annual report which sets
forth the disclosures now required.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
goodwill and other intangible assets
effective january1, 2002, the firm
adopted sfas 142 which establishes the
accounting for intangible assets (other
than those acquired in a business
combination). it also addresses the
accounting for goodwill and other
intangible assets subsequent to an
acquisition. for a further discussion on
the adoption of sfas 142, see note 16 on
page 107 of this annual report.
accounting for certain loans or debt securities acquired in a transfer
in december2003, the aicpa issued
statement of position 03-3 (sop 03-3),
accounting for certain loans or debt
securities acquired in a transfer. sop
03-3 provides guidance on the accounting
for differences between contractual and
expected cash flows from the purchasers
initial investment in loans or debt
securities acquired in a transfer, if
those differences are attributable, at
least in part, to credit quality. among
other things, sop 03-3: (1)prohibits the
recognition of the excess of contractual
cash flows over expected cash flows as an
adjustment of yield, loss accrual or
valuation allowance at the time of
purchase; (2)requires that subsequent
increases in expected cash flows be
recognized prospectively through an
adjustment of yield; and (3)requires that
subsequent decreases in expected cash
flows be recognized as an impairment. in
addition, sop 03-3 prohibits the creation
or carrying over of a valuation allowance
in the initial accounting of all loans
within its scope that are acquired in a
transfer. sop 03-3 becomes effective for
loans or debt securities acquired in
fiscal years beginning after december15,
2004.
accounting for trading derivatives
in october2002, the eitf concluded on
issue 02-3, which, effective january1,
2003, precludes mark-to-market accounting
for energy-related contracts that do not
meet the definition of a derivative under
sfas 133 (i.e., transportation, storage or
capacity contracts). the firm implemented
this provision of issue 02-3 effective
january1, 2003; implementation did not
have a material effect on the firms
consolidated statement of income. in
november2002, as part of the discussion
of issue 02-3, the fasb staff further
confirmed their view that an entity should
not recognize profit at the inception of a
trade involving a derivative financial
instrument in the absence of: (a)quoted
market prices in an active market, (b)
observable prices of other current market
transactions or (c)other observable data
supporting a valuation technique. this
clarification did not have a material
impact on the firms consolidated
statements of income in 2002 and 2003. the
fasb intends in 2004 to continue to focus
on issues relating to the fair value of
financial instruments.
accounting for interest rate lock commitments (irlcs)
irlcs associated with mortgages
(commitments to extend credit at specified
interest rates) are currently accounted
for as derivative instruments in
accordance with sfas 149. irlcs are
recorded at fair value, with changes in
fair value recorded in the income
statement.
in october2003, the fasb added a new
project to its agenda to
clarify sfas 133, with respect to the
information that should be used to
determine the fair value of irlcs that are
accounted for as derivatives, and whether
loan commitments should be reported as
assets by the issuer of that commitment
(i.e., the lender). in december2003, the
sec prescribed guidance that irlcs were
deemed to be written options from the
standpoint of the mortgage lender and, as
a result, should be recorded as a
liability at inception and remain a
liability until the loan is funded. this
guidance will be effective for irlcs
entered into with potential borrowers
after march31, 2004. this guidance will
impact the timing of revenue recognition
related to irlcs. further, the impact of
this guidance on the firms current
practice will be influenced by the volume
of new irlcs, the volume of loan sales and
the changes in market interest rates
during the period. the firm is currently
assessing the impact of this guidance on
its results of operations and hedging
strategies.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
in june2003, the securities and exchange
commission adopted final rules under
section404 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
2002 (section404). commencing with its
2004 annual report, jpmorgan chase will be
required to include a report of management
on the firms internal control over
financial reporting. the internal control
report must include a statement of
managements responsibility for
establishing and maintaining adequate
internal control over financial reporting
for the firm; of managements assessment
of the effectiveness of the firms
internal control over financial reporting
as of year-end; of the framework used by
management to evaluate the effectiveness
of the firms internal control over
financial reporting; and that the firms
independent accounting firm has issued an
attestation report on managements
assessment of the firms internal control
over financial reporting, which report is
also required to be filed as part of the
annual report.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
j.p. morgan chase & co.
comparison between 2002 and 2001
jpmorgan chases 2002 net income was $1.7
billion, relatively flat when compared
with the prior year. net income per diluted share
was $0.80 in 2002, unchanged from 2001.
total revenues for 2002 of $29.6billion
were up by only 1% from 2001. the consumer
businesses of the firm contributed to the
higher revenue, benefiting primarily from
the gradual reduction in interest rates in
2002. mortgage originations at chase home
finance in high-margin sectors like
retail, wholesale, telephone-based and
e-commerce reached $113billion, 30% above
the level reached in 2001. this
exceptional growth, however, was partly
offset by the sluggishness in the
wholesale businesses, primarily ib, due to
the continued slowdown in market
activities, a reflection of the weak
economic environment and diminished
investor confidence.
from a business-segment point of view, the
revenue results were mixed in 2002. cfs
revenue of $13.4billion grew by 24% over
2001, reflecting high volumes across all
consumer credit businesses and significant
gains in chase home finance from the
hedging of msrs, partially offset by the
negative impact of lower interest rates on
deposits. tss reported modest revenue
growth, as strong gains in treasury
services and institutional trust services,
attributable mostly to new businesses,
were offset by a decline in investor
services, which suffered from the lower
value of assets held under custody. these
increases were offset by declines in the
firms wholesale businesses. in ib,
revenue declined 15%, driven by the
reduction in capital markets and lending
revenue, as well as in investment banking
fees. the reduction in capital markets
revenue was primarily attributable to
lower portfolio management revenue related
to both fixed income and equities
transactions. impbs revenue in 2002
declined 11% from 2001, reflecting the
depreciation in the equities market and
institutional outflows across all
asset classes. jpmp recognized private
equity losses of $733million in 2002,
compared with losses of $1.2billion in
2001, as a result of lower levels of
write-downs and write-offs, particularly
in the technology and telecommunications
sectors.
the firms total noninterest expense was
$22.8billion in 2002, down 4% from 2001,
with both years incurring several large
charges. in 2002, the costs associated
with merger and restructuring initiatives
were $1.2billion, versus $2.5billion in
2001. in addition, in 2002, the firm
recorded a $1.3billion charge in
connection with the settlement of its
enron-related surety litigation and the
establishment of a reserve related to
certain material litigation, proceedings
and investigations, as well as a $98
million charge for unoccupied excess real
estate. excluding the impact of these
charges in both years, the firms
full-year 2002 noninterest expense of
$20.2billion was lower than that of 2001.
severance and related costs from expense
management initiatives, approximately 70%
of which were in ib, added $890million to
noninterest expense for 2002. these
charges were more than offset by the
continued focus on expenses, which kept
spending levels low, and by the adoption
in 2002 of sfas 142, which eliminated the
amortization of goodwill.
all business segments reported
lower-to-flat noninterest expenses,
except cfs, where higher business volumes
resulted in expense growth. ib and impb
reduced headcount in response to lower
market activity levels. at tss, tight
expense management in 2002 allowed for
investments while keeping expense levels essentially
flat with 2001.
the provision for credit losses increased
to $4.3billion in 2002, up 36% from the
prior year. this was principally
attributable to troubled commercial
credits in the telecommunications and
cable sectors and the impact of the
providian acquisition in 2002, partially
offset by a decrease in the consumer
provision, reflecting the effect of
credit card securitizations.
income tax expense in 2002 was $856
million, compared with $847million in
2001. the effective tax rate was 34% in
2002, versus 33% in 2001. the increase in
the effective tax rate was principally
attributable to the level of income
earned in certain state and local tax
jurisdictions in 2002.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
managements report on
responsibility for financial reporting
and report of independent auditors j.p. morgan chase & co.
to our stockholders:
the management of j.p. morgan chase & co.
has the responsibility for preparing the
accompanying consolidated financial
statements and for their integrity and
objectivity. the statements were prepared
in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states of
america. the consolidated financial
statements include amounts that are based
on managements best estimates and
judgments. management also prepared the
other information in the annual report and
is responsible for its accuracy and
consistency with the consolidated financial
statements.
management maintains a comprehensive system
of internal control to provide reasonable
assurance of the proper authorization of
transactions, the safeguarding of assets and
the reliability of the financial records.
the system of internal control provides for
appropriate division of responsibility and
is documented by written policies and
procedures that are communicated to
employees. j.p. morgan chase & co. maintains
a strong internal auditing program that
independently assesses the effectiveness of
the system of internal control and
recommends possible improvements. management
believes that at december31, 2003, j.p.
morgan chase & co. maintained an effective
system of internal control.
the audit committee of the board of
directors reviews the systems of internal
control and financial reporting. the
committee, which is comprised of directors
who are independent from j.p. morgan chase
& co., meets and consults regularly with
management, the internal auditors and the
independent accountants to review the scope
and results of their work.
the accounting firm of
pricewaterhousecoopers llp has performed
an independent audit of j.p. morgan chase
& co.s financial statements. management
has made available to
pricewaterhousecoopers llp all of j.p.
morgan chase & co.s financial records
and related data, as well as the minutes
of stockholders and directors meetings.
furthermore, management believes that all
representations made to
pricewaterhousecoopers llp during its
audit were valid and appropriate. the
accounting firms report appears below.
william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer
dina dublon
executive vice president and chief financial officer
january20, 2004
to the board of directors and stockholders of
j.p. morgan chase & co.:
in our opinion, the accompanying
consolidated balance sheets and the
related consolidated statements of income,
of changes in stockholders equity and of
cash flows present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of j.p.
morgan chase & co. and its subsidiaries at
december31, 2003 and december31, 2002,
and the results of their operations and
their cash flows for each of the three
years in the period ended december31,
2003, in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the united
states of america. these financial
statements are the responsibility of j.p.
morgan chase & co.s management; our
responsibility is to express an opinion on
these financial statements based on our
audits. we conducted our audits of these
statements in accordance with auditing
standards generally accepted in the united
states of america, which require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining,
on a test basis,
evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements, assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates
made by management, and evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation.
we believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
as discussed in note 16 to the financial
statements, j.p. morgan chase & co.
adopted, as of january1, 2002, statement of financial
accounting standards no.142, goodwill and other intangible
assets.
january20, 2004
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
consolidated statement of income
j.p. morgan chase & co.
year ended december 31, (in millions, except per share data)
revenue
investment banking fees
$
2,890
$
2,763
$
3,612
trading revenue
4,427
2,675
4,972
fees and commissions
10,652
10,387
9,655
private equity gains (losses)
(746
)
(1,233
)
securities gains
1,446
1,563
mortgage fees and related income
other revenue
total noninterest revenue
20,919
18,088
18,542
interest income
23,444
25,284
32,181
interest expense
11,107
13,758
21,379
net interest income
12,337
11,526
10,802
revenue before provision for credit losses
33,256
29,614
29,344
provision for credit losses
1,540
4,331
3,182
total net revenue
31,716
25,283
26,162
noninterest expense
compensation expense
11,695
10,983
11,844
occupancy expense
1,912
1,606
1,348
technology and communications expense
2,844
2,554
2,631
other expense
5,137
5,111
5,250
surety settlement and litigation reserve
1,300
merger and restructuring costs
1,210
2,523
total noninterest expense
21,688
22,764
23,596
income before income tax expense and cumulative effect of accounting change
10,028
2,519
2,566
income tax expense
3,309
income before cumulative effect of accounting change
6,719
1,663
1,719
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle (net of tax)
(25
)
net income
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
net income applicable to common stock
$
6,668
$
1,612
$
1,628
average common shares outstanding
basic
2,009
1,984
1,972
diluted
2,055
2,009
2,024
net income per common share(a)
basic
$
3.32
$
0.81
$
0.83
diluted
3.24
0.80
0.80
cash dividends per common share
1.36
1.36
1.36
(a)
basic and diluted earnings per share have been reduced by $0.01 in 2001
because of the impact of the adoption of sfas 133 relating to the accounting
for derivative instruments and hedging activities.
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these
statements.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
consolidated balance sheet
j.p. morgan chase & co.
december 31, (in millions, except share data)
assets
cash and due from banks
$
20,268
$
19,218
deposits with banks
10,175
8,942
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
76,868
65,809
securities borrowed
41,834
34,143
trading assets:
debt and equity instruments (including assets pledged of $81,312 in 2003 and $88,900 in 2002)
169,120
165,199
derivative receivables
83,751
83,102
securities:
available-for-sale (including assets pledged of $31,639 in 2003 and $50,468 in 2002)
60,068
84,032
held-to-maturity (fair value: $186 in 2003 and $455 in 2002)
loans (net of allowance for loan losses of $4,523 in 2003 and $5,350 in 2002)
214,995
211,014
private equity investments
7,250
8,228
accrued interest and accounts receivable
12,356
14,137
premises and equipment
6,487
6,829
goodwill
8,511
8,096
other intangible assets
6,480
4,806
other assets
52,573
44,814
total assets
$
770,912
$
758,800
liabilities
deposits:
u.s.:
noninterest-bearing
$
73,154
$
74,664
interest-bearing
125,855
109,743
non-u.s.:
noninterest-bearing
6,311
7,365
interest-bearing
121,172
112,981
total deposits
326,492
304,753
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
113,466
169,483
commercial paper
14,284
16,591
other borrowed funds
8,925
8,946
trading liabilities:
debt and equity instruments
78,222
66,864
derivative payables
71,226
66,227
accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities (including the
allowance for lending-related commitments of $324 in 2003 and $363 in 2002)
45,066
38,440
beneficial interests issued by consolidated variable interest entities
12,295
long-term debt
48,014
39,751
junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures held by trusts
that issued guaranteed capital debt securities
6,768
guaranteed preferred beneficial interests in capital debt securities issued by consolidated trusts
5,439
total liabilities
724,758
716,494
commitments and contingencies (see note 27)
stockholders equity
preferred stock
1,009
1,009
common stock (authorized 4,500,000,000 shares,
issued 2,044,436,509 shares in 2003 and 2,023,566,387 shares in 2002)
2,044
2,024
capital surplus
13,512
13,222
retained earnings
29,681
25,851
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
(30
)
1,227
treasury stock, at cost (1,816,495 shares in 2003 and 24,859,844 shares in 2002)
(62
)
(1,027
)
total stockholders equity
46,154
42,306
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
770,912
$
758,800
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these
statements.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
consolidated statement of changes in stockholders equity
j.p. morgan chase & co.
year ended december 31, (in millions, except per share data)
preferred stock
balance at beginning of year
$
1,009
$
1,009
$
1,520
redemption of preferred stock
(450
)
purchase of treasury stock
(61
)
balance at end of year
1,009
1,009
1,009
common stock
balance at beginning of year
2,024
1,997
1,940
issuance of common stock
issuance of common stock for purchase accounting acquisitions
balance at end of year
2,044
2,024
1,997
capital surplus
balance at beginning of year
13,222
12,495
11,598
issuance of common stock and options for purchase accounting acquisitions
shares issued and commitments to issue common stock for employee stock-based awards and related tax effects
balance at end of year
13,512
13,222
12,495
retained earnings
balance at beginning of year
25,851
26,993
28,096
net income
6,719
1,663
1,694
cash dividends declared:
preferred stock
(51
)
(51
)
(66
)
common stock ($1.36 per share each year)
(2,838
)
(2,754
)
(2,731
)
balance at end of year
29,681
25,851
26,993
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
balance at beginning of year
1,227
(442
)
(241
)
other comprehensive income (loss)
(1,257
)
1,669
(201
)
balance at end of year
(30
)
1,227
(442
)
treasury stock, at cost
balance at beginning of year
(1,027
)
(953
)
(575
)
purchase of treasury stock
(871
)
reissuance from treasury stock
1,082
forfeitures to treasury stock
(117
)
(181
)
(217
)
balance at end of year
(62
)
(1,027
)
(953
)
total stockholders equity
$
46,154
$
42,306
$
41,099
comprehensive income
net income
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
other comprehensive income (loss)
(1,257
)
1,669
(201
)
comprehensive income
$
5,462
$
3,332
$
1,493
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these
statements.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
consolidated statement of cash flows
j.p. morgan chase & co.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
operating activities
net income
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by (used in)
operating activities:
provision for credit losses
1,540
4,331
3,182
surety settlement and litigation reserve
1,300
depreciation and amortization
3,101
2,979
2,891
deferred tax provision (benefit)
1,428
1,636
(638
)
private equity unrealized (gains)losses
(77
)
1,884
net change in:
trading assets
(2,671
)
(58,183
)
26,217
securities borrowed
(7,691
)
2,437
(4,209
)
accrued interest and accounts receivable
1,809
5,819
other assets
(9,916
)
6,182
(26,756
)
trading liabilities
15,769
25,402
(20,143
)
accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities
5,873
(12,964
)
7,472
other, net
(1,383
)
(1,235
)
(520
)
net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
14,601
(25,134
)
(3,107
)
investing activities
net change in:
deposits with banks
(1,233
)
3,801
(4,410
)
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
(11,059
)
(2,082
)
5,747
loans due to sales
138,881
72,742
47,687
loans due to securitizations
31,989
24,262
21,888
other loans, net
(171,779
)
(98,695
)
(72,149
)
other, net
1,541
(3,398
)
3,431
held-to-maturity securities:
proceeds
purchases
(40
)
(2
)
available-for-sale securities:
proceeds from maturities
10,548
5,094
7,980
proceeds from sales
315,738
219,385
186,434
purchases
(301,854
)
(244,547
)
(182,920
)
cash used in acquisitions
(669
)
(72
)
(1,677
)
proceeds from divestitures of nonstrategic businesses and assets
net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
12,418
(23,344
)
12,318
financing activities
net change in:
u.s. deposits
14,602
9,985
29,119
non-u.s. deposits
7,249
1,118
(14,834
)
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
(56,017
)
41,038
(3,293
)
commercial paper and other borrowed funds
(4,675
)
(15,346
)
other, net
(91
)
proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt and capital securities
17,195
11,971
8,986
repayments of long-term debt and capital securities
(8,316
)
(12,185
)
(12,574
)
proceeds from the net issuance of stock and stock-related awards
1,213
1,429
redemption of preferred stock
(511
)
redemption of preferred stock of subsidiary
(550
)
treasury stock purchased
(871
)
cash dividends paid
(2,865
)
(2,784
)
(2,697
)
net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
(26,251
)
44,643
(10,683
)
effect of exchange rate changes on cash and due from banks
net increase (decrease)in cash and due from banks
1,050
(3,382
)
(1,372
)
cash and due from banks at the beginning of the year
19,218
22,600
23,972
cash and due from banks at the end of the year
$
20,268
$
19,218
$
22,600
cash interest paid
$
10,976
$
13,534
$
22,987
cash income taxes paid
$
1,337
$
1,253
$
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these
statements.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 1
basis of presentation
j.p. morgan chase & co. (jpmorgan chase
or the firm) is a financial holding
company for a group of subsidiaries that
provide a wide range of services to a
global client base that includes
corporations, governments, institutions
and individuals. for a discussion of the
firms business segment information, see
note 34 on pages 126-127 of this annual
report.
the accounting and financial reporting
policies of jpmorgan chase and its
subsidiaries conform to accounting
principles generally accepted in the
united states of america (gaap) and
prevailing industry practices.
additionally, where applicable, the
policies conform to the accounting and
reporting guidelines prescribed by bank
regulatory authorities.
consolidation
the consolidated financial statements
include accounts of jpmorgan chase and
other entities in which the firm has a
controlling financial interest. all
material intercompany balances and
transactions have been eliminated.
the usual condition for a controlling
financial interest is ownership of a
majority of the voting interests of an
entity. however, a controlling financial
interest may also exist in entities, such
as special purpose entities (spes),
through arrangements that do not involve
voting interests.
spes are an important part of the
financial markets, providing market
liquidity by facilitating investors
access to specific portfolios of assets
and risks. they are, for example, critical
to the functioning of the mortgage- and
asset-backed securities and commercial
paper markets. spes may be organized as
trusts, partnerships or corporations and
are typically set up for a single,
discrete purpose. spes are not operating
entities and usually have no employees and
a limited life. the basic spe structure
involves a company selling assets to the
spe. the spe funds the purchase of those
assets by issuing securities to investors.
the legal documents that govern the
transaction describe how the cash earned
on the assets must be allocated to the
spes investors and other parties that
have rights to those cash flows. spes can
be structured to be bankruptcy-remote,
thereby insulating investors from the
impact of the creditors of other entities,
including the seller of the assets.
there are two different accounting
frameworks applicable to spes, depending
on the nature of the entity and the firms
relation to that entity; the qualifying
spe (qspe) framework under sfas 140 and
the variable interest entity (vie)
framework under fin 46. the qspe framework
is applicable when an entity transfers
(sells)financial assets to an spe meeting
certain criteria. these criteria are
designed to ensure that the
activities of
the spe are essentially predetermined in
their entirety at the inception of the
vehicle and that the transferor cannot
exercise control over the entity. entities
meeting these criteria are not
consolidated by the transferors. the firm
primarily follows the qspe model for the
securitizations of its residential and
commercial mortgages, credit card loans
and automobile loans. for further details,
see note 13 on pages 100-103 of this
annual report.
when the spe does not meet the qspe
criteria, consolidation
is assessed pursuant to fin 46. a vie is
defined as an entity that: lacks enough
equity investment at risk to permit the
entity to finance its activities without
additional subordinated financial support
from other parties; has equity owners who
are unable to make decisions, and/or; has
equity owners that do not absorb or
receive the entitys losses and returns.
vies encompass vehicles traditionally
viewed as spes and may also include other
entities or legal structures, such as
certain limited-purpose subsidiaries,
trusts or investment funds. entities excluded from the scope of fin 46 include
all qspes, regardless of whether the firm
was the transferor, as long as the firm
does not have the unilateral ability to
liquidate the vehicle or cause it to no
longer meet the qspe criteria, and other
entities that meet certain criteria
specified in fin 46.
fin 46 requires a variable interest
holder (counterparty to a vie) to
consolidate the vie if that party will
absorb a majority of the expected losses
of the vie, receive a majority of the
residual returns of the vie, or both. this
party is considered the primary
beneficiary of the entity. the
determination of whether the firm meets
the criteria to be considered the primary
beneficiary of a vie requires an
evaluation of all transactions (such as
investments, liquidity commitments,
derivatives and fee arrangements) with the
entity. the foundation for this evaluation
is an expected-loss calculation prescribed
by fin 46. for further details, see note
14 on pages 103-106 of this annual report.
prior to the firms adoption of fin 46,
the decision of whether or not to
consolidate depended on the applicable
accounting principles for non-qspes,
including a determination regarding the
nature and amount of investment made by
third parties in the spe. consideration
was given to, among other factors, whether
a third party had made a substantive
equity investment in the spe; which party
had voting rights, if any; who made
decisions about the assets in the spe; and
who was at risk of loss. the spe was
consolidated if jpmorgan chase retained or
acquired control over the risks and
rewards of the assets in the spe.
financial assets sold to an spe or a vie
are derecognized when: (1)the assets are
legally isolated from the firms
creditors, (2)the accounting criteria for
a sale are met and (3)the spe is a qspe
under sfas 140, or the spe can pledge or
exchange the financial assets. all
significant transactions and retained
interests
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
between the firm, qspes and
nonconsolidated vies are reflected on
jpmorgan chases consolidated balance
sheet or in the notes to consolidated
financial statements.
investments in companies that are
considered to be voting-interest entities
under fin 46, in which the firm has
significant influence over operating and
financing decisions (generally defined as
owning a voting or economic interest of
20% to 50%), are accounted for in
accordance with the equity method of
accounting. these investments are
generally included in other assets, and
the firms share of income or loss is
included in other revenue. for a
discussion of private equity investments,
see note 15 on page 106 of this annual
report.
assets held for clients in an agency or
fiduciary capacity by the firm are not
assets of jpmorgan chase and are not
included in the consolidated balance
sheet.
certain amounts in prior
periods have been reclassified to conform to the current presentation.
use of estimates in the preparation of
consolidated financial statements
the preparation of consolidated financial
statements requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets, liabilities,
revenue, expense and disclosures of
contingent assets and liabilities. actual
results could be different from these
estimates.
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in
foreign currencies are translated into
u.s. dollars using applicable rates of
exchange. jpmorgan chase translates
revenues and expenses using exchange
rates at the transaction date.
gains and losses relating to translating
functional currency financial statements
for u.s. reporting are included in other
comprehensive income (loss)within
stockholders equity. gains and losses
relating to nonfunctional currency
transactions, including non-u.s.
operations where the functional currency
is the u.s. dollar and operations in
highly inflationary environments, are
reported in the consolidated statement of
income.
statement of cash flows
for jpmorgan chases consolidated
statement of cash flows, cash and cash
equivalents are defined as those amounts
included in cash and due from banks.
significant accounting policies
the following table identifies jpmorgan
chases significant accounting policies
and the note and page where a detailed
description of each policy can be
found:
trading activities
note 3
page 87
other noninterest revenue
note 4
page 88
postretirement employee benefit plans
note 6
page 89
employee stock-based incentives
note 7
page 93
securities
note 9
page 96
securities financing activities
note 10
page 98
loans
note 11
page 98
allowance for credit losses
note 12
page 100
loan securitizations
note 13
page 100
variable interest entities
note 14
page 103
private equity investments
note 15
page 106
goodwill and other intangibles
note 16
page 107
premises and equipment
note 17
page 109
income taxes
note 24
page 113
derivative instruments and hedging activities
note 28
page 116
off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments
and guarantees
note 29
page 117
fair value of financial instruments
note 31
page 120
note 2
business changes and developments
agreement to merge with bank one corporation
on january14, 2004, jpmorgan chase and bank one
corporation (bank one) announced an
agreement to merge. the merger agreement,
which has been approved by the boards of
directors of both companies, provides for
a stock-for-stock merger in which 1.32
shares of jpmorgan chase common stock will
be exchanged, on a tax-free basis, for
each share of bank one common stock. the
merged company, headquartered in new york,
will be known as j.p. morgan chase & co.
and will continue to trade on the new york
stock exchange under the symbol jpm.
the merger is subject to approval by the
shareholders of both institutions as well
as u.s. federal and state and non-u.s.
regulatory authorities. completion of the
transaction is expected to occur in
mid-2004.
acquisition of the providian master trust
on february5, 2002, jpmorgan chase
acquired the providian master trust from
providian national bank. the acquisition
consisted of credit card receivables of
approximately $7.9billion and related
relationships. the acquired portfolio
consisted of approximately 3.3million
credit card accounts.
note 3
trading activities
trading assets include debt and equity
securities held for trading purposes that
jpmorgan chase owns (long positions).
trading liabilities include debt and
equity securities that the firm has sold
to other parties but does not own (short
positions). the firm is obligated to
purchase securities at a future date to
cover the short positions. included in
trading assets and trading liabilities
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
are
the reported receivables (unrealized
gains) and payables (unrealized losses)
related to derivatives. these amounts
include the effect of master netting
agreements as permitted under fin39. trading positions are carried at fair
value on the consolidated balance sheet.
trading revenue
year ended december 31, (in millions)
equities(a)
$
$
$
1,541
fixed income and other(b)
3,663
2,344
3,431
total
$
4,427
$
2,675
$
4,972
(a)
includes equity securities and equity derivatives.
(b)
includes bonds and commercial paper,
various types of interest rate
derivatives (including credit
derivatives), as well as foreign
exchange and commodities.
trading assets and liabilities
the following table presents the fair
value of trading assets and trading
liabilities for the dates indicated:
december 31, (in millions)
trading assets
debt and equity instruments:
u.s. government, federal agencies and
municipal securities
$
62,381
$
68,906
certificates of deposit, bankers acceptances
and commercial paper
5,233
4,545
debt securities issued by non-u.s. governments
22,654
29,709
corporate securities and other
78,852
62,039
total debt and equity instruments
$
169,120
$
165,199
derivative receivables:
interest rate
$
60,176
$
55,260
foreign exchange
9,760
7,487
equity
8,863
12,846
credit derivatives
3,025
5,511
commodity
1,927
1,998
total derivative receivables
$
83,751
$
83,102
total trading assets
$
252,871
$
248,301
trading liabilities
debt and equity instruments(a)
$
78,222
$
66,864
derivative payables:
interest rate
$
49,189
$
43,584
foreign exchange
10,129
8,036
equity
8,203
10,644
credit derivatives
2,672
3,055
commodity
1,033
total derivative payables
$
71,226
$
66,227
total trading liabilities
$
149,448
$
133,091
(a)
primarily represents securities sold, not yet purchased.
average trading assets and liabilities
were as follows for the periods
indicated:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
trading assets - debt and equity instruments
$
154,597
$
149,173
trading assets - derivative receivables
85,628
73,641
trading liabilities - debt and equity instruments(a)
$
72,877
$
64,725
trading liabilities - derivative payables
67,783
57,607
(a)
primarily represents securities sold, not yet purchased.
note 4
other noninterest revenue
investment banking fees
investment banking fees include advisory
and equity and debt underwriting fees.
advisory fees are recognized as revenue
when related services are performed.
underwriting fees are recognized as
revenue when the firm has rendered all
services to the issuer and is entitled to
collect the fee from the issuer, as long
as there are no other contingencies
associated with the fee (e.g., not
contingent on the customer obtaining
financing). underwriting fees are
presented net of syndicate expenses. in
addition, the firm recognizes credit
arrangement and syndication fees as
revenue after satisfying certain
retention, timing and yield criteria.
the following table presents the
components of investment banking fees:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
underwriting
equity
$
$
$
debt
1,549
1,543
1,839
total underwriting
2,248
2,007
2,364
advisory
1,248
total
$
2,890
$
2,763
$
3,612
fees and commissions
fees and commissions primarily include
fees from investment management, custody
and institutional trust services, deposit
accounts, brokerage services, loan
commitments, standby letters of credit and
financial guarantees, compensating
balances, insurance products and other
financial service-related products. these
fees are recognized over the period in
which the related service is provided.
also included are credit card fees, which
primarily include interchange income
(transaction-processing fees), late fees,
cash advance fees, annual and overlimit
fees, and servicing fees earned in
connection with securitization activities.
credit card fees are recognized as billed,
except for annual fees, which are
recognized over a 12-month period.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
details of fees and commissions were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
investment management and service fees
$
2,244
$
2,322
$
2,454
custody and institutional trust service fees
1,601
1,529
1,611
credit card fees
2,971
2,869
2,108
brokerage commissions
1,181
1,139
1,130
lending-related service fees
deposit service fees
1,146
1,128
1,023
other fees
total fees and commissions
$
10,652
$
10,387
$
9,655
mortgage fees and related income
mortgage fees and related income for the
years 2003, 2002, and 2001 amounted to
$892million, $988million, and $386
million, respectively. mortgage fees and
related income primarily includes fees
from mortgage origination and servicing
activities, revenue generated through loan
sales and securitization activities,
including related hedges, as well as the
impact from hedging mortgage servicing
rights with derivatives (both those
designated and not designated under sfas
133). mortgage servicing fees are
recognized over the period that the
related service is provided net of
amortization. the valuation changes of
mortgage servicing rights and the
corresponding derivatives are adjusted
through earnings in the same period. gains
and losses on loan sales and
securitizations are recognized in income
upon sale or securitization. net interest
income and securities gains and losses
related to these mortgage banking
activities are not included in mortgage
fees and related income.
note 5
interest income and interest expense
details of interest income and expense were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
interest income
loans
$
11,276
$
12,057
$
15,544
securities
3,542
3,367
3,647
trading assets
6,592
6,798
7,390
federal funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements
1,497
2,061
3,805
securities borrowed
1,343
deposits with banks
total interest income
$
23,444
$
25,284
$
32,181
interest expense
deposits
$
3,604
$
5,253
$
7,998
short-term and other liabilities
5,899
7,038
11,098
long-term debt
1,498
1,467
2,283
beneficial interests issued by consolidated
variable interest entities
total interest expense
$
11,107
$
13,758
$
21,379
net interest income
$
12,337
$
11,526
$
10,802
provision for credit losses
1,540
4,331
3,182
net interest income after
provision for credit losses
$
10,797
$
7,195
$
7,620
note 6
postretirement employee benefit plans
the firms defined benefit pension plans
are accounted for in accordance with sfas
87 and sfas 88. its postretirement
medical and life insurance plans are
accounted for in accordance with sfas
106.
jpmorgan chase uses a measurement date of
december31 for its postretirement
employee benefit plans. the fair value of
plan assets is used to determine the
expected return on plan assets for its
u.s. and non-u.s. defined benefit pension
plans. for the u.s. postretirement benefit
plan, the market-related value, which
recognizes changes in fair value over a
five-year period, is used to determine the
expected return on plan assets.
unrecognized net actuarial gains and
losses are amortized over the average
remaining service period of active plan
participants, if required.
the medicare prescription drug,
improvement and modernization act of 2003
(the act) was signed into law on
december8, 2003. as permitted under fsp
sfas 106-1, jpmorgan chase elected to
defer accounting for certain of the
effects of the act pending issuance of
final guidance and transition rules. the
firm is currently reviewing the act and
the potential impact on its u.s.
postretirement medical plan. accordingly,
the accumulated postretirement benefit
obligation and net periodic benefit costs
related to this plan do not reflect the
effects of the act. once final guidance is
issued, previously reported information is
subject to change.
defined benefit pension plans
jpmorgan chase has a qualified
noncontributory u.s. defined benefit
pension plan that provides benefits to
substantially all u.s. employees. the u.s.
plan employs a cash balance formula, in
the form of service and interest credits,
to determine the benefits to be provided at
retirement, based on eligible compensation
and years of service. employees begin to
accrue plan benefits after completing one
year of service, and benefits vest after
five years of service. the firm also
offers benefits through defined benefit
pension plans to qualifying employees in
certain non-u.s. locations based on
eligible compensation and years of
service.
it is jpmorgan chases policy to fund its
pension plans in amounts sufficient to
meet the requirements under applicable
employee benefit and local tax laws. in
2003, the firm made two cash contributions
to its u.s. defined benefit pension plan:
$127million on february10 to fully fund
the plans projected benefit obligation as
of december31, 2002, and $200million on
december29 to fully fund the plans
projected benefit obligation as of
december31, 2003. additionally, the firm
made cash contributions totaling $87
million to fund fully the accumulated
benefit obligations of certain non-u.s.
defined benefit pension plans as of
december31, 2003. based on the current
funded status of the u.s. and non-u.s.
pension plans, the firm does not expect to
make significant fundings in 2004.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
postretirement medical and life insurance
jpmorgan chase offers postretirement
medical and life insurance benefits to
qualifying u.s. employees. these benefits
vary with length of service and date of
hire and provide for limits on the firms
share of covered medical benefits. the
medical benefits are contributory, while
the life insurance benefits are
noncontributory. postretirement medical
benefits are also offered to qualifying
u.k. employees.
jpmorgan chases u.s. postretirement
benefit obligation is partially funded
with corporate-owned life insurance
(coli) purchased on the lives of
eligible employees and retirees.
while the firm owns the coli policies,
coli proceeds (death benefits,
withdrawals and other distributions) may
be used only to reimburse the firm for
its net postretirement benefit claim
payments and related administrative
expenses. the u.k. postretirement
benefit plan is unfunded.
the following tables present the funded
status and amounts reported on the
consolidated balance sheet, the
accumulated benefit obligation and the
components of net periodic benefit costs
reported in the consolidated statement of
income for the firms u.s. and non-u.s.
defined benefit pension and
postretirement benefit plans.
defined benefit pension plans
postretirement
u.s.
non-u.s.
benefit plans(a)
as of december 31, (in millions)
change in benefit obligation
benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
(4,241
)
$
(4,007
)
$
(1,329
)
$
(1,100
)
$
(1,126
)
$
(1,056
)
benefits earned during the year
(180
)
(174
)
(16
)
(16
)
(15
)
(12
)
interest cost on benefit obligations
(262
)
(275
)
(74
)
(62
)
(73
)
(69
)
plan amendments
(89
)
(1
)
employee contributions
(1
)
(1
)
(11
)
(14
)
actuarial gain (loss)
(262
)
(226
)
(125
)
(92
)
(134
)
(50
)
benefits paid
curtailment gain
(2
)
settlement gain
special termination benefits
(1
)
(3
)
(57
)
foreign exchange impact and other
(167
)
(130
)
(4
)
(4
)
benefit obligation at end of year
$
(4,633
)
$
(4,241
)
$
(1,659
)
$
(1,329
)
$
(1,252
)
$
(1,126
)
change in plan assets
fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
4,114
$
4,048
$
1,281
$
1,058
$
1,020
$
1,089
actual return on plan assets
(406
)
(150
)
(74
)
firm contributions
settlement payments
(12
)
(6
)
benefits paid
(386
)
(377
)
(43
)
(47
)
(27
)
(11
)
foreign exchange impact and other
fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
4,866
(b)
$
4,114
(b)
$
1,603
$
1,281
$
1,149
$
1,020
reconciliation of funded status
funded status
$
$
(127
)
$
(56
)
$
(48
)
$
(103
)
$
(106
)
unrecognized amounts:
net transition asset
(1
)
(1
)
prior service cost
net actuarial (gain)loss
1,224
prepaid (accrued)benefit cost reported in
other assets (accrued expenses), respectively
$
1,290
$
1,153
$
(c)
$
(c)
$
$
(10
)
accumulated benefit obligation
$
(4,312
)
$
(3,949
)
$
(1,626
)
$
(1,295
)
na
na
(a)
includes postretirement benefit obligation of $36million and $38million
and postretirement benefit liability (included in accrued expenses) of $54
million and $49million at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively, for the
u.k. plan, which is unfunded.
(b)
at december31, 2003 and 2002, approximately $315million and $295million,
respectively, of u.s. plan assets relate to surplus assets of group annuity
contracts.
(c)
at december31, 2003 and 2002, accrued expenses related to non-u.s. defined
benefit pension plans that jpmorgan chase elected not to prefund fully totaled
$99million and $81million, respectively.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
defined benefit pension plans
postretirement
u.s.
non-u.s.
benefit plans(a)
for the year ended december 31, (in millions)
components of net periodic benefit costs
benefits earned during the year
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest cost on benefit obligations
expected return on plan assets
(322
)
(358
)
(379
)
(83
)
(76
)
(78
)
(92
)
(98
)
(48
)
amortization of unrecognized amounts:
prior service cost
net actuarial (gain)loss
(5
)
(1
)
(10
)
(12
)
curtailment (gain)loss(b)
(3
)
(8
)
settlement gain
(2
)
special termination benefits(b)
net periodic benefit costs reported in
compensation expense
$
(c)
$
$
$
(c)
$
(d)
$
$
(1)
(e)
$
$
(a)
includes net periodic postretirement benefit costs of $2million in 2003,
2002 and 2001 for the u.k. plan.
(b)
reflects expense recognized in 2002 due to management-initiated and
outsourcing-related employee terminations.
(c)
increase in net periodic benefit costs resulted from changes in actuarial
assumptions and amortization of unrecognized losses.
(d)
decrease in net periodic benefit costs resulted from
conversion of certain non-u.s. defined benefit pension plans to
defined contribution plans.
(e)
decrease in net periodic
benefit costs reflects nonrecurring costs in 2002.
jpmorgan chase has a number of other
defined benefit pension plans (i.e., u.s.
plans not subject to title iv of the
employee retirement income security act).
the most significant of these plans is the
excess retirement plan, pursuant to which
certain employees earn service credits on
compensation amounts above the maximum
stipulated by law. this plan is a
nonqualified noncontributory u.s. pension
plan with an unfunded liability at each of
december31, 2003 and 2002, in the amount
of $178million. compensation expense
related to the firms other defined
benefit pension plans totaled $19million
in 2003, $15million in 2002 and $22
million in 2001.
plan assumptions
jpmorgan chases expected long-term rate
of return for u.s. defined benefit
pension plan assets is a blended average
of its investment advisors projected
long-term (10years or more) returns for
the various asset classes, weighted by
the portfolio allocation. asset-class
returns are developed using a
forward-looking building-block approach
and are not based strictly on historical
returns. equity returns are generally
developed as the sum of inflation,
expected real earnings growth and
expected long-term dividend yield. bond
returns are generally developed as the
sum of inflation, real bond yield and
risk spread (as appropriate), adjusted
for the expected effect on returns from
changing yields. other asset-class
returns are derived from their
relationship to equity and bond markets.
in the united kingdom, which represents the
most significant of the non-u.s. pension
plans, procedures similar to those in the
united states are used to develop the
expected long-term rate of return on pension
plan assets, taking into consideration local
market conditions and the specific
allocation of plan assets. the expected
long-term rate of return on u.k. plan assets
is an average of projected long-term returns
for each asset class, selected by reference
to the yield on long-term u.k. government
bonds and aa-rated long-term corporate
bonds, plus an equity risk premium above the
risk-free rate.
the expected long-term rate of return for
the u.s. postretirement medical and life
insurance plans is computed using procedures
similar to those used for the u.s. defined
benefit pension plan.
the discount rate used in determining the
benefit obligation under the u.s.
postretirement employee benefit plans is
selected by reference to the year-end
moodys corporate aa rate, as well as other
high-quality indices with similar duration
to that of the respective plans benefit
obligations. the discount rate for the u.k.
postretirement plans is selected by
reference to the year-end iboxx  corporate
aa 15-year-plus bond rate.
the following tables present the weighted-average annualized actuarial
assumptions for the projected and accumulated benefit obligations, and the
components of net periodic benefit costs for the firms u.s. and non-u.s.
defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans, as of year-end.
u.s.
non-u.s.
for the year ended december 31,
weighted-average assumptions used to determine benefit obligations
discount rate
6.00
%
6.50
%
2.00-5.40
%
1.50-5.60
%
rate of compensation increase
4.50
4.50
1.75-3.75
1.25-3.00
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
u.s.
non-u.s.
for the year ended december 31,
weighted-average assumptions used to determine net periodic benefit costs
discount rate
6.50
%
7.25
%
7.50-7.75
%
1.50-5.60
%
2.50-6.00
%
2.75-6.25
%
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets:
pension
8.00
9.25
9.00-9.50
2.70-6.50
3.25-7.25
3.25-8.00
postretirement benefit
8.00
9.00
9.00-9.50
na
na
na
rate of compensation increase
4.50
4.50
3.00-4.50
1.25-3.00
2.00-4.00
2.00-4.00
the following tables present jpmorgan chases assumed weighted-average medical
benefits cost trend rate, which is used to measure the expected cost of
benefits at year-end, and the effect of a one-percentage-point change in the
assumed medical benefits cost trend rate:
december 31,
health care cost trend rate assumed for next year
%
%
%
rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline (the ultimate trend rate)
year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate
1-percentage-
1-percentage-
(in millions)
point increase
point decrease
effect on total service and interest costs
$
$
(3
)
effect on postretirement benefit obligation
(44
)
at december31, 2003, the firm reduced the
discount rate used to determine its u.s.
benefit obligations to 6.00%. the firm
also reduced the 2004 expected long-term
rate of return on u.s. plan assets to
7.75% and 7.00%, respectively, for its
pension and other postretirement benefit
expenses. the impact of the changes as of
december31, 2003, to the expected
long-term rate of return on plan assets
and the discount rate is expected to
increase 2004 u.s. pension and other
postretirement benefit expenses by
approximately $35million. the impact of
the changes to the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
and the discount rate on non-u.s. pension and
other postretirement benefit expenses is
not expected to be material.
jpmorgan chases u.s. pension and other
postretirement benefit expenses are most
sensitive to the expected long-term rate
of return on plan assets. with all other
assumptions held constant, a 25-basis
point decline in the expected long-term
rate of return on u.s. plan assets would
result in an increase of approximately $15
million in 2004 u.s. pension and other
postretirement benefit expenses.
additionally, a 25-basis point decline in
the discount rate for the u.s. plans would
result in an increase in 2004 u.s. pension
and other postretirement benefit expenses
of approximately $12million and an
increase in the related benefit obligation
of approximately $143million. the impact
of a decline in the discount rate related
to the u.s. pension plan would be
significantly offset by the effect of a
similar reduction in the assumed interest
rate used for crediting participant
balances.
investment strategy and asset allocation
the investment policy for postretirement
employee benefit plan assets is to
optimize the risk-return relationship as
appropriate to the respective plans needs
and goals, using a global portfolio of
various asset classes diversified by
market segment, economic sector and
issuer. specifically, the goal is to
optimize the asset mix for future benefit
obligations, while managing various risk
factors and each plans investment return
objectives. for example, long-duration
fixed income securities are included in
the u.s. qualified pension plans asset
allocation, in recognition of its
long-duration obligations. plan assets are
managed by a combination of internal and
external investment managers and, on a
quarterly basis, are rebalanced to target,
to the extent economically practical.
the firms u.s. pension plan assets are
held in various trusts and are invested in
well diversified portfolios of equity
(including u.s. large and small
capitalization and international
equities), fixed income (including
corporate and government bonds), treasury
inflation-indexed and high-yield
securities, cash equivalents and other
securities. non-u.s. pension plan assets
are similarly invested in well-diversified
portfolios of equity, fixed income and
other securities. assets of the firms
coli policies, which are used to fund
partially the u.s. postretirement benefit
plan, are held in separate accounts with
an insurance company and are invested in
equity and fixed income index funds.
assets used to fund the firms u.s. and
non-u.s. defined benefit pension and
postretirement benefit plans do not
include jpmorgan chase common stock,
except in connection with investments in
third-party stock-index funds.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
the following table presents the weighted-average asset allocation at december
31 and the respective target allocation by asset category for the firms u.s.
and non-u.s. defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans:
defined benefit pension plans
postretirement
u.s.
non-u.s.(a)(b)
benefit plans(c)
target
% of plan assets
target
% of plan assets
target
% of plan assets
allocation
allocation
allocation
asset class
debt securities
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
equity securities
real estate
other
total
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
(a)
primarily represents the u.k. plan which accounts for approximately 90% of
the non-u.s. plan assets.
(b)
the target allocation for u.k. plan assets was revised in 2003 to reduce
the volatility of funding levels, given that the plan is now closed to future
participants.
(c)
represents the u.s. postretirement benefit plan only, as the
u.k. plan is unfunded.
estimated future benefit payments
the following table presents benefit payments expected to be paid, which
include the effect of expected future service for the years indicated. the
postretirement medical and life insurance payments are net of expected retiree
contributions.
non-
u.s. and u.k.
u.s. pension
u.s. pension
postretirement
(in millions)
benefits
benefits
benefits
$
$
$
years 2009-2013
2,177
defined contribution plans
jpmorgan chase offers several defined contribution plans in the u.s. and
certain non-u.s. locations. the most significant of these plans is the jpmorgan
chase 401(k) savings plan, covering substantially all u.s. employees. this plan
allows employees to make pre-tax contributions to tax-deferred investment
portfolios. for most employees, the firm matches employee contributions
dollar-for-dollar up to a certain percentage of eligible compensation per pay
period, subject to plan and legal limits. employees begin to receive matching
contributions after completing one year of service; benefits vest after three
years of service. the firms defined contribution plans are administered in
accordance with applicable local laws and regulations.
compensation expense related to these plans totaled $240million in 2003, $251
million in 2002 and $208million in 2001.
note 7
employee stock-based incentives
effective january1, 2003, jpmorgan chase adopted sfas 123 using the
prospective transition method. sfas 123 requires all stock-based compensation
awards, including stock options, to be accounted for at fair value. fair value
is based on a black-scholes valuation model, with compensation expense
recognized in earnings over the required service period. under
the prospective transition method, all new awards granted to employees on or
after january1, 2003, are accounted for under sfas 123. in connection with the
adoption of sfas 123, the firm decided to provide key employees, excluding
members of the executive committee, with the ability to elect to receive the
value of their stock-based compensation awards as stock options, restricted
stock or any combination thereof. the net effect was to reduce net income by
$0.08 per share in 2003. awards that were outstanding as of december31, 2002,
if not subsequently modified, continue to be accounted for under apb 25.
through december31, 2002, jpmorgan chase accounted for its employee
stock-based compensation plans under the
intrinsic-value method in accordance with apb 25. under this method, no expense
is recognized for stock options granted at the stock price on the grant date,
since such options have no intrinsic value. compensation expense for restricted
stock and restricted stock units (rsus) is measured based on the number of
shares granted and the stock price at the grant date and is recognized over the
required service period.
key employee stock-based awards
jpmorgan chase grants long-term stock-based incentive awards to certain key
employees under two plans (the lti plans). the long-term incentive plan,
approved by shareholders in may2000, provides for grants of stock options,
stock appreciation rights (sars), restricted stock and rsu awards, and the
stock option plan, a nonshareholder-approved plan, provides for grants of stock
options and sars. through december31, 2003, sars have not been granted under
either of these plans.
under the lti plans, stock options are granted with an exercise price equal to
jpmorgan chases common stock price on the grant date. generally, options
cannot be exercised until at least one year after the grant date and become
exercisable over various periods as determined at the time of the grant.
options generally expire 10years after the grant date. in january2001,
jpmorgan chase granted 82.2million options under the lti plans, pursuant to a
growth performance incentive program (gpip). forfeitures of gpip options
aggregated 23.7million shares through december31, 2003.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the following table presents a summary of jpmorgan chases option activity
under the lti plans during the last three years:
year ended december 31,
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
(options in thousands)
options
exercise price
options
exercise price
options
exercise price
options outstanding, january 1
298,731
$
40.84
272,304
$
41.23
175,232
$
31.52
granted
26,751
22.15
53,230
36.41
136,863
51.07
exercised
(14,574
)
17.47
(9,285
)
16.85
(28,954
)
25.69
canceled
(16,882
)
47.57
(17,518
)
45.59
(10,837
)
49.94
options outstanding, december 31
294,026
$
39.88
298,731
$
40.84
272,304
$
41.23
options exercisable, december 31
176,163
$
37.88
144,421
$
34.91
123,045
$
30.34
the following table details the distribution of options outstanding under the
lti plans at december31, 2003:
options outstanding
options exercisable
(options in thousands)
options
weighted-average
weighted-average remaining
options
weighted-average
range of exercise prices
outstanding
exercise price
contractual life (in years)
exercisable
exercise price
$3.41$20.00
16,409
$
16.63
1.3
16,387
$
16.63
$20.01$35.00
55,671
25.23
5.9
28,664
27.75
$35.01$50.00
119,717
40.15
5.9
101,858
40.29
$50.01$65.58
102,229
51.27
6.7
29,254
51.32
total
294,026
$
39.88
5.9
176,163
$
37.88
restricted stock and rsus are granted by jpmorgan chase under the lti plans at
no cost to the recipient. restricted stock/ rsus are subject to forfeiture
until certain restrictions have lapsed, including continued employment for a
specified period. the recipient of a share of restricted stock is entitled to
voting rights and dividends on the common stock. an rsu entitles the recipient
to receive a share of common stock after the applicable restrictions lapse; the
recipient is entitled to receive cash payments equivalent to dividends on the
underlying common stock during the period the rsu is outstanding.
during 2003, 43.5million restricted stock/rsu awards were granted by jpmorgan
chase under the lti plans. in 2002 and 2001, 24.0million and 25.9million
awards, respectively, were granted under these plans. all these awards are
payable solely in stock. the 2001 grants included 1.3million restricted stock/
rsu awards that are forfeitable if certain target prices are not achieved. the
vesting of these awards is conditioned upon certain service requirements being
met and jpmorgan chases common stock price reaching and sustaining target
prices within a five-year performance period. during 2002, it was determined
that it was no longer probable that the target stock prices related to
forfeitable awards granted in 1999, 2000 and 2001 would be achieved within
their respective performance periods, and accordingly, previously accrued
expenses were
reversed. the target stock
prices for these awards ranged from $73.33 to
$85.00. these awards will be forfeited in 2004 through 2006 if the target stock
prices are not achieved.
a portion of certain employees cash incentive compensation that exceeded
specified levels was awarded in restricted stock/ rsu awards or other deferred
investments (the required deferral plan) issued under the lti plans. these
restricted stock/rsu and other deferred awards vest based solely on continued
employment. during 2001, 137,500 of such restricted stock/units were granted.
the required deferral plan was discontinued in 2002.
broad-based employee stock options
in january2003, jpmorgan chase granted 12.8million options to all eligible
full-time (150 options each) and part-time (75 options each) employees under
the value sharing plan, a nonshareholder-approved plan. the exercise price is
equal to jpmorgan chases common stock price on the grant date. the options
become exercisable over various periods and generally expire 10years after the
grant date.
the following table presents a summary of jpmorgan chases broad-based employee
stock option plan activity during the past three years:
year ended december 31,
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
(options in thousands)
options
exercise price
options
exercise price
options
exercise price
options outstanding, january 1
113,155
$
40.62
87,393
$
41.86
67,237
$
38.17
granted
12,846
21.87
32,550
36.85
26,042
51.22
exercised
(2,007
)
13.67
(674
)
15.01
(2,267
)
27.65
canceled
(6,172
)
37.80
(6,114
)
41.14
(3,619
)
49.54
options outstanding, december 31
117,822
$
39.11
113,155
$
40.62
87,393
$
41.86
options exercisable, december 31
36,396
$
32.88
38,864
$
31.95
40,390
$
31.76
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
the following table details the distribution of broad-based employee stock
options outstanding at december31, 2003:
options outstanding
options exercisable
(options in thousands)
options
weighted-average
weighted-average remaining
options
weighted-average
range of exercise prices
outstanding
exercise price
contractual life (in years)
exercisable
exercise price
$10.26$20.00
5,317
$
13.01
0.4
5,317
$
13.01
$20.01$35.00
19,155
24.66
6.6
7,725
28.79
$35.01$50.00
71,048
41.16
6.3
23,354
38.76
$50.01$65.58
22,302
51.22
7.1
total
117,822
$
39.11
6.2
36,396
$
32.88
comparison of the fair and intrinsic value measurement methods
pre-tax employee stock-based compensation expense related to these plans
totaled $919million in 2003 (which includes the $266million impact of
adopting sfas 123), $590million in 2002 and $798million in 2001. compensation
expense for 2002 included the reversal of previously accrued expense of $120
million related to forfeitable key employee awards granted in 1999, 2000 and
2001, as discussed above.
the following table presents net income and basic and diluted earnings per
share as reported, and as if all outstanding awards were accounted for at fair
value. the lower expense from applying sfas 123 in 2003 compared with 2002
resulted from a decrease in the number of outstanding stock-based compensation
awards, a lower common stock price, lower black-scholes option fair values and
longer vesting periods. the increase in compensation expense after applying sfas
123 in 2002 compared with 2001 reflects a higher level of options granted in
prior years that were not fully vested. this increase is partially offset by a
decline in the weighted-average grant-date fair value of options granted in
2002.
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except per share data)
net income as reported
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
add:employee stock-based compensation
expense originally included
in reported net income, net of tax
deduct:employee stock-based
compensation expense determined
under the fair value method
for all awards, net of tax
(863
)
(1,232
)
(1,101
)
pro forma net income
$
6,407
$
$
1,072
earnings per share:
basic:as reported
$
3.32
$
0.81
$
0.83
pro forma
3.16
0.37
0.51
diluted:as reported
$
3.24
$
0.80
$
0.80
pro forma
3.09
0.37
0.50
the following table presents jpmorgan chases weighted-average grant-date fair
values for the employee stock-based compensation awards granted, and the
assumptions used to value stock options under a black-scholes valuation model:
year ended december 31,
weighted-average grant-date fair value
stock options:
key employee
$
5.60
$
11.57
$
18.39
broad-based employee
4.98
9.49
14.60
restricted stock and rsus
(all payable solely in stock)
22.03
36.28
49.21
weighted-average annualized stock
option valuation assumptions
risk-free interest rate
3.19
%
4.61
%
5.08
%
expected dividend yield(a)
5.99
3.72
2.51
expected common stock price volatility
assumed weighted-average expected
life of stock options (in years)
key employee
6.8
6.8
6.8
broad-based employee
3.8
3.8
3.8
(a)
based primarily on historical data at the grant date.
note 8
noninterest expense
merger and restructuring costs
merger and restructuring costs associated with various programs announced prior
to january1, 2002, were reflected in the merger and restructuring costs
caption of the consolidated statement of income and had been incurred as of
december31, 2002. additionally, all previously recorded liabilities for merger
charges had been fully utilized as of year-end 2002: $1.25billion in
connection with the merger of j.p. morgan and chase, and $300million in
connection with the right-sizing of employee levels beyond that planned at the
time of the merger.
restructuring costs associated with programs announced after january1, 2002,
are reflected in the related expense category of
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the consolidated statement of income. a summary of such costs, by expense
category and segment, are shown in the following table for 2003 and 2002.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
expense category
compensation
$
$
occupancy
(b)
technology and communications
other
total  (a)
$
$
segment
investment bank
$
$
treasury & securities services
investment management & private banking
jpmorgan partners
chase financial services
support units and corporate
total (a)
$
$
(a)
with the exception of occupancy-related write-offs, all of the costs in the
table required the expenditure of cash.
(b)
excludes a $98
million charge for unoccupied excess real estate in 2002.
other expense
details of other expense were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
other expense
professional services
$
1,368
$
1,303
$
1,139
outside services
1,187
marketing
travel and entertainment
amortization of intangibles
all other
1,156
1,391
1,440
total other expense
$
5,137
$
5,111
$
5,250
note 9
securities
securities are classified as available-for-sale (afs), held-to-maturity
(htm) or trading. trading securities are discussed in note 3 on pages 8788.
securities are classified as afs when, in managements judgment, they may be
sold in response to or in anticipation of changes in market conditions. afs
securities are carried at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet.
unrealized gains and losses after sfas 133 valuation adjustments are reported
as net increases or decreases to accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
impairment is evaluated considering numerous factors, and their relative
significance varies from case to case. factors considered in the analysis
include the length of time and extent to which the market value has been less
than cost; the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer; and
the intent and ability to retain the security in order to allow for an
anticipated recovery in market value. if, based on the analysis, it is
determined that the impairment is other-than-temporary, the security is written
down and a loss is recognized. the specific identification method is used to
determine realized gains and losses on afs securities, which are included in
securities gains (losses)on the consolidated statement of income. securities
that the firm has the positive intent and ability to hold to maturity are
classified as htm and are carried at amortized cost on the consolidated balance
sheet.
the following table presents realized gains and losses from afs securities:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
realized gains
$
2,123
$
1,904
$
1,438
realized losses
(677
)
(341
)
(572
)
net realized gains (losses)
$
1,446
$
1,563
$
the amortized cost and estimated fair value of afs and htm securities were as
follows for the dates indicated:
gross
gross
gross
gross
amortized
unrealized
unrealized
fair
amortized
unrealized
unrealized
fair
december 31, (in millions)
cost
gains
losses
value
cost
gains
losses
value
available-for-sale securities
u.s. government and federal agencies/corporations
obligations:
mortgage-backed securities
$
32,248
$
$
$
31,932
$
40,148
$
$
$
40,456
collateralized mortgage obligations
1,825
1,828
3,271
3,313
u.s. treasuries
11,617
11,464
22,870
23,377
obligations of state and political subdivisions
2,841
2,960
1,744
1,875
debt securities issued by non-u.s. governments
7,232
7,238
11,873
11,912
corporate debt securities
equity securities
1,393
1,406
1,198
1,196
other, primarily asset-backed securities (a)
2,448
2,407
1,021
total available-for-sale securities
$
60,422
$
$
$
60,068
$
82,952
$
1,395
$
$
84,032
held-to-maturity securities
total held-to-maturity securities  (b)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(a)
includes cmos of private issuers, which generally have underlying
collateral consisting of obligations of u.s. government and federal agencies
and corporations.
(b)
consists primarily of mortgage-backed securities.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
included in the $799million of unrealized losses on available-for-sale
securities at december31, 2003 is $46million of unrealized losses that have
existed for a period greater than 12months. these losses primarily relate to
$1.5billion of asset-backed securities held by commercial paper conduits that
were consolidated by the firm in accordance with fin 46 on july1, 2003. the
securities held by the conduits are of high credit quality, predominantly rated
aa or better. upon adoption of fin 46, the securities were measured at the
amounts at which such interests would have been carried had the firm
consolidated the conduits when it first met the conditions to be considered the
primary beneficiary; this resulted in an initial transition adjustment to other
comprehensive income as described in note 14 on page 106. the overall
depreciation in fair value is attributable
to the illiquid secondary market for these securities and is considered
temporary, as the firm has the intent and ability to hold these investments
with the expectation that the unrealized market value loss will be recovered.
in calculating the effective yield for mortgage-backed securities (mbs) and
collateralized mortgage obligations (cmo), jpmorgan chase actively monitors
the likelihood of principal prepayment through its portfolio management
function. management regularly performs simulation testing to determine the
impact that market conditions would have on its mbs and cmo portfolios. mbss
and cmos that management believes have high prepayment risk are included in the
afs portfolio and are reported at fair value.
the following table presents the amortized cost, estimated fair value and
average yield at december31, 2003, of jpmorgan chases afs and htm securities
by contractual maturity:
available-for-sale securities
held-to-maturity securities
maturity schedule of securities
amortized
fair
average
amortized
fair
average
december 31, 2003 (in millions)
cost
value
yield(a)
cost
value
yield(a)
due in one year or less
$
4,899
$
4,900
1.89
%
$
$
%
due after one year through five years
9,212
9,175
3.33
due after five years through 10years
7,839
7,815
4.20
7.32
due after 10years (b)
38,472
38,178
4.83
6.91
total securities
$
60,422
$
60,068
4.28
%
$
$
6.92
%
(a)
the average yield is based on amortized cost balances at year-end. yields
are derived by dividing interest income (including the effect of related
derivatives on afs securities and the amortization of premiums and accretion of
discounts) by total amortized cost. taxable-equivalent yields are used where
applicable.
(b)
includes securities with no stated maturity. substantially all of jpmorgan
chases mbss and cmos are due in 10years or more based on contractual
maturity. the estimated duration, which reflects anticipated future prepayments
based on a consensus of dealers in the market, is approximately five years for
mbss and cmos.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 10
securities financing activities
jpmorgan chase enters into resale agreements, repurchase agreements, securities
borrowed transactions and securities loaned transactions primarily to finance
the firms inventory positions, acquire securities to cover short positions and
settle other securities obligations. the firm also enters into these
transactions to accommodate customers needs.
securities purchased under resale agreements (resale agreements) and
securities sold under repurchase agreements (repurchase agreements) are
generally treated as collateralized financing transactions and are carried on
the consolidated balance sheet at the amounts the securities will be
subsequently sold or repurchased, plus accrued interest. where appropriate,
resale and repurchase agreements with the same counterparty are reported on a
net basis in accordance with fin 41.
jpmorgan chase takes possession of securities purchased under resale
agreements. on a daily basis, jpmorgan chase monitors the market value of the
underlying collateral received from its counterparties, consisting primarily of
u.s. and non-u.s. government and agency securities, and requests additional
collateral from its counterparties when necessary.
similar transactions that do not meet the sfas 140 definition of a repurchase
agreement are accounted for as buys and sells rather than financing
transactions. these transactions are accounted for as a purchase (sale)of the
underlying securities with a forward obligation to sell (purchase)the
securities. the forward purchase (sale)obligation, a derivative, is recorded
on the consolidated balance sheet at its fair value, with changes in fair value
recorded in trading revenue. notional amounts of these transactions accounted
for as purchases under sfas 140 were $15billion and $8billion at december31,
2003 and 2002, respectively. notional amounts of these transactions accounted
for as sales under sfas 140 were $8billion and $13billion at december31,
2003 and 2002, respectively. based on the short-term duration of these
contracts, the unrealized gain or loss is insignificant.
securities borrowed and securities lent are recorded at the amount of cash
collateral advanced or received. securities borrowed consist primarily of
government and equity securities. jpmorgan chase monitors the market value of
the securities borrowed and lent on a daily basis and calls for additional
collateral when appropriate. fees received or paid are recorded in interest
income or interest expense.
december 31, (in millions)
securities purchased under resale agreements
$
62,801
$
57,645
securities borrowed
41,834
34,143
securities sold under repurchase agreements
$
105,409
$
161,394
securities loaned
2,461
1,661
jpmorgan chase pledges certain financial instruments it owns to collateralize
repurchase agreements and other securities financings. pledged securities that
can be sold or repledged by the secured party are identified as financial
instruments owned (pledged to various parties) on the consolidated balance
sheet.
at december31, 2003, the firm had received securities as collateral that can
be repledged, delivered or otherwise used with a fair value of approximately
$210billion. this collateral was generally obtained under resale or
securities-borrowing agreements. of these securities, approximately $197
billion was repledged, delivered or otherwise used, generally as collateral
under repurchase agreements, securities-lending agreements or to cover short
sales.
note 11
loans
loans are reported at the principal amount outstanding, net of the allowance
for loan losses, unearned income and any net deferred loan fees. loans held for
sale are carried at the lower of aggregate cost or fair value. loans are
classified as trading for secondary market trading activities where positions
are bought and sold to make profits from short-term movements in price. loans
held for trading purposes are included in trading assets and are carried at
fair value, with the gains and losses included in trading revenue. interest
income is recognized using the interest method, or on a basis approximating a
level rate of return over the term of the loan.
nonaccrual loans are those on which the accrual of interest is discontinued.
loans (other than certain consumer loans discussed below) are placed on
nonaccrual status immediately if, in the opinion of management, full payment of
principal or interest is in doubt, or when principal or interest is 90days or
more past due and collateral, if any, is insufficient to cover
principal and interest. interest accrued but not collected at the date a loan
is placed on nonaccrual status is reversed against interest income. in
addition, the amortization of net deferred loan fees is suspended. interest
income on nonaccrual loans is recognized only to the extent it is received in
cash. however, where there is doubt regarding the ultimate collectibility of
loan principal, all cash thereafter received is applied to reduce the carrying
value of the loan. loans are restored to accrual status only when interest and
principal payments are brought current and future payments are reasonably
assured.
consumer loans are generally charged to the allowance for loan losses upon
reaching specified stages of delinquency, in accordance with the federal
financial institutions examination council (ffiec) policy. for example,
credit card loans are charged off at the earlier of 180days past due or within
60days from receiving notification of the filing of bankruptcy. residential
mortgage products are generally charged off to net realizable value at 180days
past due. other consumer products are generally charged off (to net realizable
value if collateralized) at 120days past due. accrued interest on residential
mortgage products, automobile financings and certain other consumer loans are
accounted for in accordance with the nonaccrual loan policy
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
discussed above. accrued interest on all other loans is generally reversed
against interest income when the consumer loan is charged off.
a collateralized loan is considered an in-substance foreclosure and is
reclassified to assets acquired in loan satisfactions, within
other assets, only when jpmorgan chase has taken physical possession of the
collateral. this is regardless of whether formal foreclosure proceedings have
taken place.
the composition of the loan portfolio at each of the dates indicated was as
follows:
december 31, (in millions)
u.s.
non-u.s.
total
u.s.
non-u.s.
total
commercial loans:
commercial and industrial
$
43,631
$
24,618
$
68,249
$
49,205
$
31,446
$
80,651
commercial real estate:
commercial mortgage
3,182
3,182
3,176
3,178
construction
financial institutions
4,622
5,671
10,293
3,770
2,438
6,208
non-u.s. governments
total commercial loans
52,024
31,073
83,097
(d)
56,667
34,881
91,548
consumer loans:
14 family residential mortgages:
first liens
54,460
54,460
49,357
49,369
home equity loans
19,252
19,252
14,643
14,643
credit card (a)
16,793
16,793
19,677
19,677
automobile financings
38,695
38,695
33,615
33,615
other consumer
7,193
7,221
7,395
7,512
total consumer loans
136,393
136,421
124,687
124,816
total loans (b)(c)
$
188,417
$
31,101
$
219,518
$
181,354
$
35,010
$
216,364
(a)
at december31, 2003, excludes $1.1billion of accrued interest and fees on
securitized credit card loans that were classified in other assets, consistent
with the fasb staff position, accounting for accrued interest receivable
related to securitized and sold receivables under sfas 140.
(b)
loans are presented net of unearned income of $1.29billion and $1.89
billion at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
(c)
includes loans held for sale (principally mortgage-related loans) of $20.8
billion and $25.0billion at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
(d)
includes
$5.8billion of loans held by vies consolidated under fin 46.
the following table reflects information about the firms loans held for sale,
principally mortgage-related:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
net gains on sales of loans held for sale
$
$
$
lower of cost or market adjustments
(36
)
(177
)
impaired loans
jpmorgan chase accounts for and discloses nonaccrual commercial loans as
impaired loans and recognizes their interest income as discussed previously for
nonaccrual loans. the firm excludes from impaired loans its small-balance,
homogeneous consumer loans; loans carried at fair value or the lower of cost or
fair value; debt securities; and leases.
the table below sets forth information about jpmorgan chases impaired loans.
the firm primarily uses the discounted cash flow method for valuing impaired
loans:
december 31, (in millions)
impaired loans with an allowance
$
1,597
$
3,250
impaired loans without an allowance (a)
total impaired loans
$
2,003
$
3,662
allowance for impaired loans under sfas 114 (b)
$
$
1,106
average balance of impaired loans during the year
2,969
2,805
interest income recognized on impaired loans
during the year
(a)
when the discounted cash flows, collateral value or market price equals or
exceeds the carrying value of the loan, then the loan does not require an
allowance under sfas 114.
(b)
the allowance for impaired loans under sfas 114 is included in jpmorgan
chases allowance for loan losses.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 12
allowance for credit losses
jpmorgan chases allowance for loan losses is intended to cover probable credit
losses for which either the asset is not specifically identified or the size of
the loss has not been fully determined. within the allowance, there are
specific and expected loss components and a residual component.
the specific loss component covers those commercial loans deemed by the firm to
be criticized. the firm internally categorizes its criticized commercial loans
into three groups: doubtful, substandard and special-mention.
criticized nonperforming commercial loans (excluding leases) are considered to
be impaired loans. the allowance for impaired loans is computed using the
methodology under sfas 114. an allowance is established when the discounted
cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of an impaired loan
are lower than the carrying value of that loan. to compute the specific loss
component of the allowance, larger impaired loans are evaluated individually,
and smaller impaired loans are evaluated as a pool using historical loss
experience for the respective class of assets. criticized but performing loans
also are evaluated as a pool, using historical loss rates.
the expected loss component covers performing commercial loans (except
criticized loans) and consumer loans. expected losses are the product of
default probability and loss severity. these factors are differentiated by risk
rating and maturity for commercial loans. the expected loss estimates for each
consumer loan portfolio are based primarily on the firms historical loss
experience for the applicable product portfolio.
finally, a residual component is maintained to cover uncertainties that could
affect managements estimate of probable losses. the residual component of the
allowance reflects the margin of imprecision in the underlying assumptions used
for estimating specific losses and expected losses. it is anticipated that the
residual component of the allowance will range between 10% and 20% of the total
allowance for loan losses.
jpmorgan chases risk management committee reviews, at least quarterly, the
allowance for credit losses relative to the risk profile of the firms credit
portfolio and current economic conditions. the allowance is adjusted based on
that review if, in managements judgment, changes are warranted. as of december
31, 2003, jpmorgan chase deemed the allowance to be appropriate (i.e.,
sufficient to absorb losses that are inherent in the portfolio but not yet
identifiable).
to provide for the risk of loss inherent in the credit extension process,
management also computes specific and expected loss components, as well as a
residual component, for lending-related commitments using a methodology similar
to that used for the loan portfolio.
jpmorgan chase maintains an allowance for credit losses as follows:
reported in:
allowance for
credit losses on:
balance sheet
income statement
loans
allowance for loan losses
provision for credit losses
lending-related
commitments
other liabilities
provision for credit losses
the table below summarizes the changes in the allowance for loan losses:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
allowance for loan losses at january 1
$
5,350
$
4,524
$
3,665
provision for loan losses
1,579
4,039
3,185
charge-offs
(2,818
)
(4,060
)
(2,582
)
recoveries
net charge-offs
(2,272
)
(3,676
)
(2,335
)
transfer to other assets (a)
(138
)
allowance related to purchased portfolios
other
allowance for loan losses at december 31
$
4,523
$
5,350
$
4,524
(a)
includes $138million related to the transfer of the allowance for accrued
interest and fees on securitized credit card loans.
the table below summarizes the changes in the allowance for lending-related
commitments:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
allowance for lending-related commitments
at january 1
$
$
$
provision for lending-related commitments
(39
)
(3
)
charge-offs
(212
)
recoveries
net charge-offs
(212
)
other
(1
)
allowance for lending-related
commitments at december 31
$
$
$
note 13
loan securitizations
jpmorgan chase securitizes, sells and services various consumer loans
originated by chase financial services (residential mortgage, credit card and
automobile loans), as well as certain commercial loans (primarily real estate)
originated by the investment bank. interests in the sold and securitized loans
may be retained as described below.
jpmorgan chase records a loan securitization as a sale when the transferred
loans are legally isolated from the firms creditors and the accounting
criteria for a sale are met. gains or losses recorded on loan securitizations
depend, in part, on the carrying amount of the loans sold and are allocated
between the loans sold and the retained interests, based on their relative fair
values at the date of sale. since quoted market prices are generally not
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
available, the firm usually estimates fair value of these retained interests by
determining the present value of future expected cash flows using modeling
techniques. such models incorporate managements best estimates of key
variables, such as expected credit losses, prepayment speeds and discount rates
appropriate for the risks involved. gains on securitizations are reported in
other revenue. retained interests that are subject to prepayment risk, such
that jpmorgan chase may not recover substantially all of its investment, are
recorded at fair value, with subsequent adjustments reflected in other
comprehensive income or in earnings, if the fair value of the retained interest
has declined below its carrying amount and such decline has been determined to
be other-than-temporary.
jpmorgan chase-sponsored securitizations utilize spes as part of the
securitization process. these spes are structured to meet the definition of a
qspe (as discussed in note 1); accordingly, the assets and liabilities of
securitization-related spes are not reflected in the firms consolidated
balance sheet (except for retained interests as described below) but are
included on the balance sheet of the spe purchasing the assets. assets held by
securitization-related spes as of december31, 2003 and 2002, were as follows:
december 31, (in billions)
credit card receivables
$
42.6
$
40.2
residential mortgage receivables
21.1
20.6
commercial loans
33.8
25.2
automobile loans
6.5
4.5
other receivables
0.1
total
$
104.0
$
90.6
interests in the securitized loans are generally retained by the firm in the
form of senior or subordinated interest-only strips, subordinated tranches,
escrow accounts and servicing rights, and they are primarily recorded in other
assets. in addition, credit card securitization trusts require the firm to
maintain a minimum undivided interest in the trusts, representing the firms
interests in the receivables transferred to the trust that have not been
securitized. these interests are not represented by security certificates. the
firms undivided interests are carried at historical cost and are classified in
loans.
jpmorgan chase retains servicing responsibilities for all residential mortgage,
credit card and automobile loan securitizations and for certain commercial
loan securitizations it establishes. the firm receives annual servicing fees
based on the securitized loan balance plus certain ancillary fees. it also
retains the right to service the residential mortgage loans it sells in
connection with mortgage-backed securities transactions with the government
national mortgage association (gnma), federal national mortgage association
(fnma) and federal home loan mortgage corporation (freddie mac). for a
discussion of mortgage servicing rights, see note 16 on pages 107-109 of this
annual report.
the following table
summarizes new securitization transactions that were completed during
2003 and 2002; the resulting gains
arising from such securitizations; certain cash flows received from
such securitizations; and the key economic assumptions used in measuring the retained interests, as of
the dates of such sales:
year ended december 31,
($ in millions)
mortgage
credit card
automobile
commercial
mortgage
credit card
automobile
commercial
principal securitized
$
13,270
$
8,823
$
4,510
$
5,386
$
7,220
$
9,350
$
3,392
$
4,300
pre-tax gains
cash flow information:
proceeds from securitizations
$
13,540
$
8,823
$
4,503
$
5,493
$
7,403
$
9,350
$
3,386
$
4,284
servicing fees collected
other cash flows received
proceeds from collections reinvested in
revolving securitizations
58,199
44,645
key assumptions (rates per annum):
prepayment rate(a)
10.1-36.2% cpr
8.1-16.5%
1.52-1.57%
50.0%
10.1-25.0%cpr
14.6-14.9%
1.51-1.52%
na(b)
wac/wam
wac/wam
weighted-average life
2.0-4.6 years
7-12 months
1.7-1.8 years
1.3-5.2 years
3.0-7.7 years
7 months
1.8 years
7.3 years
expected credit losses
0.0-2.5%(c)
5.5-8.0%
0.5-0.6%
na(d)
0-1.0%(c)
5.4-5.9%
0.5%
na(d)
discount rate
13.0-30.0%
12.0%
3.9-4.5%
1.0-5.0%
15.0-30.0%
5.1-5.9%
5.7-5.9%
8.8%
(a)
cpr: constant prepayment rate; wac/wam: weighted-average
coupon/weighted-average maturity.
(b)
not applicable since these retained interests are not subject to prepayment
risk.
(c)
expected credit losses for prime mortgage securitizations are minimal and
are incorporated into other assumptions.
(d)
not applicable due to collateral coverage on loans in commercial
securitizations.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
in addition, the firm sold residential mortgage loans totaling $123billion and
$62.2billion during 2003 and 2002, respectively, primarily as gnma, fnma and
freddie mac mortgage-backed securities; these sales resulted in gains of $564
million in 2003 and $388million in 2002.
at december31, 2003 and 2002, the firm had, with respect to its credit card
master trusts, $7.3billion related to its undivided interest, and $1.1billion
and $978million, respectively, related to its subordinated interest in accrued
interest and fees on the securitized receivables.
the firm also maintains escrow accounts up to predetermined limits for some of
its credit card and automobile securitizations, in the unlikely event of
deficiencies in cash flows owed to investors. the amounts available in such
escrow accounts are recorded in other assets and, as of december31, 2003,
amounted to $456million and $137million for credit card and automobile
securitizations, respectively; as of december31,
2002, these amounts were $510million and $94million for credit card and
automobile securitizations, respectively.
the table below summarizes other retained securitization interests, primarily
subordinated or residual interests, which are carried at fair value on the
firms consolidated balance sheets.
december 31, (in millions)
loans
residential mortgage
$
(a)
$
(a)
credit card
(a)
(a)
automobile
(a)
(a)
commercial
total
$
$
1,021
(a)
pre-tax unrealized gains (losses)recorded in stockholders equity
that relate to retained securitization interests totaled $155million
and $156million, $11million and $(1) million, and $6million and $21
million for residential mortgage, credit card and automobile, at
december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
the table below outlines the key economic assumptions and the sensitivity of
fair values at december31, 2003, of the remaining retained interests to
immediate 10% and 20% adverse changes in those assumptions:
december 31, 2003 (in millions)
mortgage
credit card
automobile
commercial
weighted-average life
1.4-2.7 years
5-15 months
1.5 years
0.6-5.9 years
prepayment rate
29.0-31.7% cpr
8.1-15.1%
1.5% wac/wam
na(a),50.0%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(17
)
$
(7
)
$
(10
)
$
(1
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(31
)
(13
)
(19
)
(2
)
loss assumption
0.0-4.0%(b)
5.5-8.0%
0.6%
na(c)
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(28
)
$
(21
)
$
(6
)
$
impact of 20% adverse change
(57
)
(41
)
(12
)
discount rate
13.0-30.0%(d)
8.3-12.0%
4.4%
5.0-20.9%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(14
)
$
(1
)
$
(1
)
$
(1
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(27
)
(3
)
(2
)
(2
)
(a)
prepayment risk on certain commercial retained interests are minimal and
are incorporated into other assumptions.
(b)
expected credit losses for prime mortgage securitizations are minimal
and are incorporated into other assumptions.
(c)
not applicable, as modeling assumptions for predominantly all of the
commercial retained interests consider overcollateralization coverage.
(d)
during 2003, the firm sold certain residual interests of approximately
$390.5million from sub-prime mortgage securitizations via net interest margin
(nim) securitizations. the firm retained residual interests in these and
prior nim securitizations of approximately $169.8million, which are valued
using a 30% discount rate.
the sensitivity analysis in the preceding table is hypothetical. changes in
fair value based on a 10% or 20% variation in assumptions generally cannot be
extrapolated easily, because the relationship of the change in the assumptions
to the change in fair value may not be linear. also, in this table, the effect
that a change in a particular assumption may have on the fair value is
calculated without changing any other assumption. in reality, changes in one
factor may result in changes in another assumption, which might counteract or
magnify the sensitivities.
expected static-pool net credit losses include actual incurred losses plus
projected net credit losses, divided by the original balance of the
outstandings comprising the securitization pool.
the table below displays the expected static-pool net credit losses for 2003,
2002 and 2001, based on securitizations occurring in that year:
loans securitized in:(a)(b)
mortgage
auto
mortgage
auto
mortgage
auto
december31, 2003
0.03.6
%
0.9
%
0.02.8
%
0.8
%
0.02.7
%
1.0
%
december31, 2002
na
na
0.13.7
0.9
0.13.8
0.9
december31, 2001
na
na
na
na
0.12.3
0.8
(a)
no expected static-pool net credit losses on commercial securitizations due
to collateral coverage on loans in commercial securitizations.
(b)
static-pool losses not applicable to credit card securitizations due to
their revolving structure.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
the table below presents information
about delinquencies, net credit losses
and components of reported and
securitized financial assets at december31, 2003 and 2002:
type of loan
loans 90 days or
net
total loans
more past due
charge-offs
december 31,
year ended
(in millions)
mortgage (a)
$
89,276
$
81,570
$
$
$
$
credit card
51,649
50,399
1,138
1,096
2,942
2,828
automobile
45,010
37,980
other (b)
7,221
7,524
consumer loans
193,156
177,473
2,255
2,280
3,542
3,473
commercial loans
85,205
92,866
2,064
3,749
1,881
total loans reported
and securitized (c)
278,361
270,339
4,319
6,029
4,358
5,354
less: loans
securitized (a)
(58,843
)
(53,975
)
(1,495
)
(1,306
)
(2,086
)
(1,678
)
reported
$
219,518
$
216,364
$
2,824
$
4,723
$
2,272
$
3,676
(a)
includes $13.6billion of outstanding
principal balances on securitized
sub-prime 1-4 family residential mortgage
loans as of december31, 2003.
(b)
includes non-u.s. consumer loans.
(c)
represents both loans on the
consolidated balance sheet and loans that
have been securitized, but excludes loans
for which the firms only continuing
involvement is servicing of the assets.
total assets held in securitization-related
spes, as of december31, 2003, were $104.0
billion (see table on page 101 of this
annual report). the $58.8billion of loans
securitized at december31, 2003, shown in
the table above excludes: $37.1billion of
securitized loans, in which the firms only
continuing involvement is the servicing of
the assets; $7.3billion of sellers
interests in credit card master trusts and
subordinated accrued interest and fees; and
$0.8billion of escrow accounts and other
assets.
note 14
variable interest entities
jpmorgan chases business segments are
involved with vies in the following
manner:
investment bank  utilizes
vies, such as multi-seller conduits, to assist clients in accessing the
financial markets in a cost-efficient manner, by providing clients the
structural flexibility to meet the needs of investors relating to
factors such as price, yield and desired risks. the
firm also acts as a financial intermediary to tailor products for
investors. finally,
the ib securitizes commercial mortgages through qspes, which are not
considered vies, to create commercial mortgage-backed securities, as
further discussed in note 13 on pages 100-103 of this annual report.
treasury & securities services  provides trustee and custodial
services to a number of vies. these services are similar to those
provided to non-vies. tss earns market-based fees for services
provided. such relationships are not considered significant interests
under fin46
for disclosure purposes.
investment management & private banking  provides investment
management services to a limited number of the firms mutual
funds deemed vies. the services provided are similar to the
services provided to non-vies, as asset manager to the firms
mutual funds. impb earns a fixed fee based on assets
managed; such fee varies with each funds investment objective and is
industry-competitive. the majority of the residual returns and expected
losses are for the account of the funds investors. the firm generally
does not hold an equity interest in the funds, although in certain
instances, it may hold a nominal interest. for the limited number of
funds that qualify as vies, the firms interest is not considered
significant under fin46 for disclosure purposes.
jpmorgan partners  jpmp, the firms private equity business, is
involved with entities that may be deemed vies. jpmp accounts for its
activities in accordance with the investment company audit guide
(audit guide). the fasb deferred adoption of fin 46 for
non-registered investment companies that apply the audit guide. see the
fin 46 transition section of this note.
chase financial services  primarily utilizes spes to securitize
consumer assets; these entities meet the qspe criteria as discussed in
note 1 on pages 86-87 and note 13 on pages 100-103 of this annual
report, and they are not considered vies. cfs is primarily involved
with vies as part of its middle market business. this involvement includes:
(1) synthetic lease transactions, in which the firm provides financing
to a vie; in turn, the vie purchases assets, which are then leased by
the vie to the firms customer; and (2)structuring and administering
independent, member-owned finance entities for companies with dedicated
distribution systems, where the firm may also provide some liquidity,
letters of credit and/or derivative instruments. chase middle market
earns market-based fees for providing such services. the vies that the
firm either has an investment in or lends to neither meet the
requirements for consolidation nor are considered significant for
disclosure purposes, since the significant first-loss position is held
by third parties.
as noted above, there are
two broad categories of transactions involving vies with which the ib
is involved:
multi-seller conduits and client
intermediation. these are discussed more fully below.
multi-seller conduits
jpmorgan chase serves as the
administrator, and provides contingent
liquidity support and limited credit
enhancement, for several commercial paper
conduits. these conduits give clients
access to liquidity in the commercial
paper markets by allowing them to sell
assets to the conduit, which then issues
commercial paper to investors to fund the
purchases. the firm does not sell assets
to or service the assets held by these
commercial paper
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
conduits. commercial paper issued by
conduits for which the firm acts as
administrator aggregated $11.7billion at
december31, 2003, and $17.5billion at
december31, 2002. the commercial paper
issued is backed by sufficient collateral,
credit enhancements and commitments to
provide liquidity to support receiving at
least an a-1, p-1 and, in certain cases,
an f1 rating.
the firm had commitments to provide
liquidity on an asset-specific basis to
these vehicles in an amount up to $18.0
billion at december31, 2003, and $23.5
billion at december31, 2002. third-party
banks had commitments to provide liquidity
on an asset-specific basis to these
vehicles in an amount up to $700million
at december31, 2003, and up to $900
million at december31, 2002.
asset-specific liquidity is the primary
source of liquidity support for the
conduits. in addition, program-wide
liquidity is provided by jpmorgan chase to
these vehicles in the event of short-term
disruptions in the commercial paper
market; these commitments totaled $2.6
billion and $2.7billion at december31,
2003 and 2002,
respectively. for certain multi-seller
conduits, jpmorgan chase also provides
limited credit enhancement, primarily
through the issuance of letters of credit.
commitments under these letters of credit
totaled $1.9billion and $3.4billion at
december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
jpmorgan chase applies the same
underwriting standards in making liquidity
commitments to conduits as the firm would
with other extensions of credit.
if jpmorgan chase were downgraded below
a-1, p-1 and, in certain cases, f1, the
firm could also be required to provide
funding under these liquidity
commitments, since commercial paper
rated below a-1, p-1 or f1 would
generally not be issuable by the
vehicle. under these circumstances, the
firm could either replace itself as
liquidity provider or facilitate the
sale or refinancing of the assets held
in the vie in other markets.
jpmorgan chases maximum credit exposure
to these vehicles at december31, 2003, is
$18.7billion, as the firm cannot be
obligated to fund the entire notional
amounts of asset-specific liquidity,
program-wide liquidity and credit
enhancement facilities at the same time.
however, the firm views its credit
exposure to multi-seller conduit
transactions as limited. this is because,
for the most part, the firm is not
required to fund under the liquidity
facilities if the assets in the vie are in
default. additionally, the firms
obligations under the letters of credit
are secondary to the risk of first loss
provided by the client or other third
parties  for example, by the
overcollateralization of the vie with the
assets sold to it.
jpmorgan chase consolidated these
asset-backed commercial paper conduits at
july1, 2003, in accordance with fin 46
and recorded the assets and liabilities of
the conduits on its consolidated balance
sheet. in december2003, one of the
multi-seller conduits was restructured
with the issuance of preferred securities
acquired by an independent third-party
investor, who will absorb the majority of
the expected losses
of the conduit. in determining the primary
beneficiary of the conduit, the firm
leveraged an existing rating agency model
that is an independent market standard to
size the expected losses and considered the
relative rights and obligations of each of
the variable interest holders. as a result of the restructuring, jpmorgan chase
deconsolidated approximately $5.4billion
of the vehicles assets and liabilities as
of december31, 2003.
the remaining conduits continue to be
consolidated on the firms balance sheet
at december31, 2003: $4.8billion of
assets recorded in loans, and $1.5
billion of assets recorded in
available-for-sale securities.
client intermediation
as a financial intermediary, the firm is
involved in structuring vie transactions to
meet investor and client needs. the firm
intermediates various types of risks
(including, for example, fixed income,
equity and credit), typically using
derivative instruments. in certain
circumstances, the firm also provides
liquidity and other support to the vies to
facilitate the transaction. the firms
current exposure to nonconsolidated vies is
reflected in its consolidated balance sheet
or in the notes to consolidated financial
statements. the risks inherent in
derivative instruments or liquidity
commitments are managed similarly to other
credit, market and liquidity risks to which
the firm is exposed.
assets held by certain client
intermediation-related vies at
december31, 2003 and 2002, were as
follows:
december 31, (in billions)
structured commercial loan vehicles
$
5.3
$
7.2
credit-linked note vehicles
17.7
9.2
municipal bond vehicles
5.5
5.0
other client intermediation vehicles
5.8
7.4
the firm has created structured commercial
loan vehicles managed by third parties, in
which loans are purchased from third
parties or through the firms syndication
and trading functions and funded by issuing
commercial paper. investors provide
collateral and have a first risk of loss up
to the amount of collateral pledged. the
firm retains a second-risk-of-loss position
for these vehicles and does not absorb a
majority of the expected losses of the
vehicles. documentation includes provisions
intended, subject to certain conditions, to
enable jpmorgan chase to terminate the
transactions related to a particular loan
vehicle if the value of the relevant
portfolio declines below a specified level.
the amount of the commercial paper issued
by these vehicles totaled $5.3billion as
of december31, 2003, and $7.2billion as
of december31, 2002. jpmorgan chase was
committed to provide liquidity to these
vies of up to $8.0billion at december31,
2003, and $12.0billion at december31,
2002. the firms maximum exposure to loss
to these vehicles at december31, 2003, was
$5.5billion, which reflects the netting of
collateral and other program limits.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
the firm structures credit-linked notes in
which the vie purchases highly-rated
assets (such as asset-backed securities)
and enters into a credit derivative
contract with the firm to obtain exposure
to a referenced credit not held by the
vie. credit-linked notes are issued by the
vie to transfer the risk of the referenced
credit to the investors in the vie.
clients and investors often prefer a vie
structure, since the credit-linked notes
generally carry a higher credit rating
than they would if issued directly by
jpmorgan chase. the firms derivative
contract is not considered a significant
variable interest in the vie, because it
does not absorb risk but rather adds risk
to the vehicle, which is ultimately
absorbed by the investors. the fair value
of the firms derivative contracts with
credit-linked notes vehicles was not
material at december31, 2003. assets of
$2.1billion and $1.3billion reported in
the table above were recorded on the
firms consolidated balance sheet at
december31, 2003 and december31, 2002,
respectively, due to other contractual
relationships held by the firm that relate
to the collateral held by the vie.
the firm is involved with municipal bond
vehicles for the purpose of creating a
series of secondary market trusts that
allow tax-exempt investors to finance
their investments at short-term tax-exempt
rates. the vie purchases fixed-rate,
longer-term highly rated municipal bonds
by issuing puttable floating-rate
certificates and inverse floating-rate
certificates; the investors in the inverse floating-rate certificates are
exposed to the residual losses of the vie
(the residual interests). the firm often
serves as remarketing agent for the vie
and provides liquidity to support the
remarketing; total liquidity commitments
were $1.8billion and $1.5billion at
december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
in circumstances where the firm owns the
residual interests, the firm consolidates
the vie; total amounts consolidated were
$2.5billion and $1.3billion at december
31, 2003 and 2002, respectively, which are
reported in the table above. in
circumstances
where third party investors own the
residual interests, the firms exposure is
limited because of the high credit quality
of the underlying municipal bonds, the
market-value triggers based on the value
of the underlying collateral and the
residual interests held by third parties.
the firms maximum credit exposure to all
municipal bond vehicles was $4.3billion
at december31, 2003.
additionally, jpmorgan chase structures,
on behalf of clients, other client
intermediation vehicles in which the firm
transfers the risks and returns of the
assets held by the vie, typically debt and
equity instruments, to clients through
derivative contracts. the firms net
exposure arising from these intermediation
transactions is not significant. the
firms current exposure to all of these
vehicles is reflected in its consolidated
financial statements, as the fair value of
the derivative contracts are recorded in
trading assets or trading liabilities, and
changes in fair value are recognized in
trading revenue.
finally, the firm may enter into
transactions with vies structured by other
parties. these transactions can include,
for example, acting as a derivative
counterparty, liquidity provider,
investor, underwriter, placement agent,
trustee or custodian. these transactions
are conducted at arms length, and
individual credit decisions are based upon
the analysis of the specific vie, taking
into consideration the quality of the
underlying assets. jpmorgan chase records
and reports these positions similarly to
any other third-party transaction. for
example, derivative contracts are recorded
at fair value and reported in note 31 on
pages 120-123 of this annual report,
whereas liquidity facilities are included
within the firms lending-related
commitments, described in more detail in
note 29 on pages 117-119 of this annual
report. fees received when the firm
operates in an administrative capacity,
such as underwriter, trustee or custodian,
are recorded in fees and commissions.
these activities do not cause jpmorgan
chase to absorb a majority of the expected
losses of the vies or receive a majority
of the residual returns of the vie, and
they are not considered significant for
disclosure purposes.
fin 46 transition
effective february1, 2003, jpmorgan chase
implemented fin 46 for vies created or
modified after january31, 2003, in which
the firm has an interest. effective july
1, 2003, the firm implemented fin 46 for
all vies originated prior to february1,
2003, excluding certain investments made
by its private equity business, as
discussed below. the effect of adoption
was an incremental increase in the firms
assets and liabilities of approximately
$17billion at july1, 2003, and $10
billion at december31, 2003. the increase
primarily related to firm-sponsored
multi-seller asset-backed commercial paper
conduits and other entities in which the
firms trading and investment functions
have interests that absorb a majority of
the expected losses in the structures. in
addition, certain vies with assets of
approximately $2billion at december31,
2003 that had been consolidated
under prior accounting literature continue to be consolidated in accordance
with fin 46. as a result of its adoption
of fin 46, the firm also deconsolidated
certain vehicles, primarily the
wholly-owned delaware statutory business
trusts further discussed in note 18 on
pages 110-111 of this annual report.
the firms private equity business is
involved with entities that may be deemed
vies. the fasb permitted nonregistered
investment companies to defer
consolidation of vies with which they are
involved until the proposed statement of
position on the clarification
of the scope of the investment company
audit guide is finalized, which is
expected in mid-2004. following issuance
of the statement of position, the fasb
will consider further modification to fin
46 to provide an exception for companies
that qualify to apply the revised audit
guide. the firm applied this deferral provision and did not consolidate
$2.7billion of
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
additional assets in
potential vies with which jpmp is involved
as of december31, 2003. following
issuance of the revised audit guide and
further modification, if any, to fin 46,
the firm will assess the effect of such
guidance on its private equity business.
upon adoption of fin 46, the assets,
liabilities and noncontrolling interests
of vies were generally measured at the
amounts at which such interests would have
been carried had fin 46 been effective
when the firm first met the conditions to
be considered the primary beneficiary. for
certain vies, the initial carrying amount
of the assets and liabilities
(approximately $1.7billion) was based on
fair value at july1, 2003, due to limited
historical information. the difference
between the net amount added to the
balance sheet and the amount of any
previously recognized interest in the
newly consolidated entity was recognized
as a cumulative effect of an accounting
change at july1, 2003, which resulted in
a $2million (after-tax) reduction to the
firms consolidated earnings. the firm
also recorded a $34million (after-tax)
reduction in other comprehensive income,
related to available-for-sale securities
and derivative cash flow hedges; these
were related to entities measured at the
amount at which such interests would have
been carried had fin 46 been effective
when the firm first met the conditions of
being the primary beneficiary.
the following table summarizes the firms
total consolidated vie assets, by
classification on the consolidated balance
sheet, as of december31, 2003.
december 31, (in billions)
consolidated vie assets (a)
loans (b)
$
5.8
investment securities
3.8
trading assets (c)
2.7
other assets
0.1
total consolidated assets
$
12.4
(a)
the firm also holds $3billion of
assets, primarily as a sellers
interest, in certain consumer
securitizations in a segregated entity,
as part of a two-step securitization
transaction. this interest is included
in the securitization activities
disclosed in note 13 on pages 100-103 of this annual report and is not included
herein.
(b)
primarily relates to the
consolidated multi-seller asset-backed
commercial paper conduits.
(c)
includes securities and derivatives.
in the third quarter of 2003, the firm
classified the interest-bearing
beneficial interest liabilities issued by
consolidated vies in a new line item
titled beneficial interests issued by
consolidated variable interest entities.
the holders of these beneficial interests
do not have recourse to the general credit
of jpmorgan chase. see note 18
on page 110 of this annual report for the
maturity profile of the fin 46 long-term
beneficial interests.
in december2003, the fasb issued a
revision to fin 46 (fin 46r) to address
various technical corrections and
implementation issues that have arisen
since the issuance of fin 46. the
provisions of fin 46r are effective for
financial periods ending after march15,
2004. the firm will adopt fin 46r at the
effective date and is currently
assessing the impact of fin 46r on all vies
with which it is involved.
note 15
private equity investments
private equity investments are primarily
held by jpmorgan partners (jpmp), the
firms global private equity investment
business segment. jpmp invests in buyouts,
growth equity and venture opportunities in
the normal course of business. these
investments are accounted for under
investment company guidelines.
accordingly, these investments,
irrespective of the percentage of equity
ownership interest held by jpmp, are
carried on the consolidated balance sheet
at fair value. realized and unrealized
gains and losses arising from changes in
value are reported in private equity gains
(losses)in the consolidated statement of
income in the period that the gain or loss
occurs.
private investments are initially valued
based on cost. the carrying values of
private investments are adjusted from cost
to reflect both positive and negative
changes evidenced by financing events with
third-party capital providers. in addition,
these investments are subject to ongoing
impairment reviews by jpmps senior
investment professionals. a variety of
factors are reviewed and monitored to
assess impairment  including, but not
limited to, operating performance and
future expectations, comparable industry
valuations of public companies, changes in
market outlook and changes in the
third-party financing environment. the valuation control group within the finance area is responsible for reviewing the accuracy of the carrying values of private investments held by jpmp.
jpmp also holds public equity investments,
generally obtained through the initial
public offering of private equity
investments. these investments are marked
to market at the quoted public value. to
determine the carrying values of these
investments, jpmp incorporates the use of
discounts to take into account the fact
that it cannot immediately realize or
hedge the quoted public values as a result
of regulatory, corporate and/or
contractual sales restrictions imposed on
these holdings.
the following table presents the carrying
value and cost of the private equity
investment portfolio for the dates
indicated:
carrying
carrying
december 31,(in millions)
value
cost
value
cost
total
investment
portfolio
$
7,250
$
9,147
$
8,228
$
10,312
the following table presents private
equity investment realized and unrealized
gains and losses for the periods
indicated:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
realized gains (losses)
$
(44
)
$
(105
)
$
unrealized gains (losses)
(641
)
(1,884
)
private equity gains (losses) (a)
$
$
(746
)
$
(1,233
)
(a)
includes the impact of portfolio hedging activities.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
note 16
goodwill and other intangible assets
effective january1, 2002, the firm
adopted sfas 142, reclassifying certain
intangible assets from goodwill to other
intangible assets. there was no impairment
of goodwill upon adoption of sfas 142.
goodwill is not amortized, but instead
tested for impairment at the
reporting-unit segment (which is one level
below the five major business segments as
described in note 34 on pages 126-127 of
this annual report). goodwill is tested
annually (during the fourth quarter) or
more often if events or circumstances,
such as adverse changes in the business
climate, indicate there may be impairment.
other acquired intangible assets
determined to have finite lives, such as
core deposits and credit card
relationships, are amortized over their
estimated useful lives in a manner that
best reflects the economic benefits of the
intangible asset. in addition, impairment
testing is performed periodically on these
amortizing intangible assets.
the following table presents the impact
of sfas 142 on net income and earnings
per share had the accounting standard
been in effect for 2001:
year ended december 31, (in millions,
pro forma
except earnings per share)
net income
income before effect of accounting change
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,719
net effect of change in accounting principle
(25
)
net income
6,719
1,663
1,694
goodwill amortization, net of taxes
adjusted net income
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
2,087
basic earnings per share
reported basic earnings per share
$
3.32
$
0.81
$
0.83
goodwill amortization
0.19
adjusted basic earnings per share
$
3.32
$
0.81
$
1.02
diluted earnings per share
reported diluted earnings per share
$
3.24
$
0.80
$
0.80
goodwill amortization
0.19
adjusted diluted earnings per share
$
3.24
$
0.80
$
0.99
goodwill and other intangible assets consist of the following:
december 31, (in millions)
goodwill
$
8,511
$
8,096
other intangible assets:
mortgage servicing rights
$
4,781
$
3,230
purchased credit card relationships
1,014
1,269
all other intangibles
total other intangible assets
$
6,480
$
4,806
goodwill
goodwill increased during 2003 by $415
million, principally in connection with
acquisitions of businesses by treasury &
securities services, and purchase
accounting adjustments. no goodwill was
written off during 2003 or 2002.
goodwill by business segment is as follows:
december 31, (in millions)
investment bank
$
2,058
$
2,051
treasury & securities services
1,390
investment management & private banking
4,179
4,165
jpmorgan partners
chase financial services
total goodwill
$
8,511
$
8,096
mortgage servicing rights
jpmorgan chase recognizes as intangible assets mortgage servicing rights
(msrs), which represent the right to perform specified residential mortgage
servicing activities for others. msrs are either purchased from third parties or
retained upon sale or securitization of mortgage loans. servicing activities
include collecting principal, interest, and escrow payments from borrowers;
making tax and insurance payments on behalf of the borrowers; monitoring
delinquencies and executing foreclosure proceedings; and accounting for and
remitting principal and interest payments to the investors of the
mortgage-backed securities.
the amount capitalized as msrs represents the amount paid to third parties to
acquire msrs or is based on fair value if retained upon sale or securitization
of mortgage loans. the firm estimates the fair value of msrs using a discounted
future cash flow model. the model considers portfolio characteristics,
contractually specified servicing fees, prepayment assumptions, delinquency
rates, late charges, other ancillary revenues, costs to service and other
economic factors. the firm compares its fair value estimates and assumptions to
observable market data where available and to recent market activity and actual
portfolio experience. management believes that the assumptions used to estimate
fair values are supportable and reasonable.
the firm accounts for its msrs at the lower of cost or market, in accordance
with sfas 140. msrs are amortized as a reduction of the actual servicing income
received in proportion to, and over the period of the estimated future net
servicing income stream of, the underlying mortgage loans. for purposes
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
of evaluating and measuring impairment of
msrs, the firm stratifies its portfolio on
the basis of the predominant risk
characteristics: loan type and interest
rate. any indicated impairment is
recognized as a reduction in revenue
through a valuation allowance to the
extent that the carrying value of an
individual stratum exceeds its estimated
fair value.
the firm evaluates other-than-temporary
impairment by reviewing changes in
mortgage and other market interest rates
over historical periods and then
determines an interest rate scenario to
estimate the amounts of the msrs gross
carrying value and the related valuation
allowance that could be expected to be
recovered in the foreseeable future. any
gross carrying value and related valuation
allowance amount that are not expected to
be recovered in the foreseeable future,
based upon the interest rate scenario, are
considered to be other-than-temporary.
the carrying value of msrs is sensitive to
changes in interest rates, including their
effect on prepayment speeds. the firm
offsets this interest rate risk by
designating certain derivatives (e.g., a
combination of swaps, swaptions and floors
that produces an interest rate profile
opposite to the designated risk of the
hedged msrs) as fair value hedges of
specified msrs under sfas 133. sfas 133
hedge accounting allows the carrying value
of the hedged
msrs to be adjusted through earnings in
the same period that the change in value
of the hedging derivatives is recognized
through earnings. both of these valuation
adjustments are recorded in mortgage fees
and related income.
when applying sfas 133, the loans
underlying the msrs being hedged are
stratified into specific sfas 133
similar-asset groupings that possess
similar interest rate and prepayment risk
exposures. the documented hedge period for
the firm is daily. daily adjustments are
performed to incorporate new or terminated
derivative contracts and to modify the
amount of the corresponding similar asset
grouping that is being hedged. the firm
has designated changes in the benchmark
interest rate (libor)as the hedged risk.
in designating the benchmark interest
rate, the firm considers the impact that
the change in the benchmark rate has on
the prepayment speed estimates in
determining the fair value of the msrs.
the firm performs both prospective and
retrospective hedge effectiveness
evaluations, using a regression analysis,
to determine whether the hedge
relationship is expected to be highly
effective. hedge effectiveness is assessed
by
comparing the change in the value of the
msrs as a result of changes in benchmark
interest rates to the change in the value
of the designated derivatives. for a
further discussion on derivative
instruments and hedging activities, see
note 28 on pages 116-117 of this annual report.
afs securities are also used to manage the
risk exposure of msrs. these instruments
are accounted for as stand-alone
instruments, because afs securities do not
qualify as hedges under sfas 133.
accordingly, the securities are accounted
for as afs securities under sfas 115, with
realized gains and losses recognized in
earnings in securities gains (losses);
interest income on the afs securities is
recognized in earnings in net interest
income. unrealized gains and losses on afs
securities are reported in other
comprehensive income. in addition, certain
nonhedge derivatives, which have not been
designated by management in sfas 133 hedge
relationships, are used to manage the
economic risk exposure of msrs and are
recorded in mortgage fees and related
income.
the following table summarizes msr
activity and related amortization for the
dates indicated. it also includes the key
assumptions and the sensitivity of the
fair value of msrs at december31, 2003,
to immediate 10% and 20% adverse changes
in each of those assumptions:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
balance at beginning of year
$
4,864
$
7,749
$
6,461
additions
3,201
2,071
3,394
sales
(103
)
other-than-temporary impairment
(283
)
sfas 133 hedge valuation adjustments
(226
)
(3,589
)
(880
)
amortization
(1,397
)
(1,367
)
(1,123
)
balance at end of year
6,159
4,864
7,749
less: valuation allowance
(1,378
)
(1,634
)
(1,170
)
balance at end of year, after valuation allowance
$
4,781
$
3,230
$
6,579
estimated fair value at year-end
$
4,781
$
3,230
$
6,579
weighted-average prepayment speed assumption (cpr)
17.67
%
impact on fair value with 10% adverse change
$
(287
)
impact on fair value with 20% adverse change
$
(544
)
weighted-average discount rate
7.31
%
impact on fair value with 10% adverse change
$
(114
)
impact on fair value with 20% adverse change
$
(223
)
cpr:
constant prepayment rate.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
the sensitivity analysis in the preceding
table is hypothetical and should be used
with caution. as the figures indicate,
changes in fair value based on a 10% and
20% variation in assumptions generally
cannot be easily extrapolated because the
relationship of the change in the
assumptions to the change in fair value
may not be linear. also, in this table,
the effect that a change in a particular
assumption may have on the fair value is
calculated without changing any other
assumption. in reality, changes in one
factor may result in changes in another,
which might magnify or counteract the
sensitivities.
the valuation allowance represents the
extent to which the carrying value of msrs
exceeds its estimated fair value. changes
in the valuation allowance are the result
of the recognition of impairment or the
recovery of previously recognized
impairment charges due to changes in
market conditions during the period. the
changes in the valuation allowance for
msrs for the dates indicated were as
follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
balance at beginning of year
$
1,634
$
1,170
$
other-than-temporary impairment
(283
)
impairment adjustment
1,071
balance at end of year
$
1,378
$
1,634
$
1,170
during 2003, the firm recorded an
other-than-temporary impairment of its msrs
of $283million, which permanently reduced
the gross carrying value of the msrs and
the related valuation allowance. the
permanent reduction precludes subsequent
reversals. this write-down had no impact on
the results of operations or financial
condition of the firm.
purchased credit card
relationships and other intangible
assets
no purchased credit card relationships were
acquired during 2003. other intangibles
(primarily customer relationships)
increased by approximately $428million,
principally due to the businesses acquired
by treasury & securities services. all of
the firms acquired intangible assets are
subject to amortization. for the years
ended december31, 2003 and 2002,
intangible asset amortization expense was
$294million and $323million,
respectively. amortization expense for 2002
included a $12million impairment
write-down on purchased credit card
relationships related to a small credit
card portfolio previously acquired.
the components of other intangible assets were as follows:
amortization
december 31, 2003
expense
gross
accumulated
net carrying
(in millions)
amount
amortization
value
purchased credit
card relationships
$
1,885
$
$
1,014
$
$
all other intangibles
1,093
total amortization expense
$
$
future amortization expense
the following table presents estimated
amortization expense related to
purchased credit card relationships and
all other intangible assets at december
31, 2003:
purchased credit
all other
(in millions)
card relationships
intangible assets
year ended december31,
$
$
note 17
premises and equipment
premises and equipment, including
leasehold improvements, are carried at
cost less accumulated depreciation and
amortization. jpmorgan chase generally
computes depreciation using the
straight-line method over the estimated
useful life of an asset. for leasehold
improvements, the firm uses the
straight-line method over the lesser of
the remaining term of the leased facility
or the estimated economic life of the
improvement.
jpmorgan chase capitalizes certain costs
associated with the acquisition or
development of internal-use software. once
the software is ready for its intended
use, these costs are amortized on a
straight-line basis over the softwares
expected useful life.
note 18
long-term debt
jpmorgan chase issues long-term debt
denominated in various currencies,
although predominantly u.s. dollars, with
both fixed and variable interest rates.
the following table is a summary of
long-term debt (net of unamortized
original issue debt discount and sfas 133
valuation adjustments):
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
by remaining contractual maturity at december 31,
under
after
(in millions)
1 year
1-5 years
5 years
total
total
parent company
senior debt:
fixed rate
$
2,525
$
11,205
$
1,314
$
15,044
$
11,516
variable rate(a)
2,558
7,856
10,696
8,657
interest rates(b)
1.29 - 6.75
%
0.96 - 7.50
%
1.06 - 6.00
%
0.96 - 7.50
%
0.96% - 7.50
%
subordinated debt:
fixed rate
$
$
3,863
$
9,804
$
14,382
$
13,839
variable rate
1,083
interest rates(b)
6.88 - 7.63
%
4.78 - 7.88
%
5.00 - 8.25
%
4.78 - 8.25
%
4.35% - 8.50
%
subtotal
$
5,798
$
23,308
$
11,529
$
40,635
$
35,095
subsidiaries
senior debt:
fixed rate
$
$
$
1,487
$
2,829
$
2,848
variable rate(a)
2,890
3,842
interest rates(b)
6.63 - 7.04
%
2.41 - 10.95
%
1.13 - 13.00
%
1.13 - 13.00
%
1.55% - 13.00
%
subordinated debt:
fixed rate
$
$
$
$
$
variable rate
interest rates(b)
%
6.13 - 7.00
%
%
6.13 - 7.00
%
4.20% - 7.00
%
subtotal
$
$
4,427
$
2,117
$
7,379
$
4,656
total long-term debt
$
6,633
$
27,735
$
13,646
$
48,014
(e)(f)(g)
$
39,751
fin 46 long-term beneficial
interests:(c)(d)
fixed rate
$
$
$
$
na
variable rate
1,548
2,076
na
interest rates(b)
1.12
%
1.39 - 10.00
%
1.77 - 6.35
%
1.12 - 10.00
%
na
total fin 46 long-term beneficial interests
$
$
$
1,652
$
2,429
na
(a)
included are various equity-linked or other indexed instruments. embedded
derivatives separated from hybrid securities in accordance with sfas 133 are
reported at fair value and shown net with the host contract on the balance
sheet. changes in fair value of separated derivatives are recorded in trading
revenue.
(b)
the interest rates shown are the range of contractual rates in effect at
year-end, including non-u.s. dollar fixed and variable rate issuances which
excludes the effects of related derivative instruments.
the use of these derivative instruments modifies jpmorgan chases exposure to
the contractual interest rates disclosed in the table above. including the
effects of derivatives, the range of modified rates in effect at december31,
2003, for total long-term debt was 0.14% to 10.95%, versus the contractual
range of 0.96% to 13.00% presented in the table above.
(c)
included on the consolidated balance sheet in
beneficial interests issued by consolidated
variable interest entities.
(d)
not applicable for
years prior to 2003 since the firm adopted fin 46
during 2003.
(e)
at december31, 2003, long-term debt aggregating $2.0billion was
redeemable at the option of jpmorgan chase, in whole or in part, prior to
maturity, based on the terms specified in the respective notes.
(f)
the
aggregate principal amount of debt that matures in each of the five years
subsequent to 2003 is $6.6billion in 2004, $9.3billion in 2005, $5.8billion
in 2006, $6.7billion in 2007 and $5.9billion in 2008.
(g)
includes $1.1billion of outstanding zero-coupon notes at december31,
2003. the aggregate principal amount of these notes at their respective
maturities is $4.6billion.
the weighted-average contractual interest
rate for total long-term debt was 4.71%
and 5.51% as of december31, 2003 and
2002, respectively. in order to modify
exposure to interest rate and currency
exchange rate movements, jpmorgan chase
utilizes derivative instruments, primarily
interest rate and cross-currency interest
rate swaps, in conjunction with some of
its debt issues. the use of these
instruments modifies the firms interest
expense on the associated debt. the
modified weighted-average interest rate
for total long-term debt, including the
effects of related derivative instruments,
was 2.79% and 3.42% as of december31,
2003 and 2002, respectively.
jpmorgan chase has guaranteed certain debt
of its subsidiaries, including both
long-term debt and structured notes sold
as part of the firms trading activities.
these guarantees rank on a parity with
all other unsecured and unsubordinated
indebtedness of jpmorgan chase. guaranteed
liabilities totaled $509million and $1.5
billion at december31, 2003 and 2002,
respectively.
junior subordinated deferrable interest
debentures held by trusts that issued
guaranteed capital debt securities
at december31, 2003, the firm had
previously established wholly-owned
delaware statutory business trusts
(issuer trusts) that issued guaranteed
preferred beneficial interests in the
firms junior subordinated deferrable
interest debentures. prior to fin 46,
these issuer trusts were consolidated
subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase; the
preferred securities were included in
jpmorgan chases consolidated balance
sheet in the liabilities section, under
the caption guaranteed preferred
beneficial interests in capital debt
securities issued by consolidated trusts,
and the retained common capital securities
of the issuer trusts were eliminated
against the firms investment in the
issuer trusts. distributions on the
preferred securities were recorded as
interest expense on the consolidated
statement of income.
as a result of the adoption of fin 46,
jpmorgan chase deconsolidated all the
issuer trusts. as a result, the junior
subordinated deferrable interest
debentures issued by jpmorgan chase to
the issuer trusts, totaling $6.8billion,
are reflected in the firms consolidated
balance sheet in the liabilities section
at
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
december31, 2003, under the caption
junior subordinated deferrable interest
debentures held by trusts that issued
guaranteed capital debt securities.
jpmorgan chase records interest expense on
the corresponding junior subordinated
debentures in its consolidated statements
of income. the firm also recorded the
common capital securities issued by the
issuer trusts in other assets in its
consolidated balance sheet at december31,
2003.
the debentures issued by the issuer trusts
to jpmorgan chase, less the capital
securities of the issuer trusts, continue
to qualify as tier 1 capital under interim
guidance issued by the board of governors
of the federal reserve system (the federal
reserve board).
the following is a summary of the
outstanding capital securities, net of
discount, issued by each trust and the
junior subordinated deferrable interest
debenture issued by jpmorgan chase to each
trust as of december31, 2003:
($ in millions)
amount of
principal amount
stated maturity of
earliest
interest rate of
interest
capital securities,
of debenture,
issue
capital securities
redemption
capital securities
payment/distribution
name of trust
issued by trust(a)
held by trust(b)
date
and debentures
date
and debentures
dates
chase capital i
$
$
7.67
%
semiannually
chase capital ii
libor + 0.50
%
quarterly
chase capital iii
libor + 0.55
%
quarterly
chase capital v
anytime
7.03
%
quarterly
chase capital vi
anytime
libor + 0.625
%
quarterly
chase capital vii
7.00
%
quarterly
chase capital viii
8.25
%
quarterly
jpm capital trust i
7.54
%
semiannually
jpm capital trust ii
7.95
%
semiannually
j.p.morgan chase capital ix
7.50
%
quarterly
j.p.morgan chase capital x
1,000
1,031
7.00
%
quarterly
j.p.morgan chase capital xi
1,075
1,108
5.88
%
quarterly
j.p.morgan chase capital
xii
6.25
%
quarterly
total
$
6,564
$
6,768
(a)
represents the amount of capital securities issued to the public by each
trust, net of unamortized discount.
(b)
represents the principal amount of jpmorgan chase debentures held as assets
by each trust, net of unamortized discount.
note 19
preferred stock of subsidiary
chase preferred capital corporation (chase preferred
capital), a wholly owned subsidiary of
jpmorgan chase bank, a bank subsidiary of
jpmorgan chase, is a real estate
investment trust (reit) established for
the purpose of acquiring, holding and
managing real estate mortgage assets. on
february28, 2002, chase preferred capital
redeemed all 22million outstanding shares
of its 8.10% cumulative preferred stock,
seriesa, at a redemption price of $25
plus accrued and unpaid dividends.
note 20
preferred stock
jpmorgan chase is authorized to issue 200
million shares of preferred stock, in one
or more series, with a par value of $1 per
share. outstanding preferred stock at both
december31, 2003 and 2002 was 17.8
million shares. the firm did not issue,
redeem or repurchase any preferred stock
during 2003 or 2002.
dividends on shares of each outstanding
series of preferred stock are payable
quarterly. all the preferred stock
outstanding have preference over jpmorgan
chases common stock for the payment of
dividends and the distribution of assets
in the event of a liquidation or
dissolution of jpmorgan chase.
the following is a summary of jpmorgan chases preferred stock outstanding:
stated value and
shares
outstanding at december 31,
earliest
rate in effect at
redemption price per share(a)
(in millions)
(in millions)
redemption date
december 31, 2003
adjustable rate, seriesa cumulative
$
100.00
2.42
$
$
see note
(b)
5.00
%(c)
adjustable rate, seriesl cumulative
100.00
2.00
see note
(b)
4.50
(c)
adjustable rate, seriesn cumulative
25.00
9.10
see note
(b)
4.50
(c)
fixed/adjustable rate, noncumulative
50.00
4.00
see note
(b)
5.46
(c)
6.63% seriesh cumulative(d)
500.00
0.28
3/31/2006
6.63
total preferred stock
$
1,009
$
1,009
(a)
redemption price includes amount shown
in the table plus any accrued but unpaid
dividends.
(b)
the shares are redeemable
at any time with not less than 30 nor more
than 60days notice.
(c)
floating rates are based on certain u.s. treasury rates. the minimum and
maximum rates for seriesa are 5.00% and 11.50% and for seriesl and seriesn
are 4.50% and 10.50%, respectively. the fixed/adjustable rate preferred stock remained fixed at 4.96%
through june30, 2003; thereafter, the minimum and maximum rates are 5.46%
and 11.46%, respectively.
(d)
represented by depositary shares.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 21
common stock
jpmorgan chase is authorized to issue 4.5
billion shares of common stock, with a $1
par value per share. common shares issued
(newly issued or distributed from
treasury) by jpmorgan chase during 2003,
2002 and 2001 were as follows:
december 31, (in millions)
issued  balance at january 1
2,023.6
1,996.9
1,940.1
newly issued:
employee benefits and compensation plans
20.9
25.9
55.0
employee stock purchase plans
0.7
0.8
0.5
purchase accounting acquisitions and other
1.8
total newly issued
21.6
26.7
57.3
cancelled shares
(0.8
)
(0.5
)
total issued  balance at december 31
2,044.4
2,023.6
1,996.9
treasury  balance at january 1
(24.9
)
(23.5
)
(11.6
)
purchase of treasury stock
(21.9
)
forfeitures to treasury
(3.0
)
(3.9
)
(5.8
)
issued from treasury:
employee benefits and compensation plans
25.8
2.1
15.6
employee stock purchase plans
0.3
0.4
0.2
total issued from treasury
26.1
2.5
15.8
total treasury  balance at december 31
(1.8
)
(24.9
)
(23.5
)
outstanding
2,042.6
1,998.7
1,973.4
the firm did not repurchase shares of its
common stock during 2003 or 2002. during
2001, the firm repurchased 21.9million
shares of common stock under a plan which
began on july19, 2001.
as of december31, 2003, approximately
462million unissued shares of common
stock were reserved for issuance under
various employee incentive, option and
stock purchase plans.
note 22
earnings per share
sfas 128 requires the presentation of
basic and diluted earnings per share
(eps) in the income statement. basic eps
is computed by dividing net income
applicable to common stock by the
weighted-average number of common shares
outstanding for the period. diluted eps is
computed using the same method as basic
eps, but, in the denominator, common
shares outstanding reflect the potential
dilution that could occur if convertible
securities or other contracts to issue
common stock were converted or exercised
into common stock. net income available
for common stock is the same computation
for basic eps and diluted eps as jpmorgan
chase had no convertible securities, and, therefore,
no adjustments to net income available for
common stock were necessary.
basic and diluted earnings per share
were as follows for the dates
indicated:
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except per share data)
basic earnings per share
net income
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
less: preferred stock dividends
net income applicable to common stock
$
6,668
$
1,612
$
1,628
weighted-average basic shares outstanding
2,008.6
1,984.3
1,972.4
net income per share
$
3.32
$
0.81
$
0.83
diluted earnings per share
net income applicable to common stock
$
6,668
$
1,612
$
1,628
weighted-average basic shares outstanding
2,008.6
1,984.3
1,972.4
add: broad-based options
4.1
2.8
6.6
key employee options
42.4
22.0
44.6
weighted-average diluted shares outstanding
2,055.1
2,009.1
2,023.6
net income per share (a)
$
3.24
$
0.80
$
0.80
(a)
options issued under employee benefit plans to purchase 335
million, 362million and 190million shares of common stock were
outstanding for the years ended 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively, but
were not included in the computation of diluted eps because the
options exercise prices were greater than the average market price of
the common shares.
note 23
comprehensive income
comprehensive income is composed of net
income and other comprehensive income,
which includes the after-tax change in
unrealized gains and losses on afs
securities, cash flow hedging activities
and foreign currency translation
adjustments (including the impact of
related derivatives).
the following table presents other
comprehensive income (oci) balances:
accumulated
year ended
unrealized
cash
other
december 31,
gains (losses)
translation
flow
comprehensive
(in millions)
on afs securities(a)
adjustments
hedges
income (loss)
balance december31, 2000
$
(244
)
$
na
$
(241
)
net change
(5
)
$
(305
)
(201
)
balance december31, 2001
(135
)
(2
)
(305
)
(442
)
net change
(4
)
1,669
balance december31, 2002
(6
)
1,227
net change
(712
)(b)
(c)
(545
)
(1,257
)
balance december31, 2003
$
$
(6
)(d)
$
(43
)
$
(30
)
(a)
represents the after-tax difference
between the fair value and amortized cost
of the afs securities portfolio and
retained interest in securitizations
recorded in other assets.
(b)
the net
change during 2003 was primarily driven by
increasing rates and the recognition of
gains on sales of afs securities.
(c)
includes $580million of after-tax
gains on foreign currency translation
from operations for which the
functional currency is other than the
u.s. dollar, which were offset by $580
million of after-tax losses on hedges.
(d)
includes after-tax gains and losses
on foreign currency translation,
including related hedge results from
operations for which the functional
currency is other than the u.s. dollar.
na-
not applicable as sfas 133 was
adopted effective january1, 2001.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
the following table presents the
after-tax changes for net unrealized
holdings gains (losses)and
reclassification adjustments in
unrealized gains and losses on afs
securities and cash flow hedges.
reclassification adjustments include
amounts recognized in net income during
the current year that had been previously
recorded in other comprehensive income.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
unrealized gains (losses)on afs securities:
net unrealized holdings gains (losses)
arising during the period, net of taxes (a)
$
$
1,090
$
reclassification adjustment for gains
included in income, net of taxes (b)
(861
)
(224
)
(334
)
net change
$
(712
)
$
$
cash flow hedges:
net unrealized holdings gains (losses)
arising during the period, net of taxes (c)
$
$
$
(356
)
reclassification adjustment for (gains)losses
included in income, net of taxes (d)
(631
)
net change
$
(545
)
$
$
(305
)
(a)
net of tax expense of $92million for 2003, $758million for 2002 and $308
million for 2001.
(b)
net of tax expense of $528million for 2003, $156million
for 2002 and $232million in 2001.
(c)
net of tax expense of $60million for
2003 and $461million for 2002, and net of tax benefit of $247million for
2001.
(d)
net of tax expense of $438million
for 2003, and net of tax benefit of $100
million for 2002 and $35million for
2001.
note 24
income taxes
jpmorgan chase and its eligible
subsidiaries file a consolidated u.s.
federal income tax return. jpmorgan chase
uses the asset and liability method
required by sfas 109 to provide income
taxes on all transactions recorded in the
consolidated financial statements. this
requires that income taxes reflect the
expected future tax consequences of
temporary differences between the carrying
amounts of assets or liabilities for book
and tax purposes. accordingly, a deferred
tax liability or asset for each temporary
difference is determined based on the tax
rates that jpmorgan chase expects to be in
effect when the underlying items of income
and expense are to be realized. jpmorgan
chases expense for income taxes includes
the current and deferred portions of that
expense. a valuation allowance is
established to reduce deferred tax assets
to the amount jpmorgan chase expects to be
realized.
deferred income tax expense (benefit)
results from differences between assets
and liabilities measured for financial
reporting and for income tax return
purposes. the significant components of
deferred tax assets and liabilities are
reflected in the following table:
december 31, (in millions)
deferred tax assets
employee benefits
$
2,245
$
1,621
allowance for loan losses
1,410
1,675
allowance for other than loan losses
1,152
1,251
non-u.s. operations
1,055
foreign tax credit carryforward
(a)
gross deferred tax assets
$
5,571
$
5,627
deferred tax liabilities
leasing transactions
$
3,703
$
3,175
depreciation and amortization
1,037
fair value adjustments
1,107
non-u.s. operations
other, net
gross deferred tax liabilities
$
6,443
$
5,921
valuation allowance
$
$
net deferred tax asset (liability)
$
(1,032
)
$
(459
)
(a)
includes $18million and $5million expiring in 2005 and 2007,
respectively.
a valuation allowance has been recorded in
accordance with sfas 109, primarily
relating to deferred tax assets associated
with non-u.s. operations.
the components of income tax expense
included in the consolidated
statement of income were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
current income tax expense (benefit)
u.s. federal
$
$
(1,334
)
$
non-u.s.
u.s. state and local
total current expense (benefit)
1,881
(780
)
1,485
deferred income tax expense (benefit)
u.s. federal
1,341
1,630
(618
)
non-u.s.
(352
)
(73
)
u.s. state and local
(a)
total deferred expense (benefit)
1,428
1,636
(638
)
total income tax expense
$
3,309
$
$
(a)
the increase in 2002 is principally attributable to the level of
income in certain state and local tax jurisdictions in 2002.
the preceding table does not reflect the
tax effects of unrealized gains and losses
on afs securities, sfas 133 hedge
transactions and certain tax benefits
associated with jpmorgan chases employee
stock plans. the tax effect of these items
is recorded directly in stockholders
equity. stockholders equity increased by
$898million and $541million in 2003 and
2001, respectively, and decreased by $1.1
billion in 2002 as a result of these tax
effects.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
u.s. federal income taxes have not been
provided on the undistributed earnings of
certain non-u.s. subsidiaries to the extent
such earnings have been reinvested abroad
for an indefinite period of time. for 2003,
such earnings approximated $326million on
a pre-tax basis. at december31, 2003, the
cumulative amount of undistributed earnings
in these subsidiaries approximated $2.3
billion. it is not practicable at this time
to determine the income tax liability that
would result upon repatriation of these
earnings.
the tax expense applicable to securities
gains and losses for the years 2003, 2002
and 2001 was $477million, $531million
and $286million, respectively.
a reconciliation of the applicable
statutory u.s. income tax rate to the
effective tax rate for the past three
years is shown in the following table:
year ended december 31,
statutory u.s. federal tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
increase (decrease)in tax rate resulting from:
u.s. state and local income taxes, net of
federal income tax benefit
1.6
11.6
(a)
3.0
tax-exempt income
(2.7
)
(6.8
)
(5.8
)
non-u.s. subsidiary earnings
(1.0
)
(3.2
)
(3.1
)
general business credits
(0.9
)
(3.5
)
(1.8
)
other, net
1.0
0.9
5.7
effective tax rate
33.0
%
34.0
%
33.0
%
(a)
the increase in 2002 was principally attributable to the level of
income in certain state and local tax jurisdictions in 2002.
the following table presents the u.s. and
non-u.s. components of income before
income tax expense:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
u.s.
$
7,333
$
1,834
$
1,258
non-u.s.(a)
2,695
1,308
income before income tax expense
$
10,028
$
2,519
$
2,566
(a)
for purposes of this table, non-u.s. income is defined as income
generated from operations located outside the united states.
note 25
restrictions on cash and
intercompany funds transfers
the federal
reserve board requires
depository institutions to maintain cash
reserves with a federal reserve bank. the
average amount of reserve balances
deposited by jpmorgan chases bank
subsidiaries with various federal reserve
banks was approximately $2.6billion in
2003 and $2.2billion in 2002.
restrictions imposed by federal law
prohibit jpmorgan chase and certain other
affiliates from borrowing from banking
subsidiaries unless the loans are secured
in specified amounts. such secured loans
to jpmorgan chase or to other affiliates
generally are limited
to 10% of the banking subsidiarys total
capital, as determined by the risk-based
capital guidelines; the aggregate amount
of all such loans is limited to 20% of the
banking sub-
sidiarys total capital. jpmorgan chase
and its affiliates were well within
these limits throughout the year.
the principal sources of jpmorgan chases
income (on a parent company-only basis)
are dividends and interest from jpmorgan
chase bank and the other banking and
nonbanking subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase.
in addition to dividend restrictions set
forth in statutes and regulations, the
federal reserve board, the office of the comptroller of the
currency (occ) and the federal deposit
insurance corporation (fdic) have
authority under the financial institutions
supervisory act to prohibit or to limit
the payment of dividends by the banking
organizations they supervise, including
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries that
are banks or bank holding companies, if,
in the banking regulators opinion,
payment of a dividend would constitute an
unsafe or unsound practice in light of the
financial condition of the banking
organization.
at january1, 2004 and 2003, jpmorgan
chases bank subsidiaries could pay, in
the aggregate, $4.4billion and $1.3
billion, respectively, in dividends to
their respective bank holding companies
without prior approval of their relevant
banking regulators. dividend capacity in
2004 will be supplemented by the banks
earnings during the year.
in compliance with rules and regulations
established by u.s. and non-u.s.
regulators, as of december31, 2003 and
2002, cash in the amount of $3.5billion
and $2.1billion, respectively, and
securities with a market value of $3.1
billion and $3.0billion, respectively,
were segregated in special bank accounts
for the benefit of securities and futures
brokerage customers.
note 26
capital
there are two categories of risk-based
capital: core capital (referred to as tier
1 capital) and supplementary capital
(referred to as tier 2 capital). tier 1
capital includes common stockholders
equity, qualifying preferred stock and
minority interest less goodwill and other
adjustments. tier 2 capital consists of
preferred stock not qualifying as tier 1,
long-term debt and other instruments
qualifying as tier 2, the aggregate
allowance for credit losses up to a
certain percentage of risk-weighted
assets, less investments in certain
subsidiaries. under the risk-based capital
guidelines of the federal reserve board, jpmorgan chase is
required to maintain minimum ratios of
tier 1 and total (tier 1 plus tier 2)
capital to risk-weighted assets, as well
as minimum leverage ratios (which are
defined as tier 1 capital to average
adjusted on-balance sheet assets). failure
to meet these minimum requirements could
result in actions taken by the federal reserve board. bank
subsidiaries also are subject to these
capital requirements by their respective
primary regulators. management believes
that as of december31, 2003, jpmorgan
chase and each of its banking subsidiaries
met all capital requirements to which each
was subject and is not aware of any
subsequent events that would alter this
classification. the firm revised its
calculation of risk-weighted assets during
the third-quarter of 2003; capital ratios
for periods prior to june2003 have not
been recalculated.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
the following table presents the risk-based capital ratios for jpmorgan chase
and its significant banking subsidiaries:
risk-
adjusted
tier 1
total
tier 1
tier 1
total
weighted
average
capital(c)(e)
capital(c)(e)
leverage(c)(f)
december 31, 2003 (in millions)
capital(b)(c)
capital(c)
assets(d)
assets
ratio
ratio
ratio
j.p. morgan chase & co.(a)
$
43,167
$
59,816
$
507,456
$
765,910
8.5
%
11.8
%
5.6
%
jpmorgan chase bank
34,972
45,290
434,218
628,076
8.1
%
10.4
%
5.6
%
chase manhattan bank usa, n.a.
4,950
6,939
48,030
34,565
10.3
%
14.4
%
14.3
%
well capitalized ratios(g)
6.00
%
10.00
%
5.00
%(h)
minimum capital ratios(g)
4.00
%
8.00
%
3.00
%
(a)
assets and capital amounts for jpmorgan chases banking subsidiaries
reflect intercompany transactions, whereas the respective amounts for jpmorgan
chase reflect the elimination of intercompany transactions.
(b)
in accordance with the federal reserve board risk-based capital guidelines, minority interest
for jpmorgan chase includes debentures issued to jpmorgan chase less the
capital securities of the issuer trusts. for a further discussion,
see note 18 on pages 110-111 of this annual report.
(c)
the provisions of sfas 115 do not apply to the calculations of the tier 1
capital and tier 1 leverage ratios. the risk-based capital guidelines permit
the inclusion of 45% of the pre-tax unrealized gain on certain equity
securities in the calculation of tier 2 capital.
(d)
includes off-balance sheet risk-weighted assets in the amounts of $174.2
billion, $152.1billion and $13.3billion, respectively, at december31, 2003.
(e)
tier 1 capital or total capital, as applicable, divided by risk-weighted
assets. risk-weighted assets include assets and off-balance sheet positions,
weighted by the type of instruments and the risk weight of the counterparty,
collateral or guarantor.
(f)
tier 1 capital divided by adjusted average assets
(net of allowance for loan losses, goodwill and
certain intangible assets).
(g)
as defined by the
regulations issued by the federal reserve board, the fdic and the occ.
(h)
represents requirements for bank subsidiaries pursuant to regulations
issued under the federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act. there
is no tier 1 leverage component in the definition of a well-capitalized bank
holding company.
the following table shows the components
of the firms tier 1 and total capital:
december 31, (in millions)
tier 1 capital
common stockholders equity
$
45,168
$
40,065
nonredeemable preferred stock
1,009
1,009
minority interest(a)
6,882
5,520
less:
goodwill and investments in certain subsidiaries
8,511
8,122
nonqualifying intangible assets and other
1,381
tier 1 capital
$
43,167
$
37,570
tier 2 capital
long-term debt and other instruments
qualifying as tier 2
$
12,128
$
11,801
qualifying allowance for credit losses
4,777
5,458
less:
investment in certain subsidiaries
tier 2 capital
$
16,649
$
16,925
total qualifying capital
$
59,816
$
54,495
(a)
minority interest primarily includes trust preferred stocks of certain
business trusts.
note 27
commitments and contingencies
at december31, 2003, jpmorgan chase and
its subsidiaries were obligated under a
number of noncancelable operating leases
for premises and equipment used primarily
for banking purposes. certain leases
contain rent escalation clauses for real
estate taxes, they may also contain other
operating expenses and renewal option
clauses calling for increased rents. no
lease agreement imposes any restrictions
on the firms ability to pay
dividends, engage in debt or equity
financing transactions, or enter into
further lease agreements. future minimum
rental payments required, under operating
leases with noncancelable lease terms that
expire after december31, 2003, were as
follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
$
after
4,772
total minimum payments required
8,233
less: sublease rentals under noncancelable subleases
net minimum payment required
$
7,950
total rental expense was as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
gross rentals
$
1,061
$
1,012
$
sublease rentals
(106
)
(134
)
(135
)
net rental expense
$
$
$
at december31, 2003, assets were pledged
to secure public deposits and for other
purposes. the significant components of
the assets pledged were as follows:
december 31, (in billions)
reverse repurchase/securities borrowing agreements
$
$
securities
loans
other(a)
total assets pledged
$
$
(a)
primarily composed of trading assets.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries are
named as defendants in a number of legal
actions and governmental proceedings
arising in connection with their
respective businesses. additional actions,
investigations or proceedings may be
brought from time to time in the future.
in view of the inherent difficulty of
predicting the outcome of legal matters,
particularly where the claimants seek very
large or indeterminate damages or where
the cases present novel legal theories or
involve a large number of parties, the
firm cannot state with confidence what the
eventual outcome of the pending matters
will be, what the timing of the ultimate
resolution of these matters will be or
what the eventual loss related to each
pending matter will be. subject to the
foregoing caveat, jpmorgan chase
anticipates, based upon its current
knowledge, after consultation with counsel
and after taking into account its current
litigation reserves, that the outcome of
the legal actions, proceedings and
investigations currently pending against
it should not have a material adverse
effect on the consolidated financial
condition of the firm. however, the
outcome of a particular proceeding or the
imposition of a particular fine or penalty
may be material to the firms operating
results for a particular period depending
upon, among other factors, the size of the
loss or liability and the level of the
firms income for that period.
note 28
accounting for derivative instruments
and hedging activities
derivative instruments enable end-users to
increase, reduce or alter exposure to
credit or market risks. the value of a
derivative is derived from its reference
to an underlying variable or combination
of variables such as equity, foreign
exchange, credit, commodity or interest
rate prices or indices. jpmorgan chase
makes markets in derivatives for its
customers, and also is an end user of
derivatives in order to manage the firms
exposure to credit and market risks.
sfas 133, as amended by sfas 138 and sfas
149, establishes accounting and reporting
standards for derivative instruments,
including derivative instruments embedded
in other contracts used for trading and
hedging activities. all derivatives,
whether designated for hedging
relationships or not, are required to be
recorded on the balance sheet at fair
value. the accounting for changes in value
of a derivative depends on whether the
contract is for trading purposes or has
been designated and qualifies for hedge
accounting. in order to qualify for hedge
accounting, a derivative must be highly
effective at reducing the risk associated
with the exposure being hedged. the
majority of jpmorgan chases derivatives
are entered into for trading purposes. the
firm also uses derivatives as an end-user
to hedge market exposures, modify the
interest rate characteristics of related
balance sheet instruments or meet
longer-term investment objectives. both
trading and end-user derivatives are
recorded at fair value in trading assets
and trading liabilities.
derivatives designated as hedges for
accounting purposes must be considered
highly effective at reducing the risk
associated with the exposure being hedged.
each derivative must be designated as a
hedge, with documentation of the risk
management objective and strategy,
including identification of the hedging
instrument, the hedged item and the risk
exposure, and how effectiveness is to be
assessed prospectively and
retrospectively.
for qualifying fair value hedges, all
changes in the fair value of the
derivative and changes in the fair value
of the hedged item for the risk being
hedged are recognized in earnings. if the
hedge relationship is terminated, then the
fair value adjustment to the hedged item
continues to be reported as part of the
basis of the item and is amortized to
earnings as a yield adjustment. for
qualifying cash flow hedges, the effective
portion of the change in the fair value of
the derivative is recorded in other
comprehensive income and recognized in the
income statement when the hedged cash
flows affect earnings. the ineffective
portions of cash flow hedges are
immediately recognized in earnings. if the
hedge relationship is terminated, then the
change in fair value of the derivative
recorded in other comprehensive income is
recognized when the cash flows that were
hedged occur, consistent with the original
hedge strategy. for hedge relationships
discontinued because the forecasted
transaction is not expected to occur
according to the original strategy, any
related derivative amounts recorded in
other comprehensive income are immediately
recognized in earnings. for qualifying net
investment hedges, changes in the fair
value of the derivative or the revaluation
of the foreign currency-denominated debt
instrument are recorded in the translation
adjustments account within other
comprehensive income.
jpmorgan chases fair value hedges
primarily include hedges of fixed-rate
long-term debt, loans, afs securities and
msrs. interest rate swaps are the most
common type of derivative contract used to
modify exposure to interest rate risk,
converting fixed-rate assets and
liabilities to a floating rate. interest
rate options and swaptions are also used
in combination with interest rate swaps to
hedge the fair value of the firms msrs.
for a further discussion of hedging, see
note 16 on page 108 of this annual report.
all amounts have been included in earnings
consistent with the classification of the
hedged item, primarily net interest
income, mortgage fees and related income
and other revenue. jpmorgan chase did not
recognize any gains or losses during 2003
on firm commitments that no longer qualify
as fair value hedges.
jpmorgan chase also enters into derivative
contracts to hedge exposure to variability
in cash flows from floating-rate financial
instruments and forecasted transactions,
primarily the rollover of short-term
assets and liabilities, foreign currency
denominated revenues and expenses and
anticipated securities transactions.
interest rate swaps, futures, options and
forward contracts are the most common
instruments used to reduce the impact of
interest rate and foreign exchange rate changes on future earnings.
all amounts have been included in earnings
consistent with the classification of the
hedged item, primarily net interest
income.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
jpmorgan chase uses forward foreign
exchange contracts and foreign
currency-denominated debt instruments to
protect the value of its net investments
in its non-u.s. subsidiaries in foreign
currencies. the portion of the hedging
instruments excluded from the assessment
of hedge effectiveness (forward points) is
recorded in net interest income.
the following table presents derivative
instrument- and hedging-related
activities for the period indicated:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
fair value hedge ineffective net gains(a)
$
$
cash flow hedge ineffective net losses(a)
(5
)
(1
)
cash flow hedging gains on forecasted
transactions that failed to occur
(a)
includes ineffectiveness and the components of hedging instruments
that have been excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness.
over the next 12months, it is expected
that $124million (after-tax) of net
losses recorded in other comprehensive
income at december31, 2003, will be
recognized in earnings. the maximum length
of time over which forecasted transactions
are hedged is 10years, related to core
lending and borrowing activities.
in 2001, the adoption of sfas 133 resulted
in an after-tax reduction to net income of
$25million and an after-tax reduction to
other comprehensive income of $36million.
due to sfas 133, jpmorgan chase changed
certain hedging strategies and elected not
to designate some derivatives utilized to
manage economic exposure as accounting
hedges. for example, to moderate its use
of derivatives, the mortgage business
began using afs securities as economic
hedges of mortgage servicing rights.
changes in the fair value of credit
derivatives used to manage the firms
credit risk are recorded in trading
revenue because of the difficulties in
qualifying such contracts as hedges of
loans and commitments.
note 29
off-balance sheet lending-related
financial instruments and guarantees
jpmorgan chase utilizes lending-related
financial instruments (e.g., commitments
and guarantees) to meet the financing
needs of its customers. the contractual
amount of these financial instruments
represents the maximum possible credit
risk should the counterparty draw down the
commitment or the firm fulfill its
obligation under the guarantee, and the
counter-party were to subsequently fail to
perform according to the terms of the
contract. most of these commitments and
guarantees expire without a default
occurring or without being drawn. as a
result, the total contractual amount of
these instruments is not, in the firms
view, representative of its actual future
credit exposure or funding requirements.
further, certain commitments, primarily
related to consumer financings, are
cancelable, upon notice, at the option of
the firm.
to provide for the risk of loss inherent
in commercial-related contracts, an
allowance for credit losses is maintained.
see note 12 on page 100 of this annual
report for a further discussion of the
allowance for credit losses on
lending-related commitments.
the following table summarizes the
contract amounts relating to off-balance
sheet lending-related financial
instruments and
guarantees at december31, 2003 and 2002:
off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments
december 31, (in millions)
consumer-related
$
176,923
$
151,138
commercial-related:
other unfunded commitments to extend credit(a)(b)
$
176,222
$
196,654
standby letters of credit and guarantees(a)
35,332
38,848
other letters of credit(a)
4,204
2,618
total commercial-related
$
215,758
$
238,120
customers securities lent
$
143,143
$
101,503
(a)
net of risk participations totaling
$16.5billion and $15.6billion at
december31, 2003 and 2002.
(b)
includes unused advised lines of
credit totaling $19billion at december
31, 2003 and $22billion at december31,
2002, which are not legally binding. in
regulatory filings with the federal reserve board, unused
advised lines are not reportable.
fin 45 establishes guarantors accounting
and disclosure requirements for
guarantees, requiring that a guarantor
recognize, at the inception of a
guarantee, a liability in an amount equal
to the fair value of the obligation
undertaken in issuing the guarantee. fin
45 defines a guarantee as a contract that
contingently requires the firm to pay a
guaranteed party, based on: (a)changes in
an underlying asset, liability or equity
security of the guaranteed party, or (b)a
third partys failure to perform under a
specified agreement. the firm considers
the following off-balance sheet lending
arrangements to be guarantees under fin
45: certain asset purchase agreements,
standby letters of credit and financial
guarantees, securities lending
indemnifications, certain indemnification
agreements included within third-party
contractual arrangements and certain
derivative contracts. these guarantees are
described in further detail below.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
as of january1, 2003, newly issued or
modified guarantees that are not
derivative contracts have been recorded on
the firms consolidated balance sheet at
their fair value at inception. the fair
value of the obligation undertaken in
issuing the guarantee at inception is
typically equal to the net present value
of the future amount of premium receivable
under the contract. the firm has recorded
this amount in other liabilities with an
offsetting entry recorded in other assets.
as cash is received under the contract, it
is applied to the premium receivable
recorded in other assets, and the fair
value of the liability recorded at
inception is amortized into income as fees
and commissions over the life of the
guarantee contract. the amount of the
liability related to guarantees recorded
at december31, 2003, excluding the
allowance for credit losses on
lending-related commitments and derivative
contracts discussed below, was
approximately $59million.
unfunded commitments to extend credit are
agreements to lend only when a customer
has complied with predetermined
conditions, and they generally expire on
fixed dates. the allowance for credit
losses on commercial lending-related
commitments includes $155million at
december31, 2003, related to unfunded
commitments to extend credit. the majority
of the firms unfunded commitments are not
guarantees as defined in fin 45, except
for certain asset purchase agreements of
$21billion at december31, 2003. these
agreements are primarily used as a
mechanism to provide liquidity to spes. of
the $21billion of asset purchase
agreements at december31, 2003, $18
billion related to multi-seller conduits
and structured commercial loan vehicles
described in note 14 on pages 103-106 of
this annual report. it does not include $6
billion of asset purchase agreements to
multi-seller asset-backed commercial paper
conduits consolidated in accordance with
fin 46 at december31, 2003, as the
underlying assets of the conduits are
reported on the consolidated balance
sheet.
certain asset purchase agreements can be
exercised at any time by the spes
administrator, while others require a
triggering event to occur. triggering
events include, but are not limited to, a
need for liquidity, a market value decline
of the assets or a downgrade in the rating
of jpmorgan chase bank. these agreements
may cause the firm to purchase an asset
from the spe at an amount above the
assets fair value, in effect providing a
guarantee of the initial value of the
reference asset as of the date of the
agreement. in most instances, third-party
credit enhancements of the spe mitigate
the firms potential losses on these
agreements. the allowance for credit
losses on commercial lending-related
commitments related to these agreements
was insignificant at december31, 2003.
standby letters of credit and financial
guarantees are conditional lending
commitments issued by jpmorgan chase to
guarantee the performance of a customer to
a third party under certain arrangements,
such as commercial paper facilities, bond
financings, acquisition financings and
similar transactions. more than 80% of
these arrangements mature within three
years. the firm
typically has recourse to recover from the
customer any amounts paid under these
guarantees; in addition, the firm may hold
cash or other highly liquid collateral to
support these guarantees. at
december31, 2003, the firm held
collateral relating to $7.7billion of
these arrangements. the allowance for
credit losses on lending-related
commitments included $167million related
to standby letters of credit and financial
guarantees.
jpmorgan chase holds customers securities
under custodial arrangements. at times,
these securities are loaned to third
parties, and the firm issues securities
lending indemnification agreements to the
customer that protect the customer against
the risk of loss if the third party fails
to return the securities. to support these
indemnification agreements, the firm
generally obtains from the third party
cash or other highly liquid collateral
with a market value exceeding 100% of the
value of the loaned securities. at
december31, 2003, the firm held $146.7
billion in collateral in support of these
agreements.
in connection with issuing securities to
investors, the firm may enter into
contractual arrangements with third
parties that may require the firm to make
a payment to them in the event of a change
in tax law or an adverse interpretation of
tax law. in certain cases, the contract
may also include a termination clause,
which would allow the firm to settle the
contract at its fair value, thus, such a
clause would not require the firm to make
a payment under the indemnification
agreement. even without the termination
clause, management does not expect such
indemnification agreements to have a
material adverse effect on the
consolidated financial condition of
jpmorgan chase. the firm may also enter
into indemnification clauses when it sells
a business or assets to a third party,
pursuant to which it indemnifies that
third party for losses they may incur due
to actions taken by the firm prior to the
sale. see below for more information
regarding the firms loan securitization
activities. it is difficult to estimate
the firms maximum exposure under these
indemnification arrangements, since this
would require an assessment of future
changes in tax laws and future claims that
may be made against the firm that have not
yet occurred. however, based on historical
experience, management expects the risk of
loss to be remote.
as part of the firms loan securitization
activities, as described in note 13 on
pages 100-103 of this annual report, the
firm provides representations and
warranties that certain securitized loans
meet specific requirements. the firm may
be required to repurchase the loans and/or
indemnify the purchaser of the loans
against losses due to any breaches of such
representations or warranties. generally,
the maximum amount of future payments the
firm would be required to make under such
repurchase and/or indemnification
provisions would be equal to the current
amount of assets held by such
securitization-related spes as of december
31, 2003, plus, in certain circumstances,
accrued and unpaid interest on such loans
and certain expenses. the potential loss
due to such repurchase and/or indemnity is
mitigated by the due diligence the firm
performs to ensure that the assets comply
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
with the requirements set forth in the
representations and warranties.
historically, losses incurred on such
repurchases and/or indemnifications have
been insignificant, and therefore
management expects the risk of material
loss to be remote.
in connection with chase cardmember
services, the firm is a 50% partner with
one of the leading companies in electronic
payment services in a joint venture, known
as chase merchant services (the joint
venture) that provides merchant
processing services in the united states.
the joint venture is contingently liable
for processed credit card sales
transactions in the event of a dispute
between the cardmember and a merchant. if
a dispute is resolved in the cardmembers
favor, the joint venture will credit or
refund the amount to the cardmember and
charge back the transaction to the
merchant. if the joint venture is unable
to collect the amount from the merchant,
the joint venture will bear the loss for
the amount credited or refunded to the
cardmember. the joint venture mitigates
this risk by withholding settlement or
obtaining escrow deposits from certain
merchants. however, in the unlikely event
that: 1) a merchant ceases operations and
is unable to deliver products, services or
a refund; 2) the joint venture does not
have sufficient withholdings or escrow
deposits to provide customer refunds; and
3) the joint venture does not have
sufficient financial resources to provide
customer refunds, the firm would be liable
to refund the cardholder in proportion to
its equity interest in the joint venture.
for the year ended december31, 2003, the
joint venture incurred aggregate credit
losses of $2.0million on $260billion of
aggregate volume processed. at december
31, 2003, the joint venture held $242
million of collateral. the firm believes
that, based on historical experience and
the collateral held by the joint venture,
the fair value of the guarantee would not
be materially different from the credit
loss allowance recorded by the joint
venture; therefore, the firm has not
recorded any allowance for losses in
excess of the allowance recorded by the
joint venture.
the firm is a member of several securities
and futures exchanges and clearinghouses
both in the united states and overseas.
membership in some of these organizations
requires the firm to pay a pro rata share
of the losses incurred by the organization
as a result of the default of another
member. such obligation varies with
different organizations. it may be limited
to members who dealt with the defaulting
member or to the amount (or a multiple of
the amount) of the firms contribution to
a members guaranty fund, or, in a few
cases, it may be unlimited. it is difficult
to estimate the firms maximum exposure
under these membership agreements, since
this would require an assessment of future
claims that may be made against the firm
that have not yet occurred. however, based
on historical experience, management
expects the risk of loss to be remote.
in addition to the contracts described
above, there are certain derivative
contracts to which the firm is a
counterparty that meet the
characteristics of a guarantee under fin
45. these derivatives are recorded on
the consolidated balance sheet at
fair value. these contracts include
written put options that require the firm
to purchase assets from the option holder
at a specified price by a specified date
in the future, as well as derivatives
that effectively guarantee the return on
a counter-partys reference portfolio of
assets. the total notional value of the
derivatives that the firm deems to be
guarantees was $50billion at december
31, 2003. the firm reduces its exposures
to these contracts by entering into
offsetting transactions or by entering
into contracts that hedge the market risk
related to these contracts. the fair
value related to
these contracts was a derivative
receivable of $163million and a
derivative payable of $333million at
december31, 2003.
finally, certain written put options and
credit derivatives permit cash settlement
and do not require the option holder or
the buyer of credit protection to own the
reference asset. the firm does not
consider these contracts to be guarantees
as described in fin 45.
note 30
credit risk concentrations
concentrations of credit risk arise when a
number of customers are engaged in similar
business activities or activities in the
same geographic region, or when they have
similar economic features that would cause
their ability to meet contractual
obligations to be similarly affected by
changes in economic conditions.
jpmorgan chase regularly monitors various
segments of its credit risk portfolio to
assess potential concentration risks and
to obtain collateral when deemed
necessary. in the firms commercial
portfolio, risk concentrations are
primarily evaluated by industry, and also
by geographic region. in the consumer
portfolio, concentrations are primarily
evaluated by product, and by u.s.
geographic region.
for further information regarding
on-balance sheet credit concentrations by
major product and geography, see note 11
on page 99 of this annual report. for
information regarding concentrations of
off-balance sheet lending-related
financial instruments by major product,
see note 29 on page 117 of this annual
report. more information about
concentrations can be found in the
following tables in the md&a:
commercial exposure
page 55
commercial selected industry concentrations
page 56
selected country exposure
page 58
geographic region:
14 family residential mortgage loans
page 62
managed credit card loans
page 62
automobile financings
page 62
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
the table below presents both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet
commercial- and consumer-related credit exposure as of december31, 2003 and
2002:
credit
on-balance
off-balance
credit
on-balance
off-balance
december 31, (in billions)
exposure
sheet(a)
sheet(b)
exposure
sheet(a)
sheet(b)
commercial-related:
commercial banks
$
47.1
$
36.5
$
10.6
$
42.2
$
33.7
$
8.5
asset managers
21.8
11.7
10.1
24.9
12.3
12.6
securities firms and exchanges
15.6
9.3
6.3
17.5
11.7
5.8
finance companies and lessors
15.6
3.1
12.5
19.0
4.1
14.9
utilities
15.3
3.7
11.6
17.7
6.4
11.3
all other commercial
267.3
102.7
164.6
291.6
106.6
185.0
total commercial-related
$
382.7
$
167.0
$
215.7
$
412.9
$
174.8
$
238.1
consumer-related:
credit cards(c)
$
157.9
$
16.8
$
141.1
$
143.1
$
19.7
$
123.4
14 family residential mortgages
102.5
73.7
28.8
84.0
64.0
20.0
automobile financings
41.3
38.7
2.6
35.4
33.6
1.8
all other consumer
11.6
7.2
4.4
13.4
7.5
5.9
total consumer-related
$
313.3
$
136.4
$
176.9
$
275.9
$
124.8
$
151.1
total exposure
$
696.0
$
303.4
$
392.6
$
688.8
$
299.6
$
389.2
(a)
represents loans, and derivative and other receivables.
(b)
represents lending-related financial instruments.
(c)
excludes $34.9billion and $30.7billion of securitized credit card
receivables at december31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
note 31
fair value of financial instruments
the fair value of a financial instrument
is the amount at which the instrument
could be exchanged in a current
transaction between willing parties, other
than in a forced or liquidation sale.
the accounting for an asset or liability
may differ based on the type of instrument
and/or its use in a trading or investing
strategy. generally, the measurement
framework recorded in financial statements
is one of the following:
at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet, with changes in
fair value recorded each period in the consolidated statement of income
at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet, with changes in
fair value recorded each period in a separate component of
stockholders equity and as part of other comprehensive income
at cost (less other-than-temporary impairments), with changes in
fair value not recorded in the financial statements but disclosed in
the notes thereto
at the lower of cost or fair value
the firm has a well-established and
well-documented process for determining
fair values. fair value is based on quoted
market prices, where available. if listed
prices or quotes are not available, fair
value is based on internally developed
models that primarily use market-based or
independent information as inputs to the
valuation model. valuation adjustments may
be necessary to ensure that financial
instruments are recorded at fair value.
valuation adjustments include amounts to
reflect counterparty credit quality,
liquidity and concentration concerns and
are based on defined methodologies that
are applied consistently over time.
credit valuation adjustments are necessary when the market price
(or parameter) is not indicative of the credit quality of the
counterparty. as few derivative contracts are listed on an exchange,
the majority of derivative positions are valued using internally
developed models that use as their basis observable market parameters.
market practice is to quote parameters equivalent to a aa credit
rating: thus, all counterparties are assumed to have the same credit
quality. an adjustment is therefore necessary to reflect the credit
quality of each derivative counterparty and to arrive at fair value.
without this adjustment, derivative positions would not be
appropriately valued.
liquidity adjustments are necessary when the firm may not be able
to observe a recent market price for a financial instrument that trades
in inactive (or less active) markets. thus, valuation adjustments for
risk of loss due to a lack of liquidity are applied to those positions
to arrive at fair value. the firm tries to ascertain the amount of
uncertainty in the initial valuation based upon the liquidity or
illiquidity, as the case may be, of the market in which the instrument
trades and makes liquidity adjustments to the financial instruments.
the firm measures the liquidity adjustment based on the following
factors: (1)the amount of time since the last relevant pricing point;
(2)whether there was an actual trade or relevant external quote; and
(3)the volatility of the principal component of the financial
instrument.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
concentration valuation adjustments are necessary to reflect the
cost of unwinding larger-than-normal market size risk positions. the
cost is determined based on the size of the adverse market move that is
likely to occur during the extended period required to bring a position
down to a nonconcentrated level. an estimate of the period needed to
reduce, without market disruption, a position to a nonconcentrated
level is generally based on the relationship of the position to the
average daily trading volume of that position. without these
adjustments, larger positions would be valued at a price greater than
the price at which the firm could exit the positions.
valuation adjustments are determined based
on established policies and are controlled
by a price verification group independent
of the risk-taking function. economic
substantiation of models, prices, market
inputs and revenue through price/input
testing, as well as backtesting, is done
to validate the appropriateness of the
valuation methodology. any changes to the
valuation methodology are reviewed by
management to ensure the changes are
justified.
the methods described above may produce a
fair value calculation that may not be
indicative of net realizable value or
reflective of future fair values.
furthermore, the use of different
methodologies to determine the fair value
of certain financial instruments could
result in a different estimate of fair
value at the reporting date.
certain financial instruments and all
nonfinancial instruments are excluded from
the scope of sfas 107. accordingly, the
fair value disclosures required by sfas
107 provide only a partial estimate of the
fair value of jpmorgan chase. for example,
the firm has developed long-term
relationships with its customers through
its deposit base and credit card accounts,
commonly referred to as core deposit
intangibles and credit card relationships.
in the opinion of management, these items,
in the aggregate, add significant value to
jpmorgan chase, but their fair value is
not disclosed in this note.
the following captions describe the
methodologies and assumptions used, by
financial instrument, to determine fair
value.
financial assets
assets for which fair value
approximates carrying value
the firm considers fair values of certain
financial assets carried at cost
including cash and due from banks,
deposits with banks, securities borrowed,
short-term receivables and accrued
interest receivable  to approximate
their respective carrying values, due to
their short-term nature and generally
negligible credit risk.
assets where fair value differs from cost
jpmorgan chases debt, equity and
derivative trading instruments are
carried at their estimated fair value.
quoted market prices, when available, are
used to determine the fair value of
trading instruments. if quoted market
prices are not available, then fair
values are estimated by using pricing
models, quoted prices of instruments with
similar characteristics or discounted
cash flows.
federal funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements
federal funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements are
typically short-term in nature, and as
such, for a significant majority of the
firms transactions, cost approximates
carrying value. this balance sheet item
also includes structured resale agreements
and similar products with long-dated
maturities. to estimate the fair value of
these instruments, the cash flows are
discounted using the appropriate market
rates for the applicable maturity.
securities
fair values of actively traded
securities are determined by the
secondary market, while the fair values
for nonactively traded securities are
based on independent broker quotations.
derivatives
fair value for derivatives is determined based on the following:
position valuation, principally based on liquid market pricing as
evidenced by exchange-traded prices, broker-dealer quotations or
related input parameters which assume all counterparties have the same
credit rating;
credit valuation adjustments to the resulting portfolio valuation,
to reflect the credit quality of individual counterparties; and
other fair value adjustments to take into consideration liquidity,
concentration and other factors.
loans
fair value for loans is determined using
methodologies suitable for each type of
loan:
fair value for the commercial loan portfolio is based on the
assessment of the two main risk components of the portfolio: credit and
interest. the cost of credit derivatives is used to estimate the fair
value of commercial loans.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
fair values for consumer installment loans (including automobile
financings) and 1 - 4 family residential mortgages, for which market
rates for comparable loans are readily available, are based on
discounted cash flows, adjusted for prepayments. the discount rates
used for consumer installment loans are current rates offered by
commercial banks. for 1 - 4 family residential mortgages, secondary
market yields for comparable mortgage-backed securities, adjusted for
risk, are used.
fair value for credit card receivables is based on discounted
expected cash flows. the discount rates used for credit card
receivables incorporate only the effects of interest rate changes,
since the expected cash flows already reflect an adjustment for credit
risk.
the fair value of loans in the held-for-sale and trading portfolios
is generally based on observable market prices and prices of similar
instruments, including bonds, credit derivatives and loans with similar
characteristics. otherwise, if market prices are not available, the
fair value is based on the estimated cash flows adjusted for credit
risk; that risk is discounted, using a rate appropriate for each
maturity that incorporates the effects of interest rate changes.
other assets
this caption includes private equity investments and msrs.
for a discussion of the fair value
methodology for private equity
investments, see note 15 on page 106 of
this annual report.
for a discussion of the fair value
methodology for msrs, see note 16 on
pages 107-109 of this annual report.
financial liabilities
liabilities for which fair value
approximates carrying value
sfas 107 requires that the fair value
disclosed for deposit liabilities with no
stated maturity (i.e., demand, savings and
certain money market deposits) be equal to
their carrying value. sfas 107 does not
allow for the recognition of the inherent
funding value of these instruments.
fair value of commercial paper, other
borrowed funds, accounts payable and
accrued liabilities is considered to
approximate their respective carrying
values due to their short-term nature.
interest-bearing deposits
fair values of interest-bearing deposits
are estimated by discounting cash flows
based on the remaining contractual
maturities of funds having similar
interest rates and similar maturities.
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements are
typically short-term in nature, and as
such, for a significant majority of the
firms transactions, cost approximates
carrying value. this balance sheet item
also includes structured repurchase
agreements and similar products with
long-dated maturities. to estimate the
fair value of these instruments, the cash
flows are discounted using the appropriate
market rates for the applicable maturity.
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies
beneficial interests issued by
consolidated vies (beneficial
interests) are generally short-term in
nature, and as such, for a significant
majority of the firms transactions, cost
approximates carrying value. the
consolidated balance sheet also includes
beneficial interests with long-dated
maturities. the fair value of these
instruments is based on current market
rates.
long-term debt-related instruments
fair value for long-term debt, including
the guaranteed preferred beneficial
interests in the firms junior
subordinated deferrable interest
debentures, is based on current market
rates and is adjusted for jpmorgan chases
credit quality.
lending-related commitments
the firm estimates the fair value of its
commercial commitments to extend credit
based on the cost of credit derivatives.
the firm estimates the fair value of its
consumer commitments to extend credit
based on the primary market prices to
originate new commitments. it is the
change in current primary market prices
that provides the estimate of the fair
value of these commitments.
on this basis, at december31, 2003, the
fair value of the firms lending-related
commitments approximated the allowance for
lending-related commitments of $324
million. at december31, 2002, the fair
value of the firms lending-related
commitments was approximately $1.3billion, compared
with the allowance for lending-related
commitments of $363million.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
the following table presents the carrying value and estimated fair value of
financial assets and liabilities valued under sfas 107. accordingly, certain
amounts which are not considered financial instruments are excluded from the
table.
carrying
estimated
appreciation/
carrying
estimated
appreciation/
december 31, (in billions)
value
fair value
(depreciation)
value
fair value
(depreciation)
financial assets
assets for which fair value approximates carrying value
$
84.6
$
84.6
$
$
76.4
$
76.4
$
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
76.9
77.2
0.3
65.8
66.0
0.2
trading assets
252.9
252.9
248.3
248.3
securities available-for-sale
60.1
60.1
84.0
84.0
securities held-to-maturity
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.4
loans:
commercial, net of allowance for loan losses
80.8
82.1
1.3
88.6
88.7
(a)
0.1
consumer, net of allowance for loan losses
134.2
135.4
1.2
122.4
124.7
2.3
other assets
61.0
61.5
0.5
53.3
53.5
0.2
total financial assets
$
750.7
$
754.0
$
3.3
$
739.2
$
742.0
$
2.8
financial liabilities
liabilities for which fair value approximates carrying value
$
146.6
$
146.6
$
$
145.1
$
145.1
$
interest-bearing deposits
247.0
247.1
(0.1
)
222.7
223.1
(0.4
)
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
113.5
113.6
(0.1
)
169.5
169.5
trading liabilities
149.4
149.4
133.1
133.1
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies
12.3
12.3
long-term debt-related instruments
54.8
57.0
(2.2
)
45.2
45.5
(0.3
)
total financial liabilities
$
723.6
$
726.0
$
(2.4
)
$
715.6
$
716.3
$
(0.7
)
net appreciation
$
0.9
$
2.1
(a)
the fair value has been revised to reflect current valuation methodologies.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 32
international operations
the following table presents income
statement information of jpmorgan chase
by major geographic areas. the firm
defines international activities as
business transactions that involve
customers residing outside the united
states, and the information presented
below is based primarily on the domicile
of the customer. however, many of the
firms u.s. operations serve
international businesses.
as the firms operations are highly
integrated, estimates and subjective
assumptions have been made to apportion
revenue and expense between u.s. and
international operations. the estimates
and assumptions used to apportion revenue
and expense are consistent with the
allocations used for jpmorgan chases
segment reporting as set forth in note 34
on pages 126-127 of this annual report.
the firms long-lived assets for the
periods presented are not considered by
management to be significant in relation
to total assets. the majority of the
firms long-lived assets are located in
the united states.
income (loss)
net
for the year ended december 31, (in millions)
revenue(a)
expense(b)
before income taxes
income (loss)
europe/middle east and africa
$
6,324
$
3,940
$
2,384
$
1,530
asia and pacific
1,906
1,750
latin america and the caribbean
other
total international
9,138
6,066
3,072
1,966
total u.s.
24,118
17,162
6,956
4,753
total
$
33,256
$
23,228
$
10,028
$
6,719
europe/middle east and africa
$
5,120
$
4,882
$
$
asia and pacific
1,900
1,820
latin america and the caribbean
other
total international
7,747
7,293
total u.s.
21,867
19,802
(c)
2,065
1,363
total
$
29,614
$
27,095
$
2,519
$
1,663
europe/middle east and africa
$
6,725
$
5,128
$
1,597
$
1,054
asia and pacific
1,934
2,229
(295
)
(195
)
latin america and the caribbean
(17
)
(11
)
other
total international
9,388
8,098
1,290
total u.s.
19,956
18,680
1,276
total
$
29,344
$
26,778
$
2,566
$
1,694
(a)
revenue is composed of net interest income and noninterest revenue.
(b)
expense is composed of noninterest expense and provision for credit losses.
the amounts include an allocation of merger and restructuring costs.
(c)
includes the $1.3billion (pre-tax) charge related to the settlement of the
enron surety litigation and the establishment of a litigation reserve for
certain material litigation, proceedings and investigations.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
note 33
parent company
parent company  statement of income
year ended december 31, (in millions)
income
dividends from bank and bank
holding company subsidiaries(a)
$
2,436
$
3,079
$
2,650
dividends
from nonbank subsidiaries(a)(b)
2,688
7,904
interest income from subsidiaries
1,174
2,090
other interest income
other income from subsidiaries, primarily fees:
bank and bank holding company
nonbank
other income
(25
)
total income
7,191
5,754
13,207
expense
interest expense to subsidiaries(b)
other interest expense
1,329
1,511
2,436
compensation expense
other noninterest expense
total expense
2,846
2,993
3,453
income before income tax benefit and
undistributed net income of subsidiaries
4,345
2,761
9,754
income tax benefit
equity in undistributed net income (loss)
of subsidiaries
1,900
(1,530
)
(8,458
)
income before effect of accounting change
6,719
1,663
1,690
net effect of change in accounting principle
net income
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
parent company  balance sheet
december 31, (in millions)
assets
cash with banks
$
$
deposits with banking subsidiaries
12,554
9,994
securities purchased under resale agreements,
primarily with nonbank subsidiaries
trading assets
3,915
4,087
available-for-sale securities
2,099
1,081
loans
advances to, and receivables from, subsidiaries:
bank and bank holding company
9,239
9,521
nonbank
24,489
21,094
investment (at equity) in subsidiaries:
bank and bank holding company
43,853
40,709
nonbank(b)
10,399
10,826
goodwill and other intangibles
other assets
9,213
8,681
total assets
$
117,604
$
107,408
liabilities and stockholders equity
borrowings from, and payables to, subsidiaries(b)
$
9,488
$
7,483
other borrowed funds, primarily commercial paper
16,560
17,587
other liabilities
4,767
4,937
long-term debt(c)
40,635
35,095
total liabilities
71,450
65,102
stockholders equity
46,154
42,306
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
117,604
$
107,408
parent company  statement of cash flows
year ended december 31, (in millions)
operating activities
net income
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
less: net income of subsidiaries
7,017
1,971
2,096
parent company net loss
(298
)
(308
)
(402
)
add: cash dividends from subsidiaries(a)
5,098
2,320
10,554
other, net
(272
)
(912
)
(926
)
net cash provided by operating activities
4,528
1,100
9,226
investing activities
net change in:
deposits with banking subsidiaries
(2,560
)
(3,755
)
2,557
securities purchased under
resale agreements, primarily with
nonbank subsidiaries
(40
)
loans
(490
)
(27
)
advances to subsidiaries
(3,165
)
6,172
3,931
investment (at equity) in subsidiaries
(2,052
)
(2,284
)
(5,303
)
other, net
(37
)
available-for-sale securities:
purchases
(607
)
(1,171
)
(1,643
)
proceeds from sales and maturities
1,877
net cash (used in) provided by
investing activities
(8,109
)
financing activities
net change in borrowings from subsidiaries(b)
2,005
(526
)
net change in other borrowed funds
(2,104
)
(915
)
(3,272
)
proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt
12,105
12,533
7,258
repayments of long-term debt
(6,733
)
(12,271
)
(10,184
)
proceeds from the issuance of stock and
stock-related awards
1,213
1,429
redemption of preferred stock
(511
)
treasury stock purchased
(871
)
cash dividends paid
(2,865
)
(2,784
)
(2,697
)
net cash provided by (used in)
financing activities
3,621
(2,139
)
(9,374
)
net increase (decrease)in cash with banks
(304
)
cash with banks at the beginning of the year
cash with banks at the end of the year,
primarily, with bank subsidiaries
$
$
$
cash interest paid
$
1,918
$
1,829
$
2,950
cash income taxes paid (refund received)
$
$
$
(250
)
(a)
dividends in 2002 include a stock
dividend of $1.2billion from the mortgage
business, which was contributed to
jpmorgan chase bank. cash dividends in
2001 include funds from robert fleming
holdings limited and the beacon group,
llc.
(b)
subsidiaries include trusts that
issued guaranteed capital debt securities
(issuer trusts). as a result of fin 46,
the parent deconsolidated these trusts. in
2003, the parent received dividends of $11
million from the issuer trusts. for a
further discussion on issuer trusts, see
note 18 on pages 110-111 of this annual
report.
(c)
at december31, 2003, all debt that
contractually matures in 2004 through 2008
totaled $5.8billion, $7.8billion, $4.6
billion, $6.4billion and $4.5billion,
respectively.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
j.p. morgan chase & co.
note 34
segment information
jpmorgan chase is organized into five
major businesses. these businesses are
segmented based on the products and
services provided, or the type of customer
served, and reflect the manner in which
financial information is evaluated by
management.
jpmorgan chase uses shareholder value
added (sva) and operating earnings as
its principal measures of segment
profitability. for a definition of
these measurements, see the glossary of
terms on pages 130-131 of this annual
report.
operating revenue and expense directly
associated with each segment are included
in determining the segments operating
earnings. guidelines exist for allocating
to the segments expenses that are not
directly incurred by them, such as
corporate overhead. in addition,
management has developed a risk-adjusted
capital methodology that quantifies the
different types of risk  credit, market,
operational, business and private equity
within the various businesses and assigns
capital accordingly. each business segment
is responsible for its credit costs,
including actual net charge-offs and
changes in the specific and
segment results and reconciliation (table continued on next page)
treasury &
investment management
year ended december 31,
investment bank
securities services
& private banking
(in millions, except ratios)
operating net interest income
$
2,277
$
2,642
$
2,978
$
1,219
$
1,224
$
1,302
$
$
$
operating noninterest revenue
12,355
9,988
11,916
2,586
2,481
2,289
2,348
2,263
2,531
equity-related income(b)
(1
)
(2
)
(8
)
intersegment revenue(c)
(191
)
(130
)
(139
)
total operating revenue
14,440
12,498
14,747
3,992
3,892
3,802
2,878
2,839
3,189
total operating expense
8,470
8,012
8,789
3,217
2,994
2,961
2,428
2,346
2,566
operating margin
5,970
4,486
5,958
credit costs
(181
)
2,393
1,160
corporate credit allocation(d)
(36
)
(82
)
(94
)
operating earnings (loss)before taxes
6,115
2,011
4,704
income taxes (benefit)
2,430
1,847
operating earnings (loss)
3,685
1,303
2,857
merger and restructuring costs
and special items(e)
pre-sfas 142 goodwill amortization(e)
net income (loss)
$
3,685
$
1,303
$
2,857
$
$
$
$
$
$
average allocated capital
$
19,134
$
19,915
$
20,286
$
2,711
$
2,688
$
2,859
$
5,454
$
5,643
$
5,781
average managed assets(f)
510,894
495,464
510,676
18,993
17,780
18,552
33,685
35,729
36,896
shareholder value added
1,368
(1,109
)
(394
)
(423
)
(344
)
return on allocated capital
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
overhead ratio
(a)
corporate/reconciling items includes support units
and corporate and the net effect of management
accounting policies.
(b)
equity-related income
includes equity income of investees accounted for by
the equity method.
(c)
intersegment revenue includes intercompany revenue and revenue-sharing
agreements, net of intersegment expenses. transactions between business
segments are primarily conducted at fair value.
(d)
represents an allocation of pre-tax earnings related to certain
credit exposures managed within ibs credit portfolio on behalf of
clients shared with tss.
(e)
represents the after-tax amounts.
(f)
includes credit card receivables that have been securitized. the impact of
securitizations on total average assets was $32.4billion in 2003, $26.5
billion in 2002 and $18.0billion in 2001.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
expected components of the
allowance for credit losses. the residual
component of the allowance for credit
losses, available for losses in any
business segment, is maintained at the
corporate level.
a summary of the business segment results
is shown in the following table. the
corporate/reconciling items column
reflects revenue and expense excluded from
the determination of the segments
operating earnings. this column includes
the accounting effects remaining at the
corporate level after the
application of management accounting
policies, including income tax expenses
(the difference between the amounts
allocated to business units and jpmorgan
chases consolidated income tax expense).
for a further discussion concerning
jpmorgan chases business segments, see
segment results in the md&a on pages 27-44
of this annual report. additionally,
financial information relating to jpmorgan
chases operations by geographic area is
provided in note 32 on page 124 of this
annual report.
(table continued from previous page)
corporate/
jpmorgan partners
chase financial services
reconciling items(a)
total
$
(264
)
$
(302
)
$
(302
)
$
9,620
$
8,225
$
6,765
$
(522
)
$
(416
)
$
(446
)
$
12,797
$
11,819
$
10,846
(658
)
(1,151
)
5,000
5,198
4,072
(132
)
(112
)
(146
)
22,227
19,160
19,511
(2
)
(1
)
(2
)
(14
)
(9
)
(10
)
(7
)
(72
)
(162
)
(165
)
(190
)
(976
)
(1,463
)
14,632
13,426
10,828
(626
)
(626
)
(711
)
35,126
31,053
30,392
7,264
6,578
5,693
(73
)
21,688
20,156
20,488
(465
)
(1,275
)
(1,757
)
7,368
6,848
5,135
(660
)
(553
)
(896
)
13,438
10,897
9,904
3,431
3,159
2,874
3,410
5,770
4,230
(465
)
(1,275
)
(1,757
)
3,937
3,689
2,261
(784
)
(685
)
(1,049
)
10,028
5,127
5,674
(172
)
(467
)
(641
)
1,442
1,369
(828
)
(372
)
(745
)
3,309
1,743
1,872
(293
)
(808
)
(1,116
)
2,495
2,320
1,414
(313
)
(304
)
6,719
3,384
3,802
na
(1,721
)
(1,715
)
na
(1,721
)
(1,715
)
na
na
(393
)
na
na
(393
)
$
(293
)
$
(808
)
$
(1,116
)
$
2,495
$
2,320
$
1,414
$
$
(2,034
)
$
(2,412
)
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,789
$
6,293
$
7,557
$
8,750
$
8,612
$
7,733
$
1,150
$
(1,783
)
$
(2,692
)
$
42,988
$
41,368
$
41,524
8,818
9,677
11,698
215,216
179,635
162,980
20,737
21,591
13,146
808,343
759,876
753,948
(1,169
)
(1,759
)
(2,262
)
1,434
1,276
1,509
(1,631
)
(1,247
)
nm
nm
nm
%
%
%
nm
nm
nm
%
%
%
nm
nm
nm
nm
nm
nm
the tables below present reconciliations of the combined segment information
included in the preceding table to jpmorgan chases reported revenue and net
income as included in the consolidated statement of income on page 82 of this
annual report.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
segments operating revenue
$
35,752
$
31,679
$
31,103
corporate / reconciling items
(626
)
(626
)
(711
)
consolidated operating revenue
35,126
31,053
30,392
impact of securitizations
(1,870
)
(1,439
)
(1,048
)
consolidated revenue
$
33,256
$
29,614
$
29,344
year ended december 31, (in millions)
segments operating earnings
$
6,675
$
3,697
$
4,106
corporate / reconciling items
(313
)
(304
)
consolidated operating earnings
6,719
3,384
3,802
merger and restructuring costs and
special items(a)
na
(1,721
)
(1,715
)
pre-sfas 142 goodwill amortization(a)
na
na
(393
)
consolidated net income
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
(a)
represents the after-tax amounts.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
supplementary information
selected quarterly financial data
(unaudited)
as of or for the period ended
(in millions, except per share and ratio data)
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
reported basis
revenue
$
8,068
$
7,748
$
9,034
$
8,406
$
7,495
$
6,947
$
7,574
$
7,598
noninterest expense
(excluding merger and restructuring costs)
5,220
5,095
5,832
5,541
6,768
(a)
4,718
4,965
5,103
merger and restructuring costs
provision for credit losses
1,836
income tax expense (benefit)
(200
)
net income (loss)
$
1,864
$
1,628
$
1,827
$
1,400
$
(387
)
$
$
1,028
$
per common share:
net income (loss)per share:
basic
$
0.92
$
0.80
$
0.90
$
0.69
$
(0.20
)
$
0.01
$
0.51
$
0.49
diluted
0.89
0.78
0.89
0.69
(0.20
)
0.01
0.50
0.48
cash dividends declared
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
book value at period-end
22.10
21.55
21.53
20.73
20.66
21.26
20.93
20.16
performance ratios:
return on average assets
0.95
%
0.83
%
0.96
%
0.73
%
nm
0.02
%
0.56
%
0.55
%
return on average common equity
nm
nm
capital ratios:
tier 1 capital ratio
8.5
%
8.7
%
8.4
%
8.4
%
8.2
%
8.7
%
8.8
%
8.6
%
total capital ratio
11.8
12.1
12.0
12.2
12.0
12.4
12.7
12.5
tier 1 leverage ratio
5.6
5.5
5.5
5.0
5.1
5.4
5.4
5.4
selected balance sheet items:
net loans
$
214,995
$
231,448
$
222,307
$
212,256
$
211,014
$
206,215
$
207,080
$
209,541
total assets
770,912
792,700
802,603
755,156
758,800
741,759
740,546
712,508
deposits
326,492
313,626
318,248
300,667
304,753
292,171
293,829
282,037
long-term debt(b)
54,782
50,661
49,918
48,290
45,190
44,552
47,802
42,761
common stockholders equity
45,145
43,948
43,812
42,075
41,297
42,428
41,727
40,122
total stockholders equity
46,154
44,957
44,821
43,084
42,306
43,437
42,736
41,131
share price(c)
high
$
36.99
$
38.26
$
36.52
$
28.29
$
26.14
$
33.68
$
38.75
$
39.68
low
34.45
32.40
23.75
20.13
15.26
17.86
30.15
26.70
close
36.73
34.33
34.18
23.71
24.00
18.99
33.92
35.65
operating basis(d)
revenue
$
8,530
$
8,219
$
9,514
$
8,863
$
7,925
$
7,301
$
7,908
$
7,919
expense
5,220
5,095
5,832
5,541
5,468
4,620
4,965
5,103
operating margin
3,310
3,124
3,682
3,322
2,457
2,681
2,943
2,816
credit costs
1,200
1,351
2,190
1,155
1,074
earnings
$
1,864
$
1,628
$
1,827
$
1,400
$
$
$
1,179
$
1,150
operating performance:
shareholder value added
$
$
$
$
$
(551
)
$
(964
)
$
(57
)
$
(59
)
return on average common equity
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
overhead ratio
common dividend payout ratio
(a)
includes a $1.3billion charge in connection with the settlement of the
enron-related surety litigation and the establishment of a reserve related to
certain material litigations, proceedings and investigations.
(b)
includes
junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures held by trusts that issued
guaranteed capital debt securities and guaranteed preferred beneficial
interests in capital debt securities issued by consolidated trusts. excludes
$2.4billion and $3.1billion of fin 46 long-term beneficial interests at
december31, 2003 and september30, 2003, respectively, included in beneficial
interests issued by consolidated variable interest entities on the consolidated
balance sheet.
(c)
jpmorgan chases common stock is listed and traded on the new york stock
exchange, the london stock exchange limited and the tokyo stock exchange. the
high, low and closing prices of jpmorgan chases common stock are from the new
york stock exchange composite transaction tape.
(d)
includes credit card receivables that had been securitized. amounts shown
in 2002 exclude merger and restructuring costs, and special items. for a
description of special items, see glossary of terms on page 131 of this annual
report.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
five-year summary of financial highlights
j.p. morgan chase & co.
(unaudited)
as of or for the year ended december 31,
(in millions, except per share and ratio data)
reported basis
revenue
$
33,256
$
29,614
$
29,344
$
33,186
$
31,146
noninterest expense
(excluding merger and restructuring costs)
21,688
21,554
(a)
21,073
21,642
18,188
merger and restructuring costs
1,210
2,523
1,431
provision for credit losses
1,540
4,331
3,182
1,380
1,446
income tax expense
3,309
3,006
3,988
income before effect of accounting change
6,719
1,663
1,719
5,727
7,501
net effect of change in accounting principle
(25
)
net income
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
$
7,501
per common share:
net income per share
basic
$
3.32
$
0.81
$
0.83
(e)
$
2.99
$
3.87
diluted
3.24
0.80
0.80
(e)
2.86
3.69
cash dividends declared
1.36
1.36
1.36
1.28
1.08
book value at december 31
22.10
20.66
20.32
21.17
18.07
performance ratios:
return on average assets
0.87
%
0.23
%
0.23
%
0.85
%
1.19
%
return on average common equity
capital ratios:
tier 1 capital ratio
8.5
%
8.2
%
8.3
%
8.5
%
8.5
%
total capital ratio
11.8
12.0
11.9
12.0
12.3
tier 1 leverage ratio
5.6
5.1
5.2
5.4
5.9
selected balance sheet items:
net loans
$
214,995
$
211,014
$
212,920
$
212,385
$
199,270
total assets
770,912
758,800
693,575
715,348
667,003
deposits
326,492
304,753
293,650
279,365
287,064
long-term
debt(b)
54,782
45,190
43,622
47,238
45,540
common stockholders equity
45,145
41,297
40,090
40,818
33,434
total stockholders equity
46,154
42,306
41,099
42,338
35,056
share price(c)
high
$
38.26
$
39.68
$
59.19
$
67.17
$
60.75
low
20.13
15.26
29.04
32.38
43.88
close
36.73
24.00
36.35
45.44
51.79
operating
basis(d)
revenue
$
35,126
$
31,053
$
30,392
$
33,045
$
31,911
expense
21,688
20,156
20,488
21,258
17,903
operating margin
13,438
10,897
9,904
11,787
14,008
credit costs
3,410
5,770
4,230
2,370
2,439
earnings
$
6,719
$
3,384
$
3,802
$
6,176
$
7,554
operating performance:
shareholder value added
$
1,509
$
(1,631
)
$
(1,247
)
$
1,739
$
3,496
return on average common equity
%
%
%
%
%
overhead ratio
common dividend payout ratio
(a)
includes a $1.3billion charge in connection with the settlement of the
enron-related surety litigation and the establishment of a reserve related to
certain material litigations, proceedings and investigations.
(b)
includes
junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures held by trusts that issued
guaranteed capital debt securities and guaranteed preferred beneficial
interests in capital debt securities issued by consolidated trusts. excludes
$2.4billion of fin 46 long-term beneficial interests at december31, 2003
included in beneficial interests issued by consolidated variable interest
entities on the consolidated balance sheet.
(c)
jpmorgan chases common stock is listed and traded on the new york stock
exchange, the london stock exchange limited and the tokyo stock exchange. the
high, low and closing prices of jpmorgan chases common stock are from the new
york stock exchange composite transaction tape. share-related data have been
restated to reflect a three-for-two stock split effective as of the close of
business on june9, 2000.
(d)
includes credit card receivables that had been
securitized. amounts shown prior to 2003 exclude merger and restructuring
costs, and special items. for a reconciliation from reported results to
operating basis, see page 28 of this annual report. for a description of
special items, see glossary of terms on page 131 of this annual report.
(e)
basic and diluted earnings per share have been reduced by $0.01 in 2001
because of the impact of the adoption of sfas 133 relating to the accounting
for derivative instruments and hedging activities.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
glossary of terms
j.p. morgan chase & co.
aicpa: american institute of certified public accountants.
apb: accounting principles board opinion.
apb 25: accounting for stock issued to employees.
asset capital tax: capital allocated to
each business segment based on its
average asset level and certain
off-balance sheet credit-related
exposures; reflects the need for the firm
to maintain minimum leverage ratios to
meet bank regulatory definitions of well
capitalized.
assets under management: represent assets
managed by investment management & private
banking on behalf of institutional, retail
and private banking clients.
assets under supervision: represent assets
under management as well as custody,
brokerage, administration and deposit
accounts.
average allocated capital: represents the
portion of average common stockholders
equity allocated to the business segments,
based on their respective risks. the total
average allocated capital of all business
segments equals the total average common
stockholders equity of the firm.
average managed assets: includes credit
card receivables that have been
securitized.
basis point value (bpv): this
measurement quantifies the change in the
market value of assets and liabilities
(that are not part of trading activities)
that would result from a one-basis-point
change in interest rates or a
one-basis-point widening of interest rate
spreads. bpv shows whether an increase of
1/100 of 1% (or one basis point) in a
market rate will yield a profit or loss,
and of what magnitude.
bp: denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
credit derivatives are contractual
agreements that provide protection against
a credit event of one or more referenced
credits. the nature of a credit event is
established by the protection buyer and
protection seller at the inception of a
transaction, and such events include
bankruptcy, insolvency and failure to meet
payment
obligations when due. the buyer of the
credit derivative pays a periodic fee in
return for a payment by the protection
seller upon the occurrence, if any, of a
credit event.
credit risk: risk of loss from obligor or counterparty default.
criticized: an indication of credit
quality based on jpmorgan chases internal
risk assessment system. criticized
assets generally represent a risk profile
similar to a rating of a ccc+/caa1 or
lower, as defined by the independent
rating agencies.
cross-currency interest rate swaps are
contracts that involve the exchange of
both interest and principal amounts in two
different currencies. also see interest
rate swaps in this glossary.
eitf: emerging issues task force.
eitf issue 02-3: issues involved in
accounting for derivative
contracts held for trading purposes and
contracts involved in energy trading and
risk management activities.
eitf issue 03-1: the meaning of
other-than-temporary impairment and
its application to certain
investments.
fasb: financial accounting standards board.
fin 39: fasb interpretation no.39,
offsetting of amounts related to
certain contracts.
fin 41: fasb interpretation no.41,
offsetting of amounts related to certain
repurchase and reverse repurchase
agreements.
fin 45: fasb interpretation no.45,
guarantors accounting and disclosure
requirement for guarantees, including
indirect guarantees of indebtedness of
others.
fin 46: fasb interpretation no.46,
consolidation of variable interest
entities, an interpretation of accounting
research bulletin no.51.
fsp sfas 106-1: fasb staff position no.
sfas106-1, accounting and disclosure
requirements related to the medicare
prescription drug, improvement and
modernization act of 2003.
foreign exchange contracts are contracts
that provide for the future receipt and
delivery of foreign currency at
previously agreed-upon terms.
interest rate options, including caps and
floors, are contracts to modify interest
rate risk in exchange for the payment of a
premium when the contract is initiated. a
writer of interest rate options receives a
premium in exchange for bearing the risk of
unfavorable changes in interest rates.
conversely, a purchaser of an option pays a
premium for the right, but not the
obligation, to buy or sell a financial
instrument or currency at predetermined
terms in the future.
interest rate swaps are contracts in which
a series of interest rate payments in a
single currency are exchanged over a
prescribed period. an example of a
situation in which an interest rate swap
would be used would be to convert
fixed-rate debt to a variable rate. by
entering into the swap, the principal
amount of the debt would remain unchanged,
but the interest streams would change from
fixed to variable.
investment-grade: an indication of credit
quality based on jpmorgan chases internal
risk assessment system. investment-grade
generally represents a risk profile
similar to a rating of a bbb-/baa3 or
better, as defined by independent rating
agencies.
liquidity risk: the risk of being unable
to fund a portfolio of assets at
appropriate maturities and rates, and the
risk of being unable to liquidate a
position in a timely manner at a
reasonable price.
managed credit card receivables or
managed basis: refers to credit card
receivables on the firms balance sheet
plus credit card receivables that have
been securitized.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
mark-to-market exposure: mark-to-market
exposure is a measure, at a point in
time, of the value of a derivative or
foreign exchange contract in the open
market. when the mark-to-market value is
positive, it indicates the counterparty
owes jpmorgan chase and, therefore,
creates a repayment risk for the firm. when
the mark-to-market value is negative,
jpmorgan chase owes the counterparty. in
this situation, the firm does not have
repayment risk.
market risk: the potential loss in value
of portfolios and financial instruments
caused by movements in market variables,
such as interest and foreign exchange
rates, credit spreads, and equity and
commodity prices.
master netting agreement: an agreement
between two counterparties that have
multiple derivative contracts with each
other that provides for the net
settlement of all contracts through a
single payment, in a single currency, in
the event of default on or termination of
any one contract. see fin 39.
na: not applicable.
net yield on interest-earning assets: the
average rate for interest-earning assets
less the average rate paid for all
sources of funds.
nm: not meaningful.
operating basis or operating earnings:
reported results excluding the impact of
credit card securitizations and, prior to 2003,
merger and restructuring costs and special
items.
operational risk: the risk of loss
resulting from inadequate or failed
processes or systems, human factors or
external events.
overhead ratio: operating expense
(excluding merger and
restructuring costs and special items) as
a percentage of operating revenue.
return on tangible allocated capital:
operating earnings less preferred
dividends as a percentage of average
allocated capital, excluding the impact
of goodwill.
sfas: statement of financial accounting standards.
sfas 87: employers accounting for pensions.
sfas 88: employers accounting for
settlements and curtailments of
defined benefit pension plans and
for termination benefits.
sfas 106: employers accounting for
postretirement benefits other than
pensions.
sfas 107: disclosures about fair
value of financial instruments.
sfas 109: accounting for income taxes.
sfas 114:
accounting by creditors for impairment of a loan.
sfas 115: accounting for certain
investments in debt and equity
securities.
sfas 121: accounting for the
impairment of long-lived assets and
for long-lived assets to be disposed
of.
sfas 123: accounting for stock-based compensation.
sfas 128: earnings per share.
sfas 133: accounting for derivative
instruments and hedging activities.
sfas 140: accounting for transfers and
servicing of financial assets and
extinguishments of liabilities  a
replacement of fasb statement no.125.
sfas 141: business combinations.
sfas 142: goodwill and other intangible assets.
sfas 144: accounting for the impairment
or disposal of long-lived assets.
sfas 146: accounting for costs
associated with exit or disposal
activities.
sfas 149: amendment of statement no.
133 on derivative instruments and
hedging activities.
sfas 150: accounting for certain
financial instruments with
characteristics of both liabilities and
equity.
shareholder value added (sva):
represents operating earnings minus
preferred dividends and an explicit charge
for capital.
six sigma: represents a business
management approach that enables firms to
improve the quality of products and
services delivered to clients through
understanding client priorities, and then
eliminating process defects and failures.
sigmas (or standard deviations) are
statistical measures of the defects or
failures generated by a business process.
special items: all amounts are on a
pre-tax basis unless otherwise noted.
there were no special items in 2003.
special items in 2002 included a $1.3
billion charge for the settlement of the
enron surety litigation and the
establishment of a litigation reserve, and
a $98million charge for excess real
estate capacity related to facilities in
the west coast of the united states.
special items in 2001 included a $25
million loss (after-tax) from the
cumulative effect of a transition
adjustment related to the adoption of sfas
133. special items in 2000 included an
$827million gain on the sale of the hong
kong retail banking business, a $399
million gain from the transfer of
euroclear-related business, an $81million
gain from the sale of the panama
operations and a $176million loss
resulting from the economic hedge of the
purchase price of flemings prior to its
acquisition. special items in 1999 were
interest income of $62million from prior
years tax refunds, gains of $166million
from sales of non-strategic assets and a $100
million special contribution to the chase
manhattan foundation.
stress testing: a scenario that
measures market risk under unlikely but
plausible events in abnormal markets.
tangible shareholder
value added: sva less the impact of goodwill on operating
earnings and capital charges.
value-at-risk (var): a measure of the
dollar amount of potential loss from
adverse market moves in an ordinary market
environment.
j.p. morgan chase & co. / 2003 annual report
table of contents
distribution of assets, liabilities and stockholders equity;
interest rates and interest differentials
consolidated average balance sheet, interest and rates
provided below is a summary of jpmorgan
chases consolidated average balances,
interest rates and interest differentials
on a taxable-equivalent basis for the
years 2001 through 2003. income computed
on a taxable-equivalent basis is the
income reported in the consolidated
statement of income, adjusted to
make income and earnings yields on assets
exempt from income taxes (primarily
federal taxes) comparable with other
taxable income. the incremental tax rate
used for calculating the
taxable-equivalent adjustment was
approximately 41% in each of the years 2003,
2002 and 2001. a substantial portion of
jpmorgan chases securities is taxable.
(table continued on next page)
year ended december 31,
average
average
(taxable-equivalent interest and rates; in millions, except rates)
balance
interest
rate
assets
deposits with banks
$
9,742
$
2.20
%
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
87,273
1,497
1.72
securities borrowed
40,305
0.80
trading assets  debt and equity instruments
148,970
6,608
4.44
securities:
available-for-sale
77,156
3,553
4.60
(a)
held-to-maturity
7.19
loans
226,106
11,288
(b)
4.99
total interest-earning assets
589,838
23,504
3.98
allowance for loan losses
(5,161
)
cash and due from banks
17,951
trading assets  derivative receivables
85,628
all other assets
87,722
total assets
$
775,978
liabilities
interest-bearing deposits
$
227,645
$
3,604
1.58
%
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
161,020
2,199
1.37
commercial paper
13,387
1.13
other borrowings(d)
69,703
3,549
5.09
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies(e)
9,421
1.13
long-term debt
49,095
1,498
3.05
total interest-bearing liabilities
530,271
11,107
2.09
noninterest-bearing deposits
77,640
trading liabilities  derivative payables
67,783
all other liabilities, including the allowance for lending-related commitments
56,287
total liabilities
731,981
preferred stock of subsidiary
stockholders equity
preferred stock
1,009
common stockholders equity
42,988
total stockholders equity
43,997
(f)
total liabilities, preferred stock of subsidiary and stockholders equity
$
775,978
interest rate spread
1.89
%
net interest income and net yield on interest-earning assets
$
12,397
2.10
note: the weighted-average interest rates reflect the impact of local
interest rates prevailing in certain latin american countries with highly
inflationary economies.
(a)
the annualized rate for available-for-sale securities based on amortized cost was 4.63% in 2003, 5.13% in 2002 and 5.57% in 2001.
(b)
fees and commissions on loans included in loan interest amounted to $276million in 2003, $276million in 2002 and $210million in 2001.
(c)
includes $84million in 2001 of interest income resulting from the refund of prior-years taxes. excluding this amount, the net yield on interest-earning assets would be 1.97% in 2001.
(d)
includes securities sold but not yet purchased.
(e)
not applicable for years prior to 2003 since the firm adopted fin 46 during 2003.
(f)
the ratio of average stockholders equity to average assets was 5.7% for 2003, 5.8% for 2002 and 5.8% for 2001. the return on average stockholders equity was 15.3% for 2003, 3.9% for 2002 and 4.0% for 2001.
table of contents
within the consolidated average balance
sheet, interest and rates summary, the
principal amounts of nonaccrual loans
have been included in the average loan
balances used to determine
the average interest rate earned on
loans. for additional information on
nonaccrual loans, including interest
accrued, see note 11 on pages 98 and 99.
(continuation of table)
average
average
average
average
balance
interest
rate
balance
interest
rate
$
11,945
$
2.54
%
$
9,119
$
4.96
%
84,194
2,078
2.47
83,841
3,805
4.54
42,703
1.59
38,156
1,343
3.52
137,272
6,814
4.96
129,578
7,391
5.70
66,619
3,389
5.09
(a)
66,062
3,691
5.59
(a)
6.45
6.67
211,432
12,068
(b)
5.71
219,843
15,548
(b)
7.07
554,611
25,362
4.57
547,125
32,265
5.90
(5,178
)
(3,862
)
18,850
20,928
73,641
78,461
91,433
93,321
$
733,357
$
735,973
$
217,417
$
5,253
2.42
%
$
215,865
$
7,998
(c)
3.70
%
(c)
168,428
3,313
1.97
163,858
6,655
4.06
16,134
1.74
18,561
4.03
69,393
3,444
4.96
64,029
3,694
5.77
na
na
na
na
na
na
43,927
1,467
3.34
45,583
2,283
5.01
515,299
13,758
2.67
507,896
21,379
4.21
69,999
60,983
57,607
69,676
47,988
54,158
690,893
692,713
1,009
1,186
41,368
41,524
42,377
(f)
42,710
(f)
$
733,357
$
735,973
1.90
%
1.69
%
$
11,604
2.09
$
10,886
1.99
(c)
table of contents
interest rates and interest differential analysis of net interest income
u.s. and non-u.s.
presented below is a summary of interest
rates and interest differentials
segregated between u.s. and non-u.s.
operations for the years 2001 through
2003. the segregation of u.s. and
non-u.s. components is based on the
location of the office
recording the transaction. intracompany
funding generally comprises
dollar-denominated deposits originated in
various locations that are centrally
managed by jpmorgan chases treasury
units. u.s. net interest income was
$10.5billion in 2003, an increase of
$1.6billion from the prior year. the
(table continued on next page)
year ended december 31,
average
average
(taxable-equivalent interest and rates; in millions, except rates)
balance
interest
rate
interest-earning assets:
deposits with banks, primarily non-u.s.
$
9,742
$
2.20
%
federal funds sold and securities purchased
under resale agreements:
u.s.
61,925
1.59
non-u.s.
25,348
2.01
securities borrowed, primarily u.s.
40,305
0.80
trading assets  debt and equity instruments:
u.s.
86,234
4,013
4.65
non-u.s.
62,736
2,595
4.14
securities:
u.s.
67,024
3,184
4.75
non-u.s.
10,418
3.75
loans:
u.s.
194,051
9,088
4.68
non-u.s.
32,055
2,200
6.86
total interest-earning assets
589,838
23,504
3.98
interest-bearing liabilities:
interest-bearing deposits:
u.s.
117,035
1,688
1.44
non-u.s.
110,610
1,916
1.73
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements:
u.s.
129,715
1,599
1.23
non-u.s.
31,305
1.92
other borrowed funds:
u.s.
59,249
2,351
3.97
non-u.s.
23,841
1,349
5.66
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies, primarily u.s.(b)
9,421
1.13
long-term debt, primarily u.s.
49,095
1,498
3.05
intracompany funding:
u.s.
44,856
non-u.s.
(44,856
)
(946
)
total interest-bearing liabilities
530,271
11,107
2.09
noninterest-bearing liabilities(c)
59,567
total investable funds
$
589,838
$
11,107
1.89
%
net interest income and net yield:
$
12,397
2.10
%
u.s.
10,512
2.40
non-u.s.
1,885
1.24
percentage of total assets and liabilities attributable
to non-u.s. operations:
assets
30.7
liabilities
35.5
(a)
see note (c)on page 132. excluding the tax refund, the u.s. net yield on interest-earning assets would be 2.10% in 2001.
(b)
not applicable for years prior to 2003 since the firm adopted fin 46 during 2003.
(c)
represents the amount of noninterest-bearing liabilities funding interest-earning assets.
table of contents
increase primarily was attributable to higher volume of consumer loans,
primarily mortgage and automobile loans. net interest income from non-u.s.
operations was $1.9billion for
2003, compared with
$2.7billion in
2002. the decrease reflects declining
spreads.
for further discussion, see the section
entitled net interest income in the
md&a on page 25.
(continuation of table)
average
average
average
average
balance
interest
rate
balance
interest
rate
$
11,945
$
2.54
%
$
9,119
$
4.96
%
60,176
1,302
2.16
53,783
2,279
4.24
24,018
3.23
30,058
1,526
5.08
42,703
1.59
38,156
1,343
3.52
81,202
4,397
5.42
83,908
5,268
6.28
56,070
2,417
4.31
45,670
2,123
4.65
53,745
2,913
5.42
52,636
3,137
5.96
13,320
3.79
13,952
4.22
174,359
9,627
5.52
179,912
12,379
6.88
37,073
2,441
6.58
39,931
3,169
7.94
554,611
25,362
4.57
547,125
32,265
5.90
107,823
2,412
2.24
93,589
3,080
(a)
3.29
(a)
109,594
2,841
2.59
122,276
4,918
4.02
131,213
2,800
2.13
129,400
5,333
4.12
37,215
1.38
34,458
1,322
3.84
58,533
2,490
4.25
55,770
3,202
5.74
26,994
1,235
4.58
26,820
1,241
4.63
na
na
na
na
na
na
43,927
1,467
3.34
45,583
2,283
5.01
68,736
1,758
52,418
1,988
(68,736
)
(1,758
)
(52,418
)
(1,988
)
515,299
13,758
2.67
507,896
21,379
4.21
39,312
39,229
$
554,611
$
13,758
2.48
%
$
547,125
$
21,379
3.91
%
$
11,604
2.09
%
$
10,886
1.99
%
(a)
8,912
2.25
8,432
2.12
(a)
2,692
1.69
2,454
1.64
31.7
31.4
34.9
38.0
table of contents
changes in net interest income, volume and rate analysis
the table below presents an analysis of the effect on net interest income of
volume and rate changes for the periods 2003 versus 2002 and 2002 versus 2001.
in this analysis, the change due to the volume/rate variance has been allocated
to volume.
2003 versus 2002
2002 versus 2001
(on a taxable-equivalent basis;
increase (decrease) due to change in:
net
increase (decrease) due to change in:
net
in millions)
volume
rate
change
volume
rate
change
interest-earning assets
deposits with banks, primarily non-u.s.
$
(48
)
$
(41
)
$
(89
)
$
$
(221
)
$
(149
)
federal funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements:
u.s.
(343
)
(314
)
(1,119
)
(977
)
non-u.s.
(293
)
(267
)
(194
)
(556
)
(750
)
securities borrowed, primarily u.s.
(21
)
(337
)
(358
)
(736
)
(662
)
trading assets  debt and equity instruments:
u.s.
(625
)
(384
)
(157
)
(714
)
(871
)
non-u.s.
(95
)
(155
)
securities:
u.s.
(360
)
(284
)
(224
)
non-u.s.
(110
)
(5
)
(115
)
(24
)
(60
)
(84
)
loans:
u.s.
(1,465
)
(539
)
(305
)
(2,447
)
(2,752
)
non-u.s.
(345
)
(241
)
(185
)
(543
)
(728
)
change in interest income
1,602
(3,460
)
(1,858
)
(68
)
(6,835
)
(6,903
)
interest-bearing liabilities
interest-bearing deposits:
u.s.
(863
)
(724
)
(983
)
(668
)
non-u.s.
(943
)
(925
)
(328
)
(1,749
)
(2,077
)
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements:
u.s.
(20
)
(1,181
)
(1,201
)
(2,575
)
(2,533
)
non-u.s.
(114
)
(848
)
(809
)
other borrowed funds:
u.s.
(164
)
(139
)
(831
)
(712
)
non-u.s.
(178
)
(13
)
(6
)
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies,
primarily u.s.(a)
na
na
na
long-term debt, primarily u.s.
(127
)
(55
)
(761
)
(816
)
intracompany funding:
u.s.
(503
)
(309
)
(812
)
(645
)
(230
)
non-u.s.
(415
)
change in interest expense
(2,785
)
(2,651
)
(7,760
)
(7,621
)
change in net interest income
$
1,468
$
(675
)
$
$
(207
)
$
$
(a)
not applicable for years prior to 2003 since the firm adopted fin 46 during 2003.
table of contents
securities portfolio
the table below presents the amortized cost, estimated fair value and average
yield (including the impact of related derivatives) of jpmorgan chases
securities by contractual maturity range and type of security.
maturity schedule of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities
due in 1
due after 1
due after 5
due after
december 31, 2003 (in millions, rates on a taxable-equivalent basis)
year or less
through 5 years
through 10 years
10 years(a)
total
u.s. government and federal
agency/corporation obligations:
amortized cost
$
1,565
$
5,146
$
4,265
$
34,714
$
45,690
fair value
1,557
5,105
4,190
34,372
45,224
average yield(b)
1.07
%
3.10
%
4.02
%
4.88
%
4.47
%
other:(c)
amortized cost
$
3,334
$
4,066
$
3,574
$
3,758
$
14,732
fair value
3,343
4,070
3,625
3,806
14,844
average yield(b)
2.28
%
3.61
%
4.41
%
4.39
%
3.70
%
total available-for-sale securities:(d)
amortized cost
$
4,899
$
9,212
$
7,839
$
38,472
$
60,422
fair value
4,900
9,175
7,815
38,178
60,068
average yield(b)
1.89
%
3.33
%
4.20
%
4.83
%
4.28
%
total held-to-maturity securities:(d)
amortized cost
$
$
$
$
$
fair value
average yield(b)
%
%
7.32
%
6.91
%
6.92
%
(a)
securities with no stated maturity are included with securities with a
contractual maturity of 10years or more. substantially all of jpmorgan chases
mortgaged-backed securities (mbss) and collateralized mortgage obligations
(cmos) are due in 10years or more based on contractual maturity. the
estimated duration, which reflects anticipated future prepayments based on a
consensus of dealers in the market, is approximately five years for mbss and
cmos.
(b)
the average yield is based on amortized cost balances at the end of the
year. yields are derived by dividing interest income (including the effect of
related derivatives on available-for-sale securities and the amortization of
premiums and accretion of discounts) by total amortized cost.
taxable-equivalent yields are used where applicable.
(c)
includes obligations of state and political subdivisions, debt securities
issued by non-u.s. governments, corporate debt securities, cmos of private
issuers and other debt and equity securities.
(d)
for the amortized cost of the
above categories of securities at december31, 2002, see note 9 on page 96. at
december31, 2001, the amortized cost of u.s. government and federal agencies
and other available-for-sale securities was $42,474million and $17,060
million, respectively. at december31, 2001, the amortized cost of u.s.
government and federal agencies held-to-maturity securities was $476million.
there were no other held-to-maturity securities at december31, 2001.
the u.s. government and certain of its
agencies were the only issuers whose
securities exceeded 10% of jpmorgan
chases total stockholders equity at
december31, 2003.
for a further discussion of jpmorgan
chases securities portfolios, see note 9
on pages96-97.
table of contents
loan portfolio
the table below sets forth the amounts of loans outstanding by type:
december 31, (in millions)
u.s. loans:
commercial and industrial
$
43,631
$
49,205
$
56,680
$
64,031
$
58,563
commercial real estate  commercial mortgage
3,182
3,176
3,533
4,109
5,207
commercial real estate  construction
financial institutions
4,622
3,770
5,608
7,342
6,623
consumer
136,393
124,687
111,850
95,960
85,289
total u.s. loans
188,417
181,354
178,286
172,167
156,482
non-u.s. loans:
commercial and industrial
24,618
31,446
33,530
37,002
38,067
commercial real estate
1,470
financial institutions
5,671
2,438
3,570
3,976
3,779
non-u.s. governments
1,161
1,517
consumer
2,801
total non-u.s. loans
31,101
35,010
39,158
43,883
46,526
total loans(a)
$
219,518
$
216,364
$
217,444
$
216,050
$
203,008
(a)
loans are presented net of unearned income of $1.29billion, $1.89billion,
$1.83billion, $1.57billion and $1.53billion at december31, 2003, 2002,
2001, 2000 and 1999, respectively. for a discussion of jpmorgan chases loan outstandings, see commercial and
consumer credit portfolio on pages 52 through 64.
maturities and sensitivity to changes in interest rates
the table below shows, at december31, 2003, commercial loan maturity and
distribution between fixed and floating interest rates based upon the stated
terms of the commercial loan agreements. the table does not include the impact
of derivative instruments.
within
1-5
after 5
december 31, 2003 (in millions)
1 year(a)
years
years
total
u.s.:
commercial and industrial
$
19,786
$
19,115
$
4,730
$
43,631
commercial real estate
1,239
1,956
3,771
financial institutions
4,146
4,622
non-u.s.
16,210
9,925
4,938
31,073
total commercial loans
$
40,718
$
30,747
$
11,632
$
83,097
loans at fixed interest rates
$
17,447
$
5,477
loans at variable interest rates
13,300
6,155
total commercial loans
$
30,747
$
11,632
(a)
includes demand loans, overdrafts and loans having no stated schedule of
repayments and no stated maturity.
table of contents
cross-border outstandings
cross-border disclosure is based upon the
federal financial institutions examination
councils (ffiec) guidelines governing
the determination of cross-border risk. in
accordance with ffiec revised guidelines,
credit derivatives were included in the
determination of cross-border exposure
beginning in 2001.
the following table lists all countries in
which jpmorgan chases cross-border
outstandings exceed 0.75% of consolidated
assets as of any of the dates specified.
the disclosure includes certain exposures
that are not required under the disclosure
requirements of the sec. the most
significant differences between the ffiec
and sec methodologies relate to the
treatments of local country exposure and
to foreign exchange and derivatives.
for a further discussion of jpmorgan
chases cross-border exposure based on
managements view of this exposure, see
page 58.
cross-border outstandings exceeding 0.75% of total assets
net local
total
total
country
direct
cross-border
(in millions)
at december 31,
governments
banks
other(a)
assets
exposure(b)
commitments(c)
exposure
germany
$
14,741
$
12,353
$
4,383
$
$
31,477
$
31,332
$
62,809
21,705
10,213
4,789
36,707
20,405
57,112
32,003
10,068
4,194
46,265
11,977
58,242
u.k.
$
1,111
$
3,758
$
11,839
$
$
16,708
$
35,983
$
52,691
1,386
7,821
12,191
21,398
20,416
41,814
1,380
1,980
7,590
10,950
14,360
25,310
france
$
2,311
$
3,788
$
6,070
$
$
12,768
$
22,385
$
35,153
5,212
6,461
3,136
15,793
14,902
30,695
5,621
3,792
3,743
13,156
9,044
22,200
netherlands
$
4,571
$
3,997
$
11,152
$
$
19,720
$
11,689
$
31,409
4,030
2,907
8,724
15,661
7,744
23,405
4,871
1,468
7,999
14,347
4,729
19,076
italy
$
9,336
$
3,743
$
2,570
$
$
16,467
$
10,738
$
27,205
7,340
3,604
2,489
13,921
6,001
19,922
11,323
2,147
3,722
1,492
18,684
4,901
23,585
japan
$
8,902
$
$
2,358
$
$
11,770
$
13,474
$
25,244
7,990
1,534
1,443
10,967
10,290
21,257
4,696
2,499
2,278
9,473
6,662
16,135
spain
$
1,365
$
1,909
$
2,964
$
$
6,238
$
7,301
$
13,539
2,293
1,501
1,987
6,440
5,613
12,053
2,860
1,869
1,670
6,953
3,453
10,406
switzerland
$
$
4,630
$
2,201
$
$
7,521
$
4,993
$
12,514
1,684
3,129
5,976
3,375
9,351
3,142
3,129
6,827
2,141
8,968
luxembourg
$
$
$
8,336
$
$
9,828
$
1,007
$
10,835
5,355
6,904
7,550
1,946
2,510
4,589
5,340
belgium
$
1,426
$
$
1,096
$
$
2,996
$
1,072
$
4,068
1,283
2,684
1,975
4,659
1,224
1,884
2,615
5,723
2,644
8,367
(a)
consists primarily of commercial and industrial.
(b)
exposure includes loans and accrued interest receivable, interest-bearing
deposits with banks, acceptances, resale agreements, other monetary assets,
cross-border trading debt and equity instruments, mark-to-market exposure of
foreign exchange and derivative contracts and local country assets, net of
local country liabilities. the amounts associated with foreign exchange and
derivative contracts are presented after taking into account the impact of
legally enforceable master netting agreements.
(c)
commitments include outstanding letters of credit, undrawn commitments to
extend credit and credit derivatives.
jpmorgan chases total cross-border exposure tends to fluctuate greatly, and
the amount of exposure at year-end tends to be a
function of timing rather than representing a consistent trend.
table of contents
risk elements
the following table sets forth nonperforming assets and contractually past-due
assets at the dates indicated:
december 31, (in millions)
nonperforming assets
u.s. nonperforming loans:(a)
commercial and industrial
$
1,060
$
1,769
$
1,186
$
$
commercial real estate
financial institutions
consumer
total u.s. nonperforming loans
1,582
2,578
1,770
1,198
non-u.s. nonperforming loans:(a)
commercial and industrial
1,566
commercial real estate
financial institutions
non-u.s. governments
consumer
total non-u.s. nonperforming loans
1,615
total nonperforming loans
2,509
4,193
2,496
1,818
1,737
derivative receivables
1,300
other receivables
assets acquired in loan satisfactions
total nonperforming assets
$
3,086
$
4,780
$
3,920
$
1,923
$
1,873
contractually past-due assets(b)
u.s. loans:
commercial and industrial
$
$
$
$
$
commercial real estate
consumer
total u.s. loans
non-u.s. loans
commercial and industrial
financial institutions
consumer
total non-u.s. loans
derivative receivables
total
$
$
$
$
$
(a)
all nonperforming loans accounted for on a nonaccrual basis. there were no
nonperforming renegotiated loans. renegotiated loans are those for which
concessions, such as the reduction of interest rates or the deferral of
interest or principal payments, have been granted as a result of a
deterioration in the borrowers financial condition.
(b)
accruing loans past-due 90days or more as to principal and interest, which
are not characterized as nonperforming loans.
for a discussion of nonperforming loan and past-due loan policies, see note 11
on pages 98-99.
impact of nonperforming loans on interest income
the negative impact on interest income from nonperforming loans represents the
difference between the amount of interest income that would have been recorded
on nonperforming loans according to contractual terms and the amount of
interest that actually was recognized on a cash basis. the following table sets
forth this data for the years specified. the decrease in 2003 in total negative
impact on interest income reflects a lower level of interest that was not
recognized in income due to the decreased level of nonperforming loans.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
u.s.:
gross amount of interest that would have been recorded at the original rate
$
$
$
interest that was recognized in income
(5
)
(24
)
(30
)
negative impact  u.s.
non-u.s.:
gross amount of interest that would have been recorded at the original rate
interest that was recognized in income
(3
)
negative impact  non-u.s.
total negative impact on interest income
$
$
$
table of contents
summary of loan and lending-related commitments loss experience
the tables below summarize the changes in the allowance for loan losses and
lending-related commitments, respectively, during the periods indicated. for a
further discussion, see note 12 on page 100.
allowance for loan losses
year ended december 31, (in millions)
balance at beginning of year
$
5,350
$
4,524
$
3,665
$
3,738
$
4,022
provision for loan losses
1,579
4,039
3,185
1,377
1,446
u.s. charge-offs
commercial and industrial
(668
)
(967
)
(852
)
(293
)
(262
)
commercial real estate
(2
)
(5
)
(7
)
(3
)
(2
)
financial institutions
(5
)
(19
)
(35
)
(28
)
(70
)
consumer
(1,646
)
(2,070
)
(1,485
)
(1,067
)
(1,253
)
total u.s. charge-offs
(2,321
)
(3,061
)
(2,379
)
(1,391
)
(1,587
)
non-u.s. charge-offs
commercial and industrial
(470
)
(955
)
(192
)
(208
)
(396
)
financial institutions
(26
)
(43
)
(1
)
(2
)
(9
)
non-u.s. governments
(9
)
(1
)
consumer
(1
)
(1
)
(1
)
(32
)
(42
)
total non-u.s. charge-offs
(497
)
(999
)
(203
)
(243
)
(447
)
total charge-offs
(2,818
)
(4,060
)
(2,582
)
(1,634
)
(2,034
)
u.s. recoveries
commercial and industrial
commercial real estate
financial institutions
consumer
total u.s. recoveries
non-u.s. recoveries
commercial and industrial
financial institutions
non-u.s. governments
consumer
total non-u.s. recoveries
total recoveries
net charge-offs
(2,272
)
(3,676
)
(2,335
)
(1,400
)
(1,747
)
transfer to other assets
(138
)
charge to conform to ffiec revised policy
(80
)
allowance related to purchased portfolios
other
(1
)
balance at year-end
$
4,523
$
5,350
$
4,524
$
3,665
$
3,738
allowance for lending-related commitments
year ended december31, (in millions)
balance at beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
provision for lending-related commitments
(39
)
(3
)
u.s. charge-offs  commercial and industrial
(212
)
non-u.s. charge-offs  commercial and industrial
(15
)
total charge-offs
(212
)
(15
)
non-u.s. recoveries  commercial and industrial
total recoveries
net charge-offs
(212
)
(15
)
other
(1
)
balance at year-end
$
$
$
$
$
table of contents
loan loss analysis
year ended december 31, (in millions, except ratios)
balances
loans  average
$
226,106
$
211,432
$
219,843
$
209,488
$
199,912
loans  year-end
219,518
216,364
217,444
216,050
203,008
net charge-offs
2,272
3,676
2,335
1,480
(a)
1,747
allowance for loan losses:
u.s.
3,677
4,122
3,743
3,006
2,813
non-u.s.
1,228
total allowance for loan losses
4,523
5,350
4,524
3,665
3,738
nonperforming loans
2,509
4,193
2,496
1,818
1,737
ratios
net charge-offs to:
loans  average
1.00
%
1.74
%
1.06
%
0.71
%
0.87
%
allowance for loan losses
50.23
68.71
51.61
40.38
46.74
allowance for loan losses to:
loans  year-end
2.06
2.47
2.08
1.70
1.84
nonperforming loans
180.27
127.59
181.25
201.60
215.20
(a)
includes a charge of $80million to conform to ffiec revised policy.
lending-related commitments loss analysis
year ended december 31, (in millions, except ratios)
balances
commercial lending-related commitments  average
$
224,547
$
241,145
$
255,419
$
261,255
$
275,768
commercial lending-related commitments  year-end
215,758
238,120
247,711
263,154
290,794
net charge-offs
(3
)
allowance for lending-related commitments:
u.s.
non-u.s.
total allowance for lending-related commitments
ratios
net charge-offs to:
commercial lending-related commitments  average
nm
0.09
%
nm
0.01
%
nm
allowance for lending-related commitments
nm
58.40
nm
5.30
nm
allowance for lending-related commitments to:
commercial lending-related commitments  year-end
0.15
%
0.15
0.11
%
0.11
0.10
%
nm not meaningful.
deposits
the following table provides a summary of the average balances and average
interest rates of jpmorgan chases various deposits for the years indicated:
average balances
average interest rates
(in millions, except interest rates)
u.s.:
noninterest-bearing demand
$
22,289
$
23,506
$
23,828
%
%
%
interest-bearing demand
4,859
4,192
1,720
1.22
1.02
1.37
savings
104,863
84,215
69,149
0.75
0.26
1.57
time
55,911
57,929
54,110
1.51
3.71
3.64
total u.s. deposits
187,922
169,842
148,807
0.90
1.42
2.07
non-u.s.:
noninterest-bearing demand
6,561
7,395
5,229
interest-bearing demand
66,460
56,331
49,831
1.63
2.34
3.99
savings
1,008
0.15
0.56
1.93
time
43,735
52,840
72,190
1.90
2.87
4.04
total non-u.s. deposits(a)
117,363
117,574
128,041
1.63
2.42
3.84
total deposits
$
305,285
$
287,416
$
276,848
1.18
%
1.83
%
2.89
%
(a)
the majority of non-u.s. deposits were in denominations of $100,000 or
more.
table of contents
at december31, 2003, u.s. time deposits in denominations of $100,000 or more
totaled $36billion, substantially all of which mature in three months or less.
the table below presents the maturities for u.s. time certificates of deposit
in denominations of $100,000 or more:
3 months
over 3 months
over 6 months
over
by remaining maturity at december 31, 2003 (in millions)
or less
but within 6 months
but within 12 months
12 months
total
u.s. time certificates of deposit ($100,000 or more)
$
9,422
$
$
$
$
11,231
short-term and other borrowed funds
the following table provides a summary of jpmorgan chases short-term and other
borrowed funds for the years indicated:
(in millions, except rates)
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements:
balance at year-end
$
113,466
$
169,483
$
128,445
average daily balance during the year
161,020
168,428
163,858
maximum month-end balance
205,955
198,110
181,775
weighted-average rate at december 31
1.17
%
1.45
%
2.40
%
weighted-average rate during the year
1.37
1.97
4.06
commercial paper:
balance at year-end
$
14,284
$
16,591
$
18,510
average daily balance during the year
13,387
16,134
18,561
maximum month-end balance
15,769
23,726
22,753
weighted-average rate at december 31
0.98
%
1.36
%
1.92
%
weighted-average rate during the year
1.13
1.74
4.03
other borrowed funds:(a)
balance at year-end
$
87,147
$
75,810
$
63,823
average daily balance during the year
69,703
69,393
64,029
maximum month-end balance
95,690
92,439
93,468
weighted-average rate at december 31
4.52
%
5.39
%
6.62
%
weighted-average rate during the year
5.09
4.96
5.77
fin 46 short-term beneficial interests: (b) (c)
commercial paper:
balance at year-end
$
6,321
na
na
average daily balance during the year
6,185
na
na
maximum month-end balance
12,007
na
na
weighted-average rate at december 31
0.88
%
na
na
weighted-average rate during the year
1.11
na
na
other borrowed funds:
balance at year-end
$
3,545
na
na
average daily balance during the year
2,048
na
na
maximum month-end balance
3,545
na
na
weighted-average rate at december 31
2.26
%
na
na
weighted-average rate during the year
0.83
na
na
(a)
includes securities sold but not yet purchased.
(b)
included on the consolidated balance sheet in beneficial interests issued
by consolidated variable interest entities. vies had unused lines of credit of
$427million at december31, 2003 for general liquidity purposes.
(c)
not applicable for years prior to 2003 since the firm adopted fin 46 during
2003.
federal funds purchased represents
overnight funds. securities sold under
repurchase agreements generally mature
between one day and three months.
commercial paper generally is issued in
amounts not less than $100,000 and with
maturities of 270days or less. other
borrowed funds consist of demand
notes, term federal funds purchased and
various other borrowings that generally
have maturities of one year or less. at
december31, 2003, jpmorgan chase had no
lines of credit for general corporate
purposes.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange
act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on behalf
of the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
j.p. morgan chase & co.
(registrant)
by:
/s/ william b. harrison, jr.
(william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer)
date: february18, 2004
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this
report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacity and on the date indicated. jpmorgan chase does
not exercise the power of attorney to sign on behalf of any director.
capacity
date
/s/ william b. harrison, jr.
(william b. harrison, jr.)
director, chairman and chief executive officer
(principal executive officer)
february18, 2004
/s/ hans w. becherer
(hans w. becherer)
director
/s/ riley p. bechtel
(riley p. bechtel)
director
/s/ frank a. bennack, jr.
(frank a. bennack, jr.)
director
/s/ john h. biggs
(john h. biggs)
director
/s/ lawrence a. bossidy
(lawrence a. bossidy)
director
/s/ m. anthony burns
(m. anthony burns)
director
table of contents
capacity
date
/s/ ellen v. futter
(ellen v. futter)
director
february18, 2004
/s/ william h. gray, iii
(william h. gray, iii)
director
/s/ helene l. kaplan
(helene l. kaplan)
director
/s/ lee r. raymond
(lee r. raymond)
director
/s/ john r. stafford
(john r. stafford)
director
/s/ dina dublon
(dina dublon)
executive vice president
and chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
/s/ joseph l. sclafani
(joseph l. sclafani)
executive vice president and controller
(principal accounting officer)
table of contents
exhibit index
exhibit number
description
12.1
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
12.2
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges and preferred stock dividend requirements.
21.1
list of subsidiaries of j.p. morgan chase & co.
23.1
consent of independent accountants.
31.1
certification.
31.2
certification.
certification pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted
pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
