10-k
y05475e10vk.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to
section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2004
commission file
number 1-5805
jpmorgan chase & co.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-2624428
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
270 park avenue, new york, ny
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (212)270-6000
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
common stock
depositary
shares representing a one-tenth interest in 65/8%
cumulative preferred stock (stated value$500)
6.50% subordinated notes due 2005
6.25% subordinated notes due 2006
61/8% subordinated notes due 2008
6.75% subordinated notes due 2008
6.50% subordinated notes due 2009
guarantee of 8.25% capital securities,
seriesh, of chase capital viii
guarantee of 7.50% capital securities, seriesi, of
j.p. morgan chase capital ix
guarantee of 7.00% capital securities,
seriesj, of j.p. morgan chase capital x
guarantee of 57/8% capital securities,
seriesk, of j.p. morgan chase capital xi
guarantee of 6.25% capital securities,
seriesl, of j.p. morgan chase capital xii
guarantee of 6.20% capital
securities, seriesn, of jpmorgan chase capital xiv
guarantee of 8.50% preferred securities of bank one capital ii
guarantee of 8.00% preferred securities
of bank one capital v
guarantee of 7.20% preferred securities of bank one capital vi
indexed
linked notes on the s&p 500 index due november26, 2007
jpmorgan market participation notes on the s&p
500 index due march12, 2008
capped quarterly observation notes linked to s&p
500 index due september22, 2008
capped quarterly observation notes linked to s&p
500 index due october30, 2008
capped quarterly observation notes linked to s&p
500 index due january21, 2009
jpmorgan market participation notes on the s&p
500 index due march31, 2009
capped quarterly observation notes linked to s&p
500 index due july7, 2009
capped quarterly observation notes linked to s&p
500 index due september21, 2009
consumer price indexed securities due january15, 2010
principal protected notes linked to s&p 500 index due
september30, 2010
the indexed linked notes, jpmorgan market participation notes, capped quarterly observation notes, consumer price
indexed securities and principal protected notes are listed on the american stock exchange;
all other securities named above are listed on the new york stock exchange.
securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act: none
number of shares of common stock outstanding on january31, 2005: 3,553,701,118
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed
by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act
of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject
to such filing requirements for the past 90days. yes ..x..
no.....
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation
s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k
or any amendment to this form 10-k. [x]
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as defined in rule12b-2
of the exchange act). yes ..x.. no.....
the aggregate market value of jpmorgan chase & co. common stock held by non-affiliates of
jpmorgan chase & co. on june30, 2004 was approximately $80,330,277,311.
document incorporated by reference: portions of registrants proxy statement for the annual meeting
of stockholders to be held on may17, 2005, are incorporated by reference in this form 10-k in
response to items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of partiii.
form10-k index
part i
page
item1
business
overview
business segments
competition
supervision and regulation
important factors that may affect future results
non-u.s. operations
distribution of assets, liabilities and stockholders equity;
interest rates and interest differentials
132-136
return on equity and assets
129-130, 132-133
securities portfolio
loan portfolio
59-67, 101-102, 138-140
summary of loan and lending-related commitments loss experience
68-69, 102-103, 141-142
deposits
short-term and other borrowed funds
item2
properties
item3
legal proceedings
item4
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the registrant
part ii
item5
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder
matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6
selected financial data
item7
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations
item7a
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8
financial statements and supplementary data
item9
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting
and financial disclosure
item9a
controls and procedures
item9b
other information
part iii
item10
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11
executive compensation
item12
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
item13
certain relationships and related transactions
item14
principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item15
exhibits, financial statement schedules
ex-3.1: restated certificate of incorporation
ex-3.2: by-laws
indenture
junior subordinated indenture
guarantee agreement
amended and restated trust agreement
indenture
first supplemental indenture
indenture
first supplemental indenture
form of indenture
form of indenture
deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors
post-retirement compensation plan for non-employee directors
deferred compensation program
1994 long-term incentive plan
amendment to the 1994 long-term incentive plan
long-term stock incentive plan
form of stock option award
1992 stock incentive plan
1984 stock incentive plan
1995 stock incentive plan
1998 performance plan
ex-10.16: summary of terms of severance policy
stock incentive plan
performance incentive plan
revised and restated 1989 stock incentive plan
revised and restated 1995 stock incentive plan
ex-12.1: computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
ex-12.2: computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
ex-21.1: list of subsidiaries
ex-23.1: consent of independent registered public accounting firm
certification
certification
certification
certification
table of contents
part i
item1: business
effective july1, 2004, bank one corporation (bank one) merged with and into jpmorgan chase &
co. (the merger), pursuant to an agreement and plan of merger dated january14, 2004. as a result
of the merger, each outstanding share of common stock of bank one was converted in a
stock-for-stock exchange into 1.32 shares of common stock of jpmorgan chase & co. (jpmorgan chase
or the firm). the merger was accounted for using the purchase method of accounting. the
purchase price to complete the merger was $58.5billion.
bank ones results of operations were included in the firms results beginning july1, 2004.
therefore, the results of operations for the 12months ended december31, 2004, reflect six months
of operations of the combined firm and six months of heritage jpmorgan chase; the results of
operations for all other periods prior to 2004 reflect only the operations of heritage
jpmorgan chase.
overview
jpmorgan chase is a financial holding company incorporated under delaware law in 1968. jpmorgan
chase is one of the largest banking institutions in the united states, with $1.2 trillion in
assets, $106billion in stockholders equity and operations in more than 50 countries.
jpmorgan chases principal bank subsidiaries are jpmorgan chase bank, national association
(jpmorgan chase bank), a national banking association with branches in 17 states, and chase bank
usa, national association (chase usa), a national association that is the firms credit
card-issuing bank. jpmorgan chases principal nonbank subsidiary is j.p. morgan securities inc.
(jpmsi), its u.s. investment banking firm. the bank and nonbank subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase
operate nationally as well as through overseas branches and subsidiaries, representative offices
and affiliated banks.
the firms website is www.jpmorganchase.com. jpmorgan chase makes available free of charge, through
its website, annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q and current reports on
form 8-k, and any amendments to those reports filed or furnished, pursuant to section 13(a) or
section 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as soon as reasonably practicable after it
electronically files such material with, or furnishes such material to, the securities and exchange
commission (the sec). the firm has adopted, and posted on its website, a code of ethics for its
chief executive officer, president and chief operating officer, chief financial officer, chief
accounting officer and other senior financial officers.
business segments
jpmorgan chases activities are organized, for management reporting purposes, into six business
segments (investment bank, retail financial services, card services, commercial banking, treasury &
securities services and asset & wealth management) and corporate, which includes its private
equity and treasury businesses, as well as corporate support functions. a description of the
firms business segments and the products and services they provide to their respective client
bases is provided in the business segment results section of managements discussion and
analysis (md&a) beginning on page 28, and in note 31 on page 126.
competition
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries and affiliates operate in a highly competitive environment.
competitors include other banks, brokerage firms, investment banking companies, merchant banks,
insurance companies, mutual fund companies, credit card companies, mortgage banking
companies, automobile financing companies, leasing companies, e-commerce and other internet-based
companies, and a variety of other financial services and advisory companies. jpmorgan chases
businesses compete with these other firms with respect to the range of products and services
offered and the types of clients, customers, industries and geographies served. with respect to
some of its geographies and products, jpmorgan chase competes globally; with respect to others, the
firm competes on a regional basis. jpmorgan chases ability to compete effectively depends on the
relative performance of its products, the degree to which the features of its products appeal to
customers, and the extent to which the firm is able to meet its clients objectives or needs. the
firms ability to compete also depends on its ability to attract and retain its professional and
other personnel, and on its reputation.
the financial services industry has experienced consolidation and convergence in recent years, as
financial institutions involved in a broad range of financial products and services have merged.
this convergence trend is expected to continue, as demonstrated by the merger of jpmorgan chase and
bank one corporation on july1, 2004. consolidation could result in competitors of jpmorgan chase
gaining greater capital and other resources, such as a broader range of products and services and
geographic diversity. it is possible that competition will become even more intense as the firm
continues to compete with other financial institutions that may be larger or better capitalized, or
that may have a stronger local presence in certain geographies.
supervision and regulation
permissible business activities: the firm is subject to regulation under state and federal law,
including the bank holding company act of 1956, as amended (the bhca).
under the 1999 gramm-leach-bliley act (glba), bank holding companies meeting certain eligibility
criteria may elect to become financial holding companies, which may engage in activities that
have been approved by the board of governors of the federal reserve system (the federal reserve
board) and the united states department of the treasury (u.s. treasury department). jpmorgan
chase elected to become a financial holding company as of march13, 2000.
under regulations implemented by the federal reserve board, if any depository institution
controlled by a financial holding company ceases to meet certain capital or management standards,
the federal reserve board may impose corrective capital and/or managerial requirements on the
financial holding company and place limitations on its ability to conduct the broader financial
activities permissible for financial holding companies. in addition, the federal reserve board may
require divestiture of the holding companys depository institutions if the deficiencies
table of contents
part i
persist. the regulations also provide that if any depository institution controlled by a
financial holding company fails to maintain a satisfactory rating under the community reinvestment
act (cra), the federal reserve board must prohibit the financial holding company and its
subsidiaries from engaging in any additional activities other than those permissible for bank
holding companies that are not financial holding companies. at december31, 2004, the
depository-institution subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase met the capital, management and cra
requirements necessary to permit the firm to conduct the broader activities permitted under glba.
however, there can be no assurance that this will continue to be the case in the future.
regulation by federal reserve board under glba: under glbas system of functional regulation, the
federal reserve board acts as an umbrella regulator, and certain of jpmorgan chases subsidiaries
are regulated directly by additional authorities based on the particular activities of those
subsidiaries (e.g., the lead bank is regulated by the office of the
comptroller of the currency (occ), securities and investment advisory activities are regulated by the sec, and
insurance activities are regulated by state insurance commissioners).
dividend restrictions: federal law imposes limitations on the payment of dividends by the
subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase that are national banks. nonbank subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase are
not subject to those limitations. the amount of dividends that may be paid by national banks, such
as jpmorgan chase bank and chase usa, is limited to the lesser of the amounts calculated under a
recent earnings test and an undivided profits test. under the recent earnings test, a dividend
may not be paid if the total of all dividends declared by a bank in any calendar year is in excess
of the current years net income combined with the retained net income of the two preceding years,
unless the national bank obtains the approval of the comptroller of the currency. under the
undivided profits test, a dividend may not be paid in excess of a banks undivided profits. see
note 23 on page 116 for the amount of dividends that the firms principal bank subsidiaries could
pay, at january1, 2005 and 2004, to their respective bank holding companies without the
approval of the relevant banking regulators.
in addition to the dividend restrictions described above, the comptroller of the currency, the
federal reserve board and the federal deposit insurance corporation (the fdic) have authority to
prohibit or to limit the payment of dividends by the banking organizations they supervise,
including jpmorgan chase and its bank and bank holding company subsidiaries, if, in the banking
regulators opinion, payment of a dividend would constitute an unsafe or unsound practice in light
of the financial condition of the banking organization.
capital requirements: federal banking regulators have adopted risk-based capital and leverage
guidelines that require the firms capital-to-assets ratios to meet certain minimum standards.
the risk-based capital ratio is determined by allocating assets and specified off-balance sheet
financial instruments into four weighted categories, with higher levels of capital being required
for the categories perceived as representing greater risk. under the guidelines, capital is divided
into two tiers: tier 1 capital and tier 2 capital. the amount of tier 2 capital may not exceed the
amount of tier 1 capital. total capital is the sum of tier 1 capital and tier 2 capital. under the
guidelines, banking organizations are required to maintain a total capital ratio (total capital to
risk-weighted assets) of 8% and a tier 1 capital ratio of 4%.
tier 1 components: capital surplus and common stock remain the most important forms of capital at
jpmorgan chase. because common equity has no maturity date, and because dividends on common stock
are paid only
when and if declared by the board of directors, common equity is available to absorb losses over
long periods of time. noncumulative perpetual preferred stock is similar to common stock in its
ability to absorb losses. if the board of directors does not declare a dividend on noncumulative
perpetual preferred stock in any dividend period, the holders of the instrument are never entitled
to receive that dividend payment. jpmorgan chases outstanding noncumulative perpetual preferred
stock is a type commonly referenced as a frap: a fixed-rate/ adjustable preferred stock.
because the interest rate on fraps may increase (up to a predetermined ceiling), the
federal reserve board treats the firms noncumulative fraps in a manner similar to cumulative
perpetual preferred securities. the federal reserve board permits cumulative perpetual preferred
securities to be included in tier 1 capital but only up to certain limits, as these financial
instruments do not provide as strong protection against losses as common equity and noncumulative,
non-frap securities. cumulative perpetual preferred stock does not have a maturity date, similar to
other forms of tier 1 capital. however, any dividends not declared on cumulative perpetual
preferred stock accumulate and thus continue to be due to the holder of the instrument until all
arrearages are satisfied. on march1, 2005, the federal reserve
board issued a
final rule that continues the inclusion of trust preferred securities
in tier 1 capital,
subject to stricter quantitative limits. the rule provides for a
five-year transition period. the firm is currently assessing the
impact of the final rule. the effective date of the final rule is
dependent on the date of publication in the federal register. trust preferred securities are
generally issued by a special-purpose trust established and owned by jpmorgan chase. proceeds from
the issuance to the public of the trust preferred security are lent to the firm for at least 30
(but not more than 50) years. the intercompany note that evidences this loan provides that the
interest payments by jpmorgan chase on the note may be deferred for up to five years. during the
period of any such deferral, no payments of dividends may be made on any outstanding jpmorgan chase
preferred or common stock or on the outstanding trust preferred securities issued to the public.
during 2003, the firm implemented financial accounting standards board (fasb) interpretation no.
46, consolidation of variable interest entities (fin 46), which addresses the consolidation rules
to be applied to entities defined in fin 46 as variable interest entities. prior to fin 46,
trusts that issued trust preferred securities were consolidated subsidiaries of their respective
parents. as a result of fin 46, jpmorgan chase is no longer permitted to consolidate these trusts.
tier 2 components: long-term subordinated debt (generally having an original maturity of 10-12
years) is the primary form of jpmorgan chases tier 2 capital. subordinated debt is deemed a form
of regulatory capital, because payments on the debt are subordinated to other creditors of jpmorgan
chase, including holders of senior and medium long-term debt and counterparties on derivative
contracts.
the federal banking regulators have also established minimum leverage ratio guidelines. the
leverage ratio is defined as tier 1 capital divided by average total assets (net of the allowance
for loan losses, goodwill and certain intangible assets). the minimum leverage ratio is 3% for bank
holding companies that are considered strong under federal reserve board guidelines or
which have implemented the federal reserve boards risk-based capital measure for market risk.
other bank holding companies must have a minimum leverage ratio of 4%. bank holding companies may
be expected to maintain ratios well above the minimum levels, depending upon their particular
condition, risk profile and growth plans.
table of contents
the risk-based capital requirements explicitly identify concentrations of credit risk, certain
risks arising from non-traditional banking activities, and the management of those risks as
important factors to consider in assessing an institutions overall capital adequacy. other factors
taken into consideration by federal regulators include: interest rate exposure; liquidity, funding
and market risk; the quality and level of earnings; the quality of loans and investments; the
effectiveness of loan and investment policies; and managements overall ability to monitor and
control financial and operational risks, including the risks presented by concentrations of credit
and non-traditional banking activities. in addition, the risk-based capital rules incorporate a
measure for market risk in foreign exchange and commodity activities and in the trading of debt and
equity instruments. the market risk-based capital rules require banking organizations with large
trading activities (such as jpmorgan chase) to maintain capital for market risk in an amount
calculated by using the banking organizations own internal value-at-risk models (subject to
parameters set by the regulators).
the minimum risk-based capital requirements adopted by the federal banking agencies follow the
capital accord of the basel committee on banking supervision. the basel committee has proposed a
revision to the accord (basel ii). jpmorgan chase is actively pursuing implementation of the
basel ii framework in accordance with the criteria of the u.s. banking regulators, which will
require jpmorgan chase to use advanced measurement techniques, employing its internal estimates
of certain key risk drivers to derive capital requirements. implementation of basel ii by u.s.
regulators is expected as of january1, 2008, with certain transitional implementation
arrangements.
fdicia: the federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act of 1991 (fdicia) provides a
framework for regulation of depository institutions and their affiliates, including parent holding
companies, by their federal banking regulators; among other things, it requires the relevant
federal banking regulator to take prompt corrective action with respect to a depository
institution if that institution does not meet certain capital adequacy standards.
supervisory actions by the appropriate federal banking regulator under the prompt corrective
action rules generally depend upon an institutions classification within five capital categories.
the regulations apply only to banks and not to bank holding companies such as jpmorgan chase;
however, subject to limitations that may be imposed pursuant to glba, as described below, the
federal reserve board is authorized to take appropriate action at the holding company level, based
on the undercapitalized status of the holding companys subsidiary banking institutions. in certain
instances relating to an undercapitalized banking institution, the bank holding company would be
required to guarantee the performance of the undercapitalized subsidiary and might be liable for
civil money damages for failure to fulfill its commitments on that guarantee.
as of december31, 2004, the firm and its primary banking subsidiaries were well-capitalized.
fdic insurance assessments: fdicia also requires the fdic to establish a risk-based assessment
system for fdic deposit insurance. under the fdics risk-based insurance premium assessment system,
each depository institution is assigned to one of nine risk classifications based upon certain
capital and supervisory measures and, depending upon its classification, is assessed insurance
premiums on its deposits.
powers of the fdic upon insolvency of an insured depository institution: an fdic-insured depository
institution can be held liable for any loss incurred or expected to be incurred by the fdic in
connection with another fdic-insured institution under common control, with such institution being
in default or in danger of default (commonly referred to as cross-guarantee liability). an
fdic cross-guarantee claim against a depository institution is generally superior in right of
payment to claims of the holding company and its affiliates against such depository institution.
if the fdic is appointed the conservator or receiver of an insured depository institution upon its
insolvency or in certain other events, the fdic has the power: (1)to transfer any of the
depository institutions assets and liabilities to a new obligor without the approval of the
depository institutions creditors; (2)to enforce the terms of the depository institutions
contracts pursuant to their terms; or (3)to repudiate or disaffirm any contract or lease to which
the depository institution is a party, the performance of which is determined by the fdic to be
burdensome and the disaffirmation or repudiation of which is determined by the fdic to
promote the orderly administration of the depository institution. the above provisions would be
applicable to obligations and liabilities of those of jpmorgan chases subsidiaries that are
insured depository institutions, such as jpmorgan chase bank and chase usa, including, without
limitation, obligations under senior or subordinated debt issued by those banks to investors
(referenced below as public noteholders) in the public markets.
under federal law, the claims of a receiver of an insured depository institution for administrative
expenses and the claims of holders of u.s. deposit liabilities (including the fdic, as subrogee of
the depositors) have priority over the claims of other unsecured creditors of the institution,
including public noteholders, in the event of the liquidation or other resolution of the
institution. as a result, whether or not the fdic would ever seek to repudiate any obligations held
by public noteholders of any subsidiary of the firm that is an insured depository institution, such
as jpmorgan chase bank or chase usa, the public noteholders would be treated differently from, and
could receive, if anything, substantially less than, the depositors of the depository institution.
the usa patriot act: on october26, 2001, president bush signed into law the usa patriot act of
2001 (the act).
the act substantially broadens existing anti-money laundering legislation and the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the united states; imposes new compliance and due diligence obligations; creates
new crimes and penalties; compels the production of documents located both inside and outside the
united states, including those of non-u.s. institutions that have a correspondent relationship in
the united states; and clarifies the safe harbor from civil liability to customers. the act
mandates the u.s. treasury department to issue a number of regulations to further clarify the acts
requirements or provide more specific guidance on their application.
the act requires all financial institutions, as defined, to establish certain anti-money
laundering compliance and due diligence programs. the act requires financial institutions that
maintain correspondent accounts for non-u.s. institutions, or persons that are involved in
private banking for non-united states persons or their representatives, to establish
appropriate, specific and, where necessary, enhanced due diligence policies, procedures, and
controls that are reasonably designed to detect and report instances of money laundering through
those accounts.
table of contents
part i
jpmorgan chase believes its programs satisfy the requirements of the act. bank
regulators are focusing their examinations on anti-money laundering compliance, and jpmorgan chase
continues to enhance its anti-money laundering compliance programs.
other supervision and regulation: under current federal reserve board policy, jpmorgan chase is
expected to act as a source of financial strength to its bank subsidiaries and to commit resources
to support the bank subsidiaries in circumstances where it might not do so absent such policy.
however, because glba provides for functional regulation of financial holding company activities by
various regulators, glba prohibits the federal reserve board from requiring payment by a holding
company or subsidiary to a depository institution if the functional regulator of the payor objects
to such payment. in such a case, the federal reserve board could instead require the divestiture of
the depository institution and impose operating restrictions pending the divestiture.
any loans by a bank holding company to any of its subsidiary banks are subordinate in right of
payment to deposits and certain other indebtedness of the subsidiary banks. in the event of a bank
holding companys bankruptcy, any commitment by the bank holding company to a federal bank
regulatory agency to maintain the capital of a subsidiary bank at a certain level would be
assumed by the bankruptcy trustee and entitled to a priority of payment.
the bank subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase are subject to certain restrictions imposed by federal law
on extensions of credit to, and certain other transactions with, the firm and certain other
affiliates, and on investments in stock or securities of jpmorgan chase and those affiliates. these
restrictions prevent jpmorgan chase and other affiliates from borrowing from a bank subsidiary
unless the loans are secured in specified amounts.
the firms bank and certain of its nonbank subsidiaries are subject to direct supervision and
regulation by various other federal and state authorities (some of
which are considered
functional regulators under glba). jpmorgan chases national bank subsidiaries, such as jpmorgan
chase bank and chase usa, are subject to supervision and regulation
by the occ and, in certain matters, by the federal reserve board and the fdic. supervision and
regulation by the responsible regulatory agency generally includes comprehensive annual reviews of
all major aspects of the relevant banks business and condition, as well as the imposition of
periodic reporting requirements and limitations on investments and other powers. the firm also
conducts securities underwriting, dealing and brokerage activities through jpmsi and other
broker-dealer subsidiaries, all of which are subject to the regulations of the sec and the national
association of securities dealers, inc. (nasd). jpmsi is a member of the new york stock exchange
(nyse). the operations of jpmorgan chases mutual funds also are subject to regulation by the
sec. the types of activities in which the non-u.s. branches of jpmorgan chase bank and the
international subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase may engage are subject to various restrictions imposed
by the federal reserve board. those non-u.s. branches and international subsidiaries also are
subject to the laws and regulatory authorities of the countries in which they operate.
the activities of jpmorgan chase bank and chase usa as consumer lenders also are subject to
regulation under various federal laws, including the truth-in-lending, the equal credit
opportunity, the fair credit reporting, the fair debt collection practice and the electronic funds
transfer acts, as well as various state laws. these statutes impose
requirements on the making, enforcement and collection of consumer loans and on the types of
disclosures that need to be made in connection with such loans.
in addition, under the requirements imposed by glba, jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries are
required periodically to disclose to their retail customers the firms policies and practices with
respect to (1)the sharing of non-public customer information with jpmorgan chase affiliates and
others; and (2)the confidentiality and security of that information. under glba, retail customers
also must be given the opportunity to opt out of information-sharing arrangements with
non-affiliates, subject to certain exceptions set forth in glba.
important factors that may affect future results
from time to time, the firm has made and will make forward-looking statements. these statements
can be identified by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts.
forward-looking statements often use words such as anticipate, target, expect, estimate,
intend, plan, goal, believe or other words of similar meaning. forward-looking statements
provide jpmorgan chases current expectations or forecasts of future events, circumstances or
results. jpmorgan chases disclosures in this report, including in the md&a section, contain
forward-looking statements. the firm also may make forward-looking statements in its other
documents filed with the sec and in other written materials. in addition, the firms senior
management may make forward-looking statements orally to analysts, investors, representatives of
the media and others.
any forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the firm speak only as of the date they are
made. jpmorgan chase does not undertake to update forward-looking statements to reflect the impact
of circumstances or events that arise after the date the forward-looking statement was made. the
reader should, however, consult any further disclosures of a forward-looking nature jpmorgan chase
may make in its annual reports on form 10-k, its quarterly reports on form 10-q and its current
reports on form 8-k.
all forward-looking statements, by their nature, are subject to risks and uncertainties.
jpmorgan chases actual future results may differ materially from those set forth in its
forward-looking statements. factors that might cause the firms future financial
performance to vary from that described in its forward-looking statements include the credit,
market, operational, liquidity, interest rate and other risks discussed in the md&a section of this
report and in other periodic reports filed with the sec. in addition, the following discussion sets
forth certain risks and uncertainties that the firm believes could cause its actual future results
to differ materially from expected results. however, other factors besides those listed below or
discussed in jpmorgan chases reports to the sec also could adversely affect the firms results,
and the reader should not consider any such list of factors to be a complete set of all potential
risks or uncertainties. this discussion is provided as permitted by the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995.
merger of jpmorgan chase and bank one. there are significant risks and uncertainties associated
with the firms merger with bank one. for example, jpmorgan chase may fail to realize the growth
opportunities and cost savings anticipated to be derived from the merger. in addition, it is
possible that the integration process could result in the loss of
table of contents
key employees, or that the disruption of ongoing business from the merger could adversely affect
jpmorgan chases ability to maintain relationships with clients or suppliers.
business conditions and general economy. the profitability of jpmorgan chases businesses could be
affected by general economic conditions in the united states or abroad. in 2004 both the u.s.
and global economies continued to strengthen overall. while the outlook for the firm for 2005
continues to be cautiously optimistic, there can be no assurances that the economic
recovery that began in 2003 will continue throughout 2005.
factors such as the liquidity of the global financial markets, the level and volatility of equity
prices and interest rates, investor sentiment, inflation, and the availability and cost of credit
could significantly affect the activity level of clients, with respect to size, number and timing
of transactions involving the firms investment banking business, including its underwriting and
advisory businesses. these factors also may affect the realization of cash returns from the firms
private equity business. a recurrence of a market downturn would likely lead to a decline in the
volume of transactions that the firm executes for its customers and, therefore, lead to a decline
in the revenues it receives from trading commissions and spreads. higher interest rates or
continued weakness in the market also could affect the willingness of financial investors to
participate in loan syndications or underwritings managed by jpmorgan chase. the firm generally
maintains large trading portfolios in the fixed income, currency, commodity and equity markets and
has significant investment positions, including merchant banking investments held by its private
equity business. the revenues derived from mark-to-market values of the firms business are
affected by many factors, including its credit standing; its success in proprietary positioning;
volatility in interest rates and in equity and debt markets; and the economic, political and
business factors described below. jpmorgan chase anticipates that these revenues will fluctuate
over time.
the fees jpmorgan chase earns for managing assets are also dependent upon general economic
conditions. for example, a higher level of u.s. or non-u.s. interest rates or a downturn in trading
markets could affect the valuations of the mutual funds managed by the firm, which, in turn, could
affect the firms revenues. moreover, even in the absence of a market downturn, below-market
performance by jpmorgan chases mutual funds could result in outflows of assets under management
and, therefore, reduce the fees the firm receives.
the credit quality of jpmorgan chases on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet assets may be
affected by business conditions. in a poor economic environment there is a greater likelihood that
more of the firms customers or counterparties could become delinquent on their loans or other
obligations to jpmorgan chase, which, in turn, could result in a higher levels of charge-offs and
provision for credit losses, all of which would adversely affect the firms earnings.
the firms consumer businesses are particularly affected by domestic economic conditions, including
u.s. interest rates, the rate of unemployment, the level of consumer confidence, changes in
consumer spending and the number of personal bankruptcies, as these factors will affect the level
of consumer loans and credit quality.
competition. jpmorgan chase operates in a highly competitive environment and expects various
factors to cause competitive conditions to continue to intensify. the firm expects competition to
intensify as continued merger activity in the financial services industry produces larger,
better-capitalized companies that are capable of offering a wider array of financial products and
services, and at more competitive prices. in addition, technological advances and the growth of
e-commerce have made it possible for non-depository institutions to offer products and services
that traditionally were banking products, and for financial institutions to compete with technology
companies in providing electronic and internet-based financial solutions.
non-u.s. operations; trading in non-u.s. securities. the firm does business throughout the world,
including in developing regions of the world commonly known as emerging markets. jpmorgan chases
businesses and revenues derived from non-u.s. operations are subject to risk of loss from
unfavorable political and diplomatic developments, currency fluctuations, social instability,
changes in governmental policies or policies of central banks, expropriation, nationalization,
confiscation of assets and changes in legislation relating to non-u.s. ownership. jpmorgan chase
also invests in the securities of corporations located in non-u.s. jurisdictions, including
emerging markets. revenues from the trading of non-u.s. securities also may be subject to negative
fluctuations as a result of the above factors. the impact of these fluctuations could be
accentuated, because generally, non-u.s. trading markets, particularly in emerging market
countries, are smaller, less liquid and more volatile than u.s. trading markets.
operational risk. jpmorgan chase, like all large corporations, is exposed to many types of
operational risk, including the risk of fraud by employees or outsiders, unauthorized transactions
by employees or operational errors, including clerical or record-keeping errors or those resulting
from faulty or disabled computer or telecommunications systems. given the high volume of
transactions at jpmorgan chase, certain errors may be repeated or compounded before they are
discovered and successfully rectified. in addition, the firms necessary dependence upon automated
systems to record and process its transaction volume may further increase the risk that technical
system flaws or employee tampering or manipulation of those systems will result in losses that are
difficult to detect. the firm may also be subject to disruptions of its operating systems, arising
from events that are wholly or partially beyond its control (including, for example, computer
viruses or electrical or telecommunications outages), which may give rise to losses in service to
customers and to loss or liability to the firm. the firm is further exposed to the risk that its
external vendors may be unable to fulfill their contractual obligation to the firm (or will be
subject to the same risk of fraud or operational errors by their respective employees as is the
firm), and to the risk that the firms (or its vendors) business continuity and data
security systems prove not to be sufficiently adequate. the firm also faces the risk that the
design of its controls and procedures prove inadequate or are circumvented, thereby causing delays
in detection or errors in information. although the firm maintains a system of controls designed to
keep operational risk at appropriate levels, there can be no assurance that jpmorgan chase will not
suffer losses from operational risks in the future that may be material in amount.
government monetary policies and economic controls. jpmorgan chases businesses and earnings are
affected by general economic conditions, both domestic and international. the firms businesses and
earnings also are affected by the fiscal or other policies that are adopted by various regulatory
authorities of the united states, non-u.s. governments and international agencies. for example,
policies and regulations of the federal reserve board influence, directly and indirectly, the rate
of interest paid by commercial banks on their interest-bearing deposits and also
table of contents
part i
may affect the value of financial instruments held by the firm. the actions of the
federal reserve board also determine to a significant degree the firms cost of funds for
lending and investing. the nature and impact of future changes in economic and market conditions
and fiscal policies are uncertain and are beyond the firms control. in addition, these policies
and conditions can affect the firms customers and counterparties, both in the united states and
abroad, which may increase the risk that such customers or counterparties default on their
obligations to jpmorgan chase.
reputational and legal risk. the firms ability to attract and retain customers and employees could
be adversely affected to the extent its reputation is damaged. the failure of the firm to deal, or
to appear to fail to deal, with various issues that could give rise to reputational risk could
cause harm to the firm and its business prospects. these issues include, but are not limited to,
appropriately dealing with potential conflicts of interest; legal and regulatory requirements;
ethical issues; money-laundering; privacy; record-keeping; sales and trading practices; and the
proper identification of the legal, reputational, credit, liquidity and market risks inherent in
its products. failure to address appropriately these issues could also give rise to additional
legal risk to the firm, which, in turn, could increase the size and
number of litigation claims and damages
asserted against the firm or subject the firm to enforcement actions, fines and penalties.
credit, market, liquidity and private equity risk. jpmorgan chases revenues also are dependent
upon the extent to which management can successfully achieve its business strategies within a
disciplined risk environment. jpmorgan chases ability to grow its businesses is affected by
pricing and competitive pressures, as well as by the costs associated with the introduction of new
products and services and the expansion and development of new distribution channels. to the extent
any of the instruments and strategies the firm uses to hedge or otherwise manage its exposure to
market, credit and private equity risk are not effective, the firm may not be able to mitigate
effectively its risk exposures in particular market environments or against particular types of
risk. the firms balance sheet growth will be dependent upon the economic conditions described
above, as well as on its determination to securitize, sell, purchase or syndicate particular loans
or loan portfolios. the firms trading revenues and interest rate risk are dependent upon its
ability to identify properly, and mark to market, changes in the value of its financial instruments
caused by changes in market prices or rates. the firms earnings will also be dependent upon how
effectively its critical accounting estimates, including those used in its private equity
valuations, prove accurate and upon how effectively it determines and assesses the cost of credit
and manages its risk concentrations. to the extent its assessments of migrations in credit quality
and of risk concentrations, or its assumptions or estimates used in establishing valuation models
for the fair value of assets and liabilities or for loan loss reserves, prove inaccurate or not
predictive of actual results, the firm could suffer higher-than-anticipated losses. the successful
management of credit, market, operational and private equity risk is an important consideration in
managing the firms liquidity risk, as evaluation by rating agencies of the management of these
risks affects their determinations as to the firms credit ratings and, therefore, its cost of
funds.
non-u.s. operations
for geographic distributions of total revenue, total expense, income before income tax expense
and net income, see note 30 on page 125. for a discussion of non-u.s. loans, see note 11 on page
101 and the sections entitled country exposure in the md&a on page 65 and cross-border
outstandings on page 139.
item2: properties
the headquarters of jpmorgan chase is located in new york city at 270 park avenue, which is a
50-story bank and office building owned by jpmorgan chase. this location contains approximately 1.3
million square feet of space. in total, jpmorgan chase owns or leases
approximately 12.3million
square feet of commercial office space and retail space in new york city.
prior to the merger with bank one on july1, 2004, the headquarters of bank one was located in
chicago at 10 south dearborn, which continues to be used as an administrative and operational
facility. this location is owned by the firm and contains approximately 2.0million square feet of
space. in total, jpmorgan chase owns or leases approximately 5.2million square feet of commercial
office and retail space in chicago.
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries also own or lease significant administrative and operational
facilities in houston and dallas, texas (6.8million square feet); columbus, ohio (3million square
feet); phoenix, arizona (1.5million square feet);
tampa, florida (1.1million square feet); jersey city, new jersey (1.1million square feet); and in
indianapolis, indiana (1million square feet).
in the united kingdom, jpmorgan chase leases approximately
2.4million square feet of office space and owns a 350,000 square-foot
operations center.
in addition, jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries occupy offices and other administrative and
operational facilities throughout the world under various types of ownership and leasehold
agreements, including 2,508 retail branches in the united states. the properties occupied by
jpmorgan chase are used across all of the firms business segments and for corporate
purposes.
jpmorgan chase continues to evaluate its current and projected space requirements, particularly in
light of the merger with bank one. there is no assurance that the firm will be able to dispose of
its excess premises or that it will not incur charges in connection with such dispositions. such
disposition costs may be material to the firms results of operations in a given period. for a
discussion of occupancy expense, see the consolidated results of operations discussion on page 22.
item3: legal proceedings
enron litigation. jpmorgan chase is involved in a number of lawsuits and investigations arising
out of its banking relationships with enron corp. and its subsidiaries (enron). a lawsuit in
london by the firm against westdeutsche landesbank girozentrale (wlb) sought to compel payment of
$165million under an enron-related letter of credit issued by wlb. wlb resisted payment on the
grounds that the underlying pre-pay transaction, and its predecessors, were disguised loans and
part of a
table of contents
fraudulent scheme to
hide enrons debt. the trial of that action was conducted in june and july
2004, and on august3, 2004, the court issued its decision in favor of jpmorgan chase, finding that
the firm did not commit fraud and ordering wlb to pay the letter of credit in full.
that order has become final.
other actions involving enron have been initiated by parties against jpmorgan chase, its directors
and certain of its officers. these lawsuits include a series of purported class actions brought on
behalf of shareholders of enron, including the lead action captioned newby v. enron corp. the
consolidated complaint filed in newby names as defendants, among others, jpmorgan chase; several
other investment banking firms; a number of law firms; enrons former accountants and affiliated
entities and individuals; and other individual defendants, including present and former officers
and directors of enron. it asserts claims against jpmorgan chase and the other defendants under
federal and state securities laws. the newby trial is scheduled to commence in october2006.
additional actions include: a purported, consolidated class action lawsuit by jpmorgan chase
stockholders alleging that the firm issued false and misleading press releases and other public
documents relating to enron in violation of section 10(b) of the securities exchange act of 1934
and rule10b-5 thereunder; putative class actions on behalf of jpmorgan chase employees who
participated in the firms employee stock ownership plans alleging claims under the employee
retirement income security act (erisa) for alleged breaches of fiduciary duties and negligence by
jpmorgan chase, its directors and named officers; shareholder derivative actions alleging breaches
of fiduciary duties and alleged failures to exercise due care and diligence by the firms directors
and named officers in the management of jpmorgan chase; individual and putative class actions in
various courts by enron investors, creditors and holders of participating interests related to
syndicated credit facilities; third-party actions brought by defendants in enron-related cases,
alleging federal and state law claims against jpmorgan chase and many other defendants;
investigations by governmental agencies with which the firm is cooperating; and several bankruptcy
actions, including an adversary proceeding brought by enron in bankruptcy court seeking damages for
alleged aiding and abetting of breaches of fiduciary duty by enron insiders, return of alleged
fraudulent conveyances and preferences, and equitable subordination of jpmorgan chases claims in
the enron bankruptcy.
worldcom litigation. j.p. morgan securities inc. (jpmsi) and jpmorgan chase were named as
defendants in more than 50 actions that were filed in u.s. district courts, in state courts in more
than 20 states, and in one arbitral panel beginning in july2002, arising out of alleged accounting
irregularities in the books and records of worldcom inc. plaintiffs in these actions are individual
and institutional investors, including state pension funds, who purchased debt securities issued by
worldcom pursuant to public offerings in 1997, 1998, 2000 and 2001. jpmsi acted as an underwriter
of the 1998, 2000 and 2001 offerings. in addition to jpmsi, jpmorgan chase and, in two actions,
j.p. morgan securities ltd. (jpmsl), in its capacity as one of the underwriters of the
international tranche of the 2001 offering, the defendants in various of the actions include other
underwriters, certain executives and directors of worldcom, and worldcoms auditors. in the
actions, plaintiffs allege that defendants knew, or were reckless or negligent in not knowing, that
the securities were sold to plaintiffs on the basis of misrepresentations and omissions of material
facts concerning the financial condition and business of worldcom. the complaints against jpmorgan
chase, jpmsi and jpmsl assert claims under federal and state securities laws, under other state
statutes and
under common-law theories of fraud and negligent misrepresentation. in the class action pending
in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york, which involves claims on
approximately $15billion of worldcom bonds, the court denied summary judgment with respect
to the alleged financial misrepresentation and certain alleged
omissions claims, and trial is presently
scheduled to commence in late march2005.
commercial financial services litigation. jpmsi (formerly known as chase securities inc.) has been
named as a defendant in several actions that were filed in or transferred to the u.s. district
court for the northern district of oklahoma in 1999, arising from the failure of commercial
financial services, inc. (cfs). plaintiffs in these actions are institutional investors who
purchased approximately $1.3billion (original face amount) of asset-backed securities issued by
cfs. the securities were backed by charged-off credit card receivables. in addition to jpmsi, the
defendants in various of the actions are the founders and key executives of cfs, as well as its
auditors and outside counsel. jpmsi is alleged to have been the investment banker to cfs and to
have acted as an initial purchaser and placement agent in connection with the issuance of certain
of the securities. plaintiffs allege that defendants knew, or were reckless or negligent in not
knowing, that the securities were sold to plaintiffs on the basis of misleading misrepresentations
and omissions of material facts. the complaints against jpmsi assert claims under the securities
exchange act of 1934, under the oklahoma securities act and under common-law theories of fraud and
negligent misrepresentation. plaintiffs seek damages in the amount of approximately $1.8billion,
plus punitive damages and additional interest that continues to accrue, and attorneys fees. cfs
has commenced an action against jpmsi in oklahoma state court and has asserted claims against jpmsi
for professional negligence and breach of fiduciary duty. cfs alleges that jpmsi failed to detect
and prevent its insolvency. cfs seeks damages of approximately $1.3billion. cfs also has
commenced, in its bankruptcy case, an adversary proceeding against jpmsi and its credit card
affiliate, chase manhattan bank usa, n.a., alleging that certain payments, aggregating $78.4
million, made in connection with cfss purchase or securitization of charged-off credit card
receivables were constructive fraudulent conveyances, and it seeks to recover such payments and
interest. a trial date on the adversary proceeding has been set for may2005. the federal
securities actions have been set for trial in july2005.
ipo allocation litigation. beginning in may2001, jpmorgan chase and certain of its securities
subsidiaries were named, along with numerous other firms in the securities industry, as defendants
in a large number of putative class action lawsuits filed in the u.s. district court for the
southern district of new york. these suits purport to challenge alleged improprieties in the
allocation of stock in various public offerings, including some offerings for which a jpmorgan
chase entity served as an underwriter. the suits allege violations of securities and antitrust laws
arising from alleged material misstatements and omissions in registration statements and
prospectuses for the initial public offerings (ipos) and alleged market manipulation with respect
to aftermarket transactions in the offered securities. the securities claims allege, among other
things, misrepresentation and market manipulation of the aftermarket trading for these offerings by
tying allocations of shares in ipos to undisclosed excessive
commissions paid to jpmorgan chase and to required aftermarket purchase transactions by customers who received allocations of shares in
the respective ipos, as well as allegations of misleading analyst reports. the antitrust claims
allege an illegal conspiracy to require customers, in exchange for ipo allocations, to pay
undisclosed and excessive
table of contents
part i
commissions and to make aftermarket purchases of the ipo securities at a price higher
than the offering price as a precondition to receiving allocations. the securities cases were all
assigned to one judge for coordinated pre-trial proceedings, and the antitrust cases were all
assigned to another judge. on february13, 2003, the court denied the motions of jpmorgan chase and
others to dismiss the securities complaints. on october13, 2004, the court granted in part
plaintiffs motion to certify classes in six focus cases in the securities litigation, and the
underwriter defendants have petitioned to appeal that decision. on february15, 2005, the court
preliminarily approved a proposed settlement of plaintiffs claims against the issuer defendants in
these cases. with respect to the antitrust claims, on november3, 2003, the court granted
defendants motion to dismiss the claims relating to the ipo allocation practices, and that
decision is on appeal. a separate antitrust claim alleging that jpmsi and the other underwriters
conspired to fix their underwriting fees is in discovery.
research analyst conflicts. jpmsi has been named as a co-defendant with nine other broker-dealers
in a putative class action filed in federal court in colorado, seeking an unspecified amount of
money damages for alleged violations of federal securities laws related to analyst independence
issues; and an action filed in west virginia state court by west virginias attorney general,
seeking recovery from the defendants in the aggregate of $5,000 for each of what are alleged to be
hundreds of thousands of violations of the states consumer protection statute. on august8, 2003,
the plaintiffs in the colorado action dismissed the complaint without prejudice. in west virginia,
the court denied defendants motion to dismiss, and defendants are pursuing an interlocutory
appeal to the state supreme court.
jpmsi was served by the sec, nasd and nyse on or about may30, 2003, with subpoenas or document
requests seeking information regarding certain present and former officers and employees in
connection with an investigation focusing on whether particular individuals properly performed
supervisory functions regarding domestic equity research. the regulators also raised issues
regarding jpmsis document retention procedures and policies and pursued a books-and-records charge
against it concerning e-mail that its heritage entities could not retrieve for the period prior to
july2001. jpmsi has negotiated an agreement that has been accepted by all of the
regulators to settle this matter for a payment of a $2.1million penalty without admitting or
denying any allegations.
national century financial enterprises litigation. jpmorgan chase, jpmorgan chase bank, jpmorgan
partners, beacon group, llc and three current or former firm employees have been named as
defendants in more than a dozen actions filed in or transferred to the united states district court
for the southern district of ohio (the mdl litigation). in the majority of these actions,
bank one, bank one, n.a., and banc one capital markets, inc. are also named as defendants. jpmorgan
chase bank and bank one, n.a. are also defendants in an action brought by the unencumbered assets
trust (uat), a trust created for the benefit of the creditors of national century financial
enterprises, inc. (ncfe) as a result of ncfes plan of liquidation in bankruptcy. these actions
arose out of the november2002 bankruptcy of ncfe. prior to bankruptcy, ncfe provided financing to
various healthcare providers through wholly-owned special-purpose vehicles, including npf vi and
npf xii, which purchased discounted accounts receivable to be paid under third-party insurance
programs. npf vi and npf xii financed the purchases of such receivables primarily through private
placements of notes (notes) to institutional investors and pledged the receivables for, among
other
things, the repayment of the notes. in the mdl litigation, jpmorgan chase bank is sued in its role
as indenture trustee for npf vi, which issued approximately $1billion in notes. bank one, n.a. is
sued in its role as indenture trustee for npf xii, which issued approximately $2billion in notes.
the three current or former firm employees are sued in their roles as former members of ncfes
board of directors (the defendant employees). jpmorgan chase, jpmorgan partners and beacon group,
llc, are claimed to be vicariously liable for the alleged actions of the defendant employees. banc
one capital markets, inc. is sued in its role as co-manager for three note offerings made by npf
xii. other defendants include the founders and key executives of ncfe, its auditors and outside
counsel, and rating agencies and placement agents that were involved with the issuance of the
notes. plaintiffs in these actions include institutional investors who purchased more than $2.7
billion in original face amount of asset-backed securities issued by ncfe. plaintiffs allege that
the trustees violated fiduciary and contractual duties, improperly permitted ncfe and its
affiliates to violate the applicable indentures and violated securities laws by (among other
things) failing to disclose the true nature of the ncfe arrangements. plaintiffs further allege
that the defendant employees controlled the board and audit committees of the ncfe entities; were
fully aware or negligent in not knowing of ncfes alleged manipulation of its books; and are liable
for failing to disclose their purported knowledge of the alleged fraud to the plaintiffs.
plaintiffs also allege that banc one capital markets, inc. is liable for cooperating in the sale of
securities based on false and misleading statements. motions to dismiss on behalf of the jpmorgan
chase entities, the bank one entities and the defendant employees are currently pending. in the uat
action, jpmorgan chase bank and bank one are sued in their roles as indenture trustees. claims are
asserted under the federal racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations act (rico), the ohio
corrupt practices act and various common-law claims. responsive pleadings in the uat action have
not been filed.
mutual fund litigation: on june29, 2004, banc one investment advisors (boia) entered into a
settlement with the new york attorney general and the sec related to alleged market timing in the
one group mutual funds. under the settlement, boia paid $10million in restitution and fee
disgorgement plus a civil penalty of $40million. boia also agreed to reduce fees over a five-year
period in the amount of $8million per year, consented to a cease-and-desist order and a censure,
and agreed to undertake certain compliance and mutual fund governance reforms. additionally,
jpmorgan chase, bank one, and certain subsidiaries and officers have been named, along with
numerous other entities related to the mutual fund industry, as defendants in private-party
litigation arising out of alleged late trading and market timing in mutual funds. the actions have
been filed in or transferred to u.s. district court in baltimore, maryland. certain plaintiffs
allege that boia and related entities and officers allowed favored investors to market time and
late trade in the one group mutual funds. these complaints include a purported class action on
behalf of one group shareholders alleging claims under federal securities laws and common law; a
purported derivative suit on behalf of the one group funds under the investment company act, the
investment advisers act and common law; and a purported class action on behalf of participants and
beneficiaries of the bank one corporation 401(k)plan, alleging claims under the employee
retirement income security act. on september29, 2004, certain other plaintiffs in the federal
action in baltimore, maryland filed amended complaints which included jpmorgan chase and jpmsi as
defendants. the amended complaints allege that jpmorgan chase and jpmsi, with several co-defendants
including bank of america,
table of contents
bank of america securities, canadian imperial commerce bank, bear stearns and cfsb, provided
financing to canary capital which was used to engage in the market timing and late trading.
jpmorgan chase and jpmsi are alleged to have financed knowingly the market timing and late trading
by canary capital and edward stern, and knowingly to have created short-position equity baskets to
allow canary capital to profit from trading in a falling market. on february25, 2005,
boia, jpmorgan chase, jpmsi and other defendants filed motions to dismiss these actions.
certain jpmorgan chase subsidiaries have also received various subpoenas and information requests
relating to market timing and late trading in mutual funds from various governmental and other
agencies, including the sec, the nasd, the u.s. department of labor, the attorneys general of new
york, west virginia and vermont, and regulators in the united kingdom, luxembourg, the republic of
ireland, chile and hong kong. the firm is fully cooperating with these investigations.
on january12, 2005, bank one securities corporation (bosc) entered into a settlement with the
nasd pursuant to which bosc was censured and agreed to pay a $400,000 fine for its alleged failure
to implement adequate supervisory systems and written procedures designed to detect and prevent
late trading of mutual funds, and for inaccurately recording the entry time for customer orders.
bank one securities litigation. bank one and several former officers and directors are defendants
in three class actions and one individual action arising out of the mergers between banc one
corporation (banc one) and first commerce corporation (first commerce), and banc one
corporation and first chicago nbd corporation (fcnbd). these actions were filed in 2000 and are
pending in the united states district court for the northern district of illinois in chicago under
the general caption, in re bank one securities litigation. the cases were filed after bank ones
earnings announcements in august and november1999 that lowered bank ones earnings expectations
for the third and fourth quarters of 1999. following the announcements, bank ones stock
price had dropped by 37.7% as of november10, 1999.
two of these class actions were brought by representatives of fcnbd shareholders and banc one
shareholders, respectively, alleging certain misrepresentations and omissions of material fact
made in connection with the merger between fcnbd and banc one, which was completed
in october1998. there is also an individual lawsuit proceeding
in connection with that same merger. a third class action was filed by another individual plaintiff
representing shareholders of first commerce, alleging certain misrepresentations and omissions of
material fact made in connection with the merger between banc one and first commerce, which was
completed in june1998. all of these plaintiff groups claim that as a result of various
misstatements or omissions regarding payment processing issues at first usa bank, n.a., a
wholly-owned subsidiary of banc one, and as a result of the use of various accounting practices,
the price of banc one common stock was artificially inflated, causing their shareholders to acquire
shares of the bank ones common stock in the merger at an exchange rate that was
artificially deflated. the complaints against bank one and the individual defendants assert claims
under federal securities laws. fact discovery, with limited exceptions, closed in december2003.
the parties are in the middle of expert discovery, which is scheduled to close in the spring
of 2005.
in addition to the various cases, proceedings and investigations discussed above, jpmorgan chase
and its subsidiaries are named as defendants in a number of other legal actions and governmental
proceedings arising in connection with their respective businesses. additional actions,
investigations or proceedings may be brought from time to time in the future. in view of the
inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of legal matters, particularly where the claimants
seek very large or indeterminate damages, or where the cases present novel legal theories, involve
a large number of parties or are in early stages of discovery, the firm cannot state with
confidence what the eventual outcome of these pending matters will be, what the timing of the
ultimate resolution of these matters will be or what the eventual loss, fines or penalties related
to each pending matter may be. jpmorgan chase believes, based upon its current knowledge, after
consultation with counsel and after taking into account its litigation reserves, that the outcome
of the legal actions, proceedings and investigations currently pending against it should not have a
material adverse effect on the consolidated financial condition of the firm. however, in light of
the uncertainties involved in such proceedings, actions and investigations, there is no assurance
that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not significantly exceed the reserves currently
accrued by the firm; as a result, the outcome of a particular matter may be material to jpmorgan
chases operating results for a particular period, depending upon, among other factors, the size of
the loss or liability imposed and the level of jpmorgan chases income for that period.
item4: submission of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
executive officers of the registrant
name
age
positions and offices held with jpmorgan chase
(at december 31, 2004)
william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer since november2001, prior to which he was
president and chief executive officer from december2000. he was chairman and chief
executive officer from january through december2000 and president and chief executive
officer from june through december1999.
table of contents
part i
james dimon
president and chief operating officer. prior to the merger, he had been chairman and
chief executive officer of bank one corporation since march2000. before joining bank
one corporation, he had been a private investor from november1998 until march2000;
president of citigroup inc. and chairman and co-chief executive officer of citigroup inc.
subsidiary salomon smith barney holdings, inc. from october to november1998; president
and chief operating officer of travelers group from november1993 until october1998.
austin a. adams
chief information officer. prior to the merger, he had been chief information officer of
bank one corporation since march2001. before joining bank one corporation, he had
been chief information officer at first union corporation (now known as wachovia corp.)
from 1985 until february2001.
steven b. black
co-chief executive officer of the investment bank since march2004, prior to which he had
been deputy head of the investment bank since january2001 and head of institutional
equities business since 2000. prior to joining jpmorgan chase in 2000, he had been vice
chairman, global equities, tax exempt securities and securities lending of citigroup inc.
subsidiary, salomon smith barney inc.
william i. campbell
chairman of card services. prior to the merger, he had been head of card services
with bank one corporation since july2003. he had been senior partner with sanoch
management, llc from january2000 until july2003, prior to which he had been co-chief
executive officer of global consumer business of citigroup inc. from january1996 until
december1999.
michael j. cavanagh
chief financial officer since september2004, prior to which he had been head of middle
market banking. prior to the merger, he had been chief administrative officer of
commercial banking from february2003, chief operating officer for middle market banking
from august2003, treasurer from 2001 until 2003, and head of strategy and planning from
may2000 until 2001 at bank one corporation. prior to joining bank one corporation, he
held executive positions at citigroup inc. and its predecessor entities.
david a. coulter
chairman of west coast region since january2005 and head of private equity since
march2004. he had been chairman of the investment bank and head of asset & wealth
management from june2002 until december2004, prior to which he had been head of
chase financial services from 2000 until 2002. prior to joining jpmorgan chase in 2000,
he led the west coast operations of the beacon group, prior to which he was chairman
and chief executive officer of bankamerica corporation and bank of america nt & sa.
john j. farrell
director human resources and head of security since september2001.
joan guggenheimer
co-general counsel. prior to the merger, she had been chief legal officer and corporate
secretary at bank one corporation since may2003. she had served in various positions
with citigroup inc. and its predecessor entities from 1985 until 2003, and prior to joining
bank one corporation was general counsel of the global corporate and investment bank
and also served as co-general counsel of citigroup inc.
frederick w. hill
director of corporate marketing and communications.
samuel todd maclin
head of commercial banking since july2004, prior to which he had been chairman and
ceo of the texas region and head of middle market banking.
jay mandelbaum
head of strategy and business development. prior to the merger, he had been head of
strategy and business development since september2002 at bank one corporation. he
had been vice chairman and chief executive officer of the private client group of
citigroup inc. subsidiary salomon smith barney, inc. from september2000 until august
2002 and senior executive vice president of private client sales and marketing at salomon
smith barney, inc. from august1997 until august2000.
william h. mcdavid
co-general counsel. prior to the merger, he had been general counsel.
heidi miller
chief executive officer of treasury & securities services. prior to the merger, she had been
chief financial officer at bank one corporation since march2002. prior to joining bank
one corporation, she had been vice chairman of marsh, inc. from january2001 until
table of contents
march2002; senior executive vice president, chief financial officer and head of strategic
planning at priceline.com from march until november2000; chief financial officer at
citigroup inc. from 1998 until march2000.
charles w. scharf
head of retail financial services. prior to the merger, he had been head of retail banking
from may2002 prior to which he was chief financial officer from june2000 at bank one
corporation. prior to joining bank one corporation, he had been chief financial officer at
citigroup global corporate and investment bank from 1998 until 2000.
richard j. srednicki
chief executive officer of card services from july2004 prior to which he was executive
vice president of chase cardmember services from 1999 until 2004.
james e. staley
global head of asset & wealth management since 2001. he had been head of the private
bank at j.p. morgan & co. incorporated.
don m. wilson iii
chief risk officer. he had been co-head of credit & rates markets from 2001 until july
2003, prior to which he headed the global trading division.
william t. winters
co-chief executive officer of the investment bank since march2004, prior to which he had
been deputy head of the investment bank and head of credit & rate markets. he had
been head of global markets at j.p. morgan & co. incorporated.
unless otherwise noted, during the five fiscal years ended december31, 2004, all of
jpmorgan chases above-named executive officers have continuously held senior-level positions with
jpmorgan chase or its predecessor institutions, bank one corporation, j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated and the chase manhattan corporation. there are no family relationships among the
foregoing executive officers.
part ii
item5: market for registrants common
equity, related stockholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities
the outstanding shares of jpmorgan chases common stock are listed and traded on the new york
stock exchange, the london stock exchange limited and the tokyo stock exchange. for the quarterly
high and low prices of jpmorgan chases common stock on the new york stock exchange for the last
two years, see the section entitled supplementary information  selected quarterly financial data
(unaudited) on page 129. jpmorgan chase declared quarterly cash dividends on its common stock in
the amount of $0.34 per share for each quarter of 2004 and 2003. the common dividend payout ratio
based on reported net income was 88% for 2004, 43% for 2003 and 171% for 2002. at january31, 2005,
there were 233,239 holders of record of jpmorgan chases common stock. for information regarding
securities authorized for issuance under the firms employee stock-based compensation plans, see
item12 on page 12.
on july20, 2004, the board of directors approved an initial stock repurchase program in the
aggregate amount of $6.0billion. this amount includes shares to be repurchased to offset issuances
under the firms employee equity-based plans. the actual amount of shares repurchased will be
subject to various factors, including market conditions; legal considerations affecting the amount
and timing of repurchase activity; the firms capital position (taking into account purchase
accounting adjustments); internal capital generation; and alternative potential investment
opportunities. the stock repurchase program has no set expiration or termination date.
the firms repurchases of equity securities were as follows:
total open
average
dollar value of
for the year ended
market shares
price paid
remaining authorized
december 31, 2004
repurchased
per share(a)
repurchase program
third quarter
3,497,700
$
39.42
$
5,862
october
4,187,000
37.60
5,704
november
5,827,700
38.12
5,482
december
5,766,800
38.19
5,262
fourth quarter
15,781,500
38.01
5,262
total for 2004
19,279,200
$
38.27
$
5,262
(a)
excludes commission costs.
in addition to the repurchases disclosed above, participants in the long-term incentive plan
and stock option plan may have shares withheld to cover income taxes. shares withheld to pay income
taxes are repurchased pursuant to the terms of the applicable plan and not under the firms
publicly announced share repurchase program. shares repurchased were as follows for the year ended
december31, 2004: first quarter 3,625,236 shares at an average price per share of $39.47; second
quarter669,247 shares at an average price per share of $36.23; third quarter995,686 shares at an
average price per share of $38.17; october107,795 shares at an average price per share of $39.48;
november216,254 shares at an average price per share of $38.79; december95,026 shares at an
average price per share of $37.96; fourth quarter419,075 shares at an average price per share of
$38.78; 2004 total5,709,244 shares at an average price per share of $38.82.
table of contents
parts ii & iii
item6: selected financial data
for five-year selected
financial data, see five-year summary of consolidated financial highlights
(unaudited) on page 130.
item7: managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and
results of operations
managements discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations,
entitled managements discussion and analysis, appears on pages 18 through 81. such
information should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes
thereto, which appear on pages 84 through 128.
item7a: quantitative and qualitative
disclosures about market risk
for information related to market risk, see the market risk management section on pages 70
through 74 and note 26 on pages 118-119.
item8: financial statements
and supplementary data
the consolidated financial statements, together with the notes thereto and the report of
pricewaterhousecoopers llp dated february22, 2005 thereon, appear on pages 83 through 128.
supplementary financial data for each full quarter within the two years ended december31, 2004 are
included on page 129 in the table entitled supplementary information  selected quarterly
financial data (unaudited). also included is a glossary of terms on page 131.
item9: changes in and disagreements
with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
none.
item9a: controls and procedures
within the 75-day period prior to the filing of this report, an evaluation was carried out
under the supervision and with the participation of the firms management, including its chief
executive officer, chief operating officer and chief financial officer, of the effectiveness of the
design and operation of its disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in rule13a-15(e) under
the securities exchange act of 1934). see exhibits 31.1,
31.2 and 31.3 for the certification statements issued by the chief executive officer, chief
operating officer and chief financial officer. based upon that evaluation, the chief executive
officer, chief operating officer and chief financial officer concluded that the design and
operation of these disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
the work undertaken by the firm to comply with section404 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
involved the identification, documentation, assessment and testing of
the firms internal control over financial
reporting in order to evaluate the effectiveness of such controls. the evaluation included key
controls of bank one corporation from the date of its acquisition on july1, 2004.
the firm is committed to maintaining high standards of internal control over financial reporting.
nevertheless, because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may
not prevent or detect misstatements. in addition, in a firm as large and complex as jpmorgan
chase, lapses or deficiencies in internal controls are likely to occur from time to time and there
can be no assurance that any such deficiencies will not result in significant deficiencies  or,
even, material weaknesses  in internal controls in the future. see page 82 for managements
report on internal control over financial reporting, and page 83 for
the report of the firms independent
registered public accounting firm with respect to managements
assessment of internal control. there was no change in the
firms internal control over financial reporting (as defined in
rule13a-15(f) under the securities exchange act of 1934) that
occurred during the fourth quarter of 2004 that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
firms internal control over financial reporting.
item9b: other information
none.
part iii
item10: directors and
executive officers of the registrant
see item13 on page 13.
item11: executive compensation
see item13 on page 13.
item12: security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management
for security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management, see item13 on page 13.
table of contents
parts iii & iv
the following table details the total number of shares available for issuance under
jpmorgan chase employee stock-based incentive plans (including shares available for issuance
to nonemployee directors). the firm is not authorized to grant stock-based incentive awards
to nonemployees other than to nonemployee directors.
number of shares to be
weighted-average
number of shares remaining
december 31, 2004
issued upon exercise of
exercise price of
available for future issuance under
(shares in thousands)
outstanding options
outstanding options
equity compensation plans
employee stock-based incentive plans approved by shareholders
314,814
$
35.76
188,580
(a)(b)
employee stock-based incentive plans not approved by shareholders
172,448
40.12
54,000
(c)
total
487,262
$
37.30
242,580
(a)
includes
35million shares of restricted stock/restricted stock units available for
grant in lieu of cash under our shareholder approved plan. the shareholder approved
1996 long-term incentive plan, as
amended in may2000, expires in may2005.
(b)
in
january2005, approximately 35.5million restricted stock
units and 2.0million stock appreciation rights (sars)
(settled only in shares) and stock options were granted under the firms shareholder
approved plan as part of
employee annual incentive compensation. other than these grants, the firm does not
anticipate making any significant grants to employees under the 1996 long-term incentive
plan before
this plan expires in may2005. a new equity plan will be presented for approval by
shareholders at the annual meeting in may2005. for the new
equity plan, management will
not be
requesting the remaining shares available for future issuance under the shareholder
approved 1996 long-term incentive plan  anticipated to be about 150million shares  be
made available
under the new equity plan.
(c)
management has determined that there will be no grants in 2005 under either the stock option
plan (under which options and sars were last awarded in 2002) and the value sharing
plan (6.3million options and sars were
granted in 2004). both of these non-shareholder approved plans will expire in may
2005. management will not be requesting that the 54million shares available for
future issuance be carried over to the new equity plan.
item13: certain relationships and
related transactions
information related to
jpmorgan chases executive officers is included on pages 9-11. pursuant to
instruction g (3)to form 10-k, the remainder of the information to be provided in items 10, 11,
12, 13 and 14 of form 10-k (other than information pursuant to rule402 (i), (k)and (l)of
regulations-k) is incorporated by reference to jpmorgan chases definitive proxy statement for the
2005 annual meeting of stockholders, which proxy statement will be filed with the securities and
exchange commission pursuant to regulation14a within 120days of the close of jpmorgan chases
2004 fiscal year.
item14: principal accounting fees and
services
see item13 above.
part iv
item15: exhibits, financial statement
schedules
exhibits, financial statements and financial statement schedules
1.
financial statements
the consolidated financial statements, the notes thereto and the report thereon listed in item
8 are set forth commencing on page 83.
2.
financial statement schedules
financial statement schedules are omitted since the required information is either not
applicable, not deemed material, or is shown in the respective consolidated financial
statements or in the notes thereto.
3.
exhibits
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of jpmorgan chase & co.
3.2
by-laws of jpmorgan chase & co. as amended by the board of
directors on march16, 2004, effective july20, 2004.
4.1
deposit agreement, dated as of february8, 1996, between
j.p. morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded through merger by
jpmorgan chase & co.) and morgan guaranty trust company of
new york (succeeded through merger by jpmorgan chase bank),
as depository (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.7 to the
registration statement on form 8-a of the chase manhattan
corporation (now known as jpmorgan chase & co.) file no.
1-5805), filed december20, 2000.
4.2
indenture, dated as of december1, 1989, between chemical
banking corporation (now known as jpmorgan chase & co.) and
the chase manhattan bank (national association), as succeeded
to by bankers trust company (now known as deutsche bank
trust company americas), as trustee.
4.3(a)
indenture, dated as of april1, 1987, as amended and restated as of december15, 1992,
between chemical banking corporation (now known as jpmorgan chase & co.) and morgan guaranty
trust company of new york (now known as jpmorgan chase bank), as succeeded to by u.s. bank
trust national association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.3(a) to the
annual report on form 10-k of jpmorgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.3(b)
second supplemental indenture, dated as of october8, 1996,
between the chase manhattan corporation (now known as
jpmorgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of april1,
1987, as amended and restated as of december15, 1992 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.3(b) to the annual report on
form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the
year ended december31, 2000).
table of contents
part iv
4.3(c)
third supplemental indenture, dated as of december29, 2000,
between the chase manhattan corporation (now known as
jpmorgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of april1,
1987, as amended and restated as of december15, 1992 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.3(c) to the annual report on
form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the
year ended december31, 2000).
4.4(a)
amended and restated indenture, dated as of september1,
1993, between the chase manhattan corporation (as assumed
by jpmorgan chase & co.) and chemical bank (succeeded
through the merger by jpmorgan chase bank), as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4(a) to the annual report on
form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the
year ended december31, 2000).
4.4(b)
first supplemental indenture, dated as of march29, 1996,
among chemical banking corporation (now known as jpmorgan
chase & co.), the chase manhattan corporation, chemical
bank, as resigning trustee, and u.s. bank trust national
association, as successor trustee, to the amended and restated
indenture, dated as of september1, 1993 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4(b) to the annual report on form 10-k of j.p.
morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended
december31, 2000).
4.4(c)
second supplemental indenture, dated as of october8, 1996,
between the chase manhattan corporation (now known as
jpmorgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank trust national association,
as trustee, to the amended and restated indenture, dated as of
september1, 1993 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4(c) to
the annual report on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.4(d)
third supplemental indenture, dated as of december29, 2000,
between the chase manhattan corporation (now known as
jpmorgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank trust national association,
as trustee, to the amended and restated indenture, dated as of
september1, 1993 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4(d)
to the annual report on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co.
(file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(a)
indenture dated as of august15, 1982, between j.p. morgan &
co. incorporated (succeeded through merger by jpmorgan chase
& co.) and u.s. bank trust national association, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.5(a) to the annual report
on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for
the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(b)
first supplemental indenture, dated as of may5, 1986,
between j.p. morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded through
merger by jpmorgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of august15,
1982 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.5(b) to the annual
report on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(c)
second supplemental indenture, dated as of february27, 1996,
between j.p. morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded through
merger by jpmorgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of august15,
1982 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.5(c) to the annual
report on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(d)
third supplemental indenture, dated as of january30, 1997,
between j.p. morgan & co. incorporated (succeeded through
merger by jpmorgan chase & co.) and u.s. bank trust national
association, as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of august15,
1982 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.5(d) to the annual
report on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.5(e)
fourth supplemental indenture, dated as of december29, 2000,
among j.p. morgan & co. incorporated, the chase manhattan
corporation (now known as jpmorgan chase & co.), and u.s.
bank trust national association, as trustee, to the indenture, dated
as of august15, 1982 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.5(e) to the annual report on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase
& co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.6(a)
indenture dated as of march1, 1993, between j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated (succeeded through merger by jpmorgan chase &
co.) and u.s. bank trust national association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.7(a) to the annual report on
form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for the
year ended december31, 2000).
4.6(b)
first supplemental indenture, dated as of december29, 2000,
among j.p. morgan & co. incorporated, the chase manhattan
corporation (now known as jpmorgan chase & co.), and u.s.
bank trust national association, as trustee, to the indenture,
dated as of march1, 1993 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.7(b) to the annual report on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase
& co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
4.7
indenture dated may25, 2001, between j.p. morgan chase &
co. (now known as jpmorgan chase & co.) and deutsche bank
trust company americas (previously known as bankers trust
company), as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit
4(a)(1) to the registration statement on form s-3 (file
no.333-52826)
of j.p. morgan chase & co., file no.1-5805).
4.8(a)
junior subordinated indenture, dated as of december1, 1996,
between the chase manhattan corporation (now known as
jpmorgan chase & co.) and the bank of new york, as
debenture trustee.
4.8(b)
guarantee agreement, dated as of january24, 1997, between
the chase manhattan corporation (now known as jpmorgan
chase & co.) and the bank of new york, as trustee.
4.8(c)
amended and restated trust agreement, dated as of january
24, 1997, among the chase manhattan corporation (now
known as jpmorgan chase & co.), the bank of new york, as
property trustee, the bank of new york (delaware), as delaware
trustee, and the administrative trustees named therein.
table of contents
4.9(a)
indenture relating to senior debt securities, dated march3,
1997, between banc one corporation (a predecessor to bank
one corporation) (succeeded through merger by jpmorgan
chase & co.) and the chase manhattan bank, as trustee.
4.9(b)
first supplemental indenture relating to senior debt securities,
dated as of october2, 1998, between banc one corporation (a
predecessor to bank one corporation) (succeeded through
merger by jpmorgan chase & co.) and the chase manhattan
bank, as trustee.
4.9(c)
form of second supplemental indenture relating to senior debt
securities, dated as of july1, 2004, among j.p. morgan chase &
co. (now known as jpmorgan chase & co.), bank one corporation,
jpmorgan chase bank, as resigning trustee, and deutsche bank
trust company americas, as successor trustee, to the indenture,
dated as of march3, 1997 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.22 to the registration statement on form s-3 dated
july1, 2004. (file no.333-116822) of jpmorgan chase & co.)
4.10(a)
indenture relating to subordinated debt securities, dated march
3, 1997, between banc one corporation (a predecessor to bank
one corporation) (succeeded through merger by jpmorgan
chase & co.) and the chase manhattan bank, as trustee.
4.10(b)
first supplemental indenture relating to subordinated debt securities dated october2, 1998, between banc one corporation
(a predecessor to bank one corporation) (succeeded through
merger by jpmorgan chase & co.) and the chase manhattan
bank, as trustee.
4.10(c)
second supplemental indenture relating to subordinated debt
securities, dated july1, 2004, among j.p. morgan chase & co.
(now known as jpmorgan chase & co.), bank one corporation,
jpmorgan chase bank, as resigning trustee, and u.s. bank trust
national association, as successor trustee, to the indenture
dated as of march3, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
4.25 to the registration statement on form s-3 dated july1,
2004. (file no.333-116822) of jpmorgan chase & co.)
4.11(a)
form of indenture, dated july1, 1995, between banc one corporation
(a predecessor to bank one corporation) (succeeded through
merger by jpmorgan chase & co.) and citibank n.a, as trustee.
4.11(b)
form of supplemental indenture,
dated july1, 2004, among j.p.
morgan chase & co. (now known as jpmorgan chase & co.),
bank one corporation, and citibank n.a. as resigning trustee,
and u.s. bank trust national association, as successor trustee, to
the indenture, dated as of july1, 1995 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit4.27 to the registration statement on form s-3 dated
july1, 2004. (file no.333-116822) of jpmorgan chase & co.)
4.12(a)
form of indenture, dated december1, 1995, between first
chicago nbc corporation (a predecessor to bank one corporation)
(succeeded through merger by jpmorgan chase & co.) and the
chase manhattan bank (national association), as trustee.
4.12(b)
form of supplemental indenture, dated as of july1, 2004, among
j.p. morgan chase & co. (now known as jpmorgan chase & co.),
bank one corporation, jpmorgan chase bank (as successor to
the chase manhattan bank (national association), as resigning
trustee, and u.s. bank trust national association, as successor
trustee, to the indenture, dated as of december1, 1995
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.29 to the registration
statement on form s-3 dated july1, 2004. (file no.333-116822)
of jpmorgan chase & co.)
10.1
deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors of
the chase manhattan corporation (now known as jpmorgan
chase & co.) and the chase manhattan bank (now known as
jpmorgan chase bank, n.a.), as amended and restated effective
december,1996.
10.2
post-retirement compensation plan for non-employee directors,
as amended and restated as of may21, 1996.
10.3
deferred compensation program of jpmorgan chase & co. and
participating companies, effective as of january1, 1996.
10.4
amended and restated 1996 long-term incentive plan of the
chase manhattan corporation (incorporated by reference to
schedule14a, filed on april5, 2000, of the chase manhattan
corporation, file no.1-5805).
10.5(a)
the chase manhattan 1994 long-term incentive plan.
10.5(b)
amendment to the chase manhattan 1994 long-term incentive
plan.
10.6
chemical banking corporation long-term stock incentive plan,
as amended and restated as of may19, 1992.
10.7
key executive performance plan of jpmorgan chase & co., as
amended and restated january1, 1999 (incorporated by reference to proposal 4 of the joint proxy statement, dated april19,
2004, of j.p. morgan chase & co. and bank one corporation).
10.8
excess retirement plan of the chase manhattan bank and
participating companies, restated effective january1, 1997
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.14 to the annual report
on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file no.1-5805) for
the year ended december31, 2000).
10.9
form of j.p. morgan &
co. incorporated stock option award.
10.10
1992 j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated stock incentive plan, as amended.
10.11
1984 j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated stock incentive plan, as amended.
10.12
1995 j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated stock incentive plan, as amended.
10.13
1998 j.p. morgan & co.
incorporated performance plan.
10.14
executive retirement plan of the chase manhattan corporation
and certain subsidiaries (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.25 to the annual report on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase
& co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
table of contents
part iv
10.15
benefit equalization plan of the chase manhattan corporation
and certain subsidiaries (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.26 to the annual report on form 10-k of j.p. morgan chase
& co. (file no.1-5805) for the year ended december31, 2000).
10.16
summary of terms of jpmorgan chase & co. severance policy.
10.17
employment agreement between j. p. morgan chase & co. and
james dimon dated january14, 2004 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.1 of the registration statement on form s-4 dated
as of july1, 2004 of j.p. morgan chase & co. (file
no.333-112967)).
10.18
summary of terms of pension
william b. harrison, jr. (incorporated by reference to form 8-k of jpmorgan chase
& co. dated february28, 2005).
10.19
bank one corporation director
stock plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(b) to the form10-k of bank one corporation for
the year ended december31, 2003).
10.20
summary of bank one corporation
director deferred compensation plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(m) to the form10-k of bank one corporation for
the year ended december31, 2000).
10.21
bank one corporation stock
performance plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(a) to
the form10-k of bank one corporation for the year ended
december31, 2002).
10.22
bank one corporation deferred
compensation plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(d) to the form10-k of bank one corporation for
the year ended december31, 2000).
10.23
bank one corporation
supplement savings and investment plan, as amended (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10(e) to the form10-k of bank one corporation for
the year ended december31, 2003).
10.24
bank one corporation
supplemental personal pension account plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(f) to the form10-k of bank one corporation for
the year ended december31, 2003).
10.25
bank one corporation key
executive change of control plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(g) to the form10-k of bank one corporation for
the year ended december31, 2003).
10.26
bank one corporation planning
group annual incentive plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(h) to the form10-k of bank one corporation for
the year ended december31, 2003).
10.27
bank one corporation investment
option plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(i) to the form10-k of bank one corporation for
the year ended december31, 2003).
10.28
first chicago corporation stock
incentive plan.
10.29
nbd bancorp, inc. performance
incentive plan, as amended.
10.30
bank one corporation revised
and restated 1989 stock incentive plan.
10.31
bank one corporation revised
and restated 1995 stock incentive plan.
12.1
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
12.2
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges and preferred
stock dividend requirements.
21.1
list of subsidiaries of jpmorgan chase & co.
22.1
annual report on form 11-k of the jpmorgan chase 401(k)
savings plan (to be filed by amendment pursuant to rule15d-21
under the securities exchange act of 1934).
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
certification.
31.2
certification.
31.3
certification.
certification pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section1350, as adopted
pursuant to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
jpmorgan chase hereby agrees to furnish to the securities and exchange
commission, upon request, copies of instruments defining the rights of
holders for the outstanding nonregistered long-term debt of jpmorgan
chase and its subsidiaries and certain other long-term debt issued by
predecessor institutions of jpmorgan chase and assumed by virtue of
the mergers with those respective institutions. these instruments have
not been filed as exhibits hereto by reason that the total amount of each
issue of such securities does not exceed 10% of the total assets of
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. in addition,
jpmorgan chase hereby agrees to file with the securities and exchange
commission, upon request, the junior subordinated indentures, the
guarantees and the amended and restated trust agreements for each
delaware business trust subsidiary that has issued capital securities,
the guarantees for which have been assumed by jpmorgan chase & co.
by virtue of the mergers of the respective predecessor institutions that
originally issued such securities. the provisions of such agreements differ
from the documents constituting exhibits 4.8(a), (b)and (c)to this report
only with respect to the pricing terms of each series of capital securities;
these pricing terms are disclosed in note 17 on page 112.
table of contents
table of contents
financial:
managements discussion and analysis:
introduction
executive overview
consolidated results of operations
explanation and reconciliation of the firms use of non-gaap financial measures
business segment results
balance sheet analysis
capital management
off-balance sheet arrangements and contractual cash obligations
risk management
liquidity risk management
credit risk management
market risk management
operational risk management
reputation and fiduciary risk management
private equity risk management
critical accounting estimates used by the firm
nonexchange-traded commodity contracts at fair value
accounting and reporting developments
audited financial statements:
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
notes to consolidated financial statements
supplementary information:
selected quarterly financial data
five-year summary of consolidated financial highlights
glossary of terms
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
this section of the annual report provides managements discussion and analysis (md&a) of
the financial condition and results of operations for jpmorgan chase. see the glossary of terms on
page 131 for a definition of terms used throughout this annual report. the md&a included in this
annual report contains statements that are forward-looking within the meaning of the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995. such statements are based upon the current beliefs and
expectations of jpmorgan chases management and are subject to
significant risks and uncertainties. these risks and uncertainties could cause jpmorgan
chases results to differ materially from those set forth in such forward-looking statements. such
risks and uncertainties are described herein and in parti,
item1: business, important
factors that may affect future results, in the jpmorgan chase annual report on form 10-k for the
year ended december31, 2004, filed with the securities and exchange commission and available at
the commissions website (www.sec.gov), to which reference is hereby made.
introduction
jpmorgan chase & co. (jpmorgan chase or the firm), a financial holding company
incorporated under delaware law in 1968, is a leading global financial services firm and one of the
largest banking institutions in the united states, with $1.2 trillion in assets, $106billion in
stockholders equity and operations in more than 50 countries. the firm is a leader in investment
banking, financial services for consumers and businesses, financial transaction processing,
investment management, private banking and private equity. jpmorgan chase serves more than 90
million customers, including consumers nationwide and many of the worlds most prominent wholesale
clients.
jpmorgan chases principal bank subsidiaries are jpmorgan chase bank, national association
(jpmorgan chase bank), a national banking association with branches in 17 states; and
chase bank usa, national association, a national bank headquartered in delaware that is the firms
credit card issuing bank. jpmorgan chases principal nonbank subsidiary is j.p. morgan securities
inc. (jpmsi), its u.s. investment banking firm.
the headquarters for jpmorgan chase is in new york city. the retail banking business, which
includes the consumer banking, small business banking and consumer lending activities with the
exception of credit card, is headquartered in chicago. chicago also serves as the headquarters for
the commercial banking business.
jpmorgan chases activities are organized, for management reporting purposes, into six business
segments, as well as corporate. the firms wholesale businesses are comprised of the investment
bank, commercial banking, treasury & securities services, and asset & wealth management. the firms
consumer businesses are comprised of retail financial services and card services. a description of
the firms business segments, and the products and services they provide to their respective client
bases, follows:
investment bank
jpmorgan chase is one of the worlds leading investment banks, as evidenced by the breadth of
its client relationships and product capabilities. the investment bank (ib) has extensive
relationships with corporations, financial institutions, governments and institutional investors
worldwide. the firm provides a full range of investment banking products and services, including
advising on corporate strategy and structure, capital raising in equity and debt markets,
sophisticated risk management, and market-making in cash securities and derivative instruments in
all major capital markets. the ib also commits the firms own capital to proprietary investing and
trading activities.
retail financial services
retail financial services (rfs) includes home finance, consumer & small business banking,
auto & education finance and insurance. through this group of businesses, the firm provides
consumers and small businesses with a broad range of financial products and services including
deposits, investments, loans and insurance. home finance is a leading provider of consumer real
estate loan products and is one of the largest originators and servicers of
home mortgages. consumer & small business banking offers one of the largest branch networks in the
united states, covering 17 states with 2,508 branches and 6,650 automated teller machines. auto &
education finance is the largest bank originator of automobile loans as well as a top provider of
loans for college students. through its insurance operations, the firm sells and underwrites an
extensive range of financial protection products and investment alternatives, including
life insurance, annuities and debt protection products.
card services
card services (cs) is the largest issuer of general purpose credit cards in the
united states, with approximately 94million cards in circulation, and is the largest merchant
acquirer. cs offers a wide variety of products to satisfy the needs of its cardmembers, including
cards issued on behalf of many well-known partners, such as major airlines, hotels,
universities, retailers and other financial institutions.
commercial banking
commercial banking (cb) serves more than 25,000 corporations, municipalities, financial
institutions and not-for-profit entities, with annual revenues generally ranging from $10million to
$2billion. a local market presence and a strong customer
service model, coupled with a focus on risk management, provide a
solid infrastructure for cb to provide the
firms complete product set  lending, treasury services, investment banking and
investment management  for both corporate clients and their executives. cbs clients
benefit greatly from the firms extensive branch network and often use the firm exclusively to meet
their financial services needs.
treasury & securities services
treasury & securities services (tss) is a global leader in providing transaction, investment and
information services to support the needs of corporations, issuers and institutional investors
worldwide. tss is the largest cash management provider in the world and one of the top three global
custodians. the treasury services business provides clients with a broad range of
capabilities, including u.s. dollar and multi-currency clearing, ach, trade, and short-term
liquidity and working capital tools. the investor services business provides a wide range of
capabilities, including custody, funds services, securities lending, and performance measurement
and execution products. the institutional trust services business provides trustee, depository and
administrative services for debt and equity issuers. treasury services partners with the
commercial banking, consumer & small business banking and asset & wealth management segments to
serve clients firmwide. as a result, certain treasury services revenues are included in other segments
results.
asset & wealth management
asset & wealth management (awm) provides investment management to retail and institutional
investors, financial intermediaries and high-net-worth families and individuals globally. for
retail investors, awm provides investment management products and services, including a global
mutual fund franchise, retirement plan administration, and consultation and brokerage
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
services. awm delivers investment management to institutional investors across all asset
classes. the private bank and private client services businesses provide integrated wealth
management services to ultra-high-net-worth and high-net-worth clients, respectively.
merger with bank one corporation
effective july1, 2004, bank one corporation (bank one) merged with and into jpmorgan chase
(the merger), pursuant to an agreement and plan of merger
dated january14, 2004. as a result of
the merger, each outstanding share of common stock of bank one was converted in a stock-for-stock
exchange into 1.32 shares of common stock of jpmorgan chase. the merger was accounted for using the
purchase method of accounting. the purchase price to complete the merger was $58.5billion. key
objectives of the merger were to provide the firm with a more balanced business mix and greater
geographic diversification.
bank ones results of operations were included in the firms results beginning july1, 2004.
therefore, the results of operations for the 12months ended december31, 2004, reflect six months
of operations of the combined firm and six months of heritage jpmorgan chase; the results of
operations for all other periods prior to 2004 reflect only the operations of heritage jpmorgan
chase.
it is expected that cost savings of approximately $3.0billion (pre-tax) will be achieved by the
end of 2007; approximately two-thirds of the savings are anticipated to be realized by the end of
2005. total 2004 merger savings were approximately $400million. merger costs to combine the
operations of jpmorgan chase and bank one are expected to range from approximately $4.0billion to
$4.5billion (pre-tax). of these costs, approximately $1.0billion, specifically related to bank
one, were accounted for as purchase accounting adjustments and were recorded as an increase to
goodwill in 2004. of the approximately $3.0billion to $3.5billion in remaining merger-related
costs, $1.4billion (pre-tax) were incurred in 2004 and have been charged to income, $1.4billion
(pre-tax) are expected to be incurred in 2005, and the remaining costs are expected to be incurred
in 2006. these estimated merger-related charges will result from actions taken with respect to both
jpmorgan chases and bank ones operations, facilities and employees. the charges will be recorded
based on the nature and timing of these integration actions.
as part of the merger, certain accounting policies and practices were conformed, which resulted
in $976million (pre-tax) of charges in 2004. the significant components of the conformity
charges were comprised of a $1.4billion (pre-tax) charge related to the decertification of the
sellers interest in credit card securitizations, and the benefit of a $584million reduction in
the allowance for credit losses as a result of conforming the wholesale and consumer credit
provision methodologies.
other business events
electronic financial services
on january5, 2004, jpmorgan chase acquired electronic financial services (efs), a leading
provider of government-issued benefits payments and prepaid stored value cards used by
state and federal government agencies and private institutions. the acquisition further
strengthened jpmorgan chases position as a leading provider of wholesale payment services.
cazenove
on november5, 2004, jpmorgan chase and cazenove group plc (cazenove) announced an agreement
to combine cazenoves investment banking business and jpmorgan chases united kingdom-based investment
banking business into a new entity to be jointly owned. the partnership will provide investment banking services in the united
kingdom and ireland. the transaction closed on february28, 2005, and the new company is called jpmorgan cazenove holdings.
highbridge
on december13, 2004, jpmorgan chase formed a strategic partnership with and acquired a
majority interest in highbridge capital management (highbridge), a new york-based multi-strategy
hedge fund manager, with seven discrete strategy groups and more than $7billion of assets
under management. highbridge has offices in new york, london and hong kong. including
highbridge, jpmorgan chase now manages more than $40billion of absolute-return products
(e.g., hedge funds, private equity and real estate investments).
vastera
on january7, 2005, jpmorgan chase agreed to acquire vastera, a provider of global trade
management solutions, for approximately $129million. vasteras business will be combined with the
logistics and trade services businesses of tsss treasury services unit. the transaction is
expected to close in the first half of 2005. vastera automates trade management processes
associated with the physical movement of goods internationally; the acquisition will enable
treasury services to offer management of information and processes in support of physical goods
movement, together with financial settlement.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
executive overview
this overview of managements discussion and analysis highlights selected information
and may not contain all of the information that is important to readers of this annual report. this
overview discusses the economic or industry-wide factors that affected jpmorgan chase, the factors
that drove business performance, and the factors that management monitors in setting policy. for a
more complete understanding of trends, events, commitments, uncertainties, liquidity, capital
resources and critical accounting estimates, this entire annual report should be read carefully.
financial performance of jpmorgan chase
as of or for the year ended december 31, (a)
(in millions, except per share and ratio data)
change
total net revenue
$
43,097
$
33,384
%
provision for credit losses
2,544
1,540
noninterest expense
34,359
21,816
net income
4,466
6,719
(34
)
net income per share  diluted
1.55
3.24
(52
)
average common equity
75,641
42,988
return on average common equity(roce)
%
%
(1,000
)bp
loans
$
402,114
$
214,766
%
total assets
1,157,248
770,912
deposits
521,456
326,492
tier 1 capital ratio
8.7
%
8.5
%
bp
total capital ratio
12.2
11.8
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
business overview
the firms results in 2004 were affected by many factors, but the most significant of these
were the merger, the litigation charge taken in the second quarter of the year and global economic
growth.
the firm reported 2004 net income of $4.5billion, or $1.55 per share, compared with net income of
$6.7billion, or $3.24 per share, for 2003. the return on common equity was 6%, compared with 16%
in 2003. results included $3.7billion in after-tax charges, or $1.31 per share, comprised of:
merger costs of $846million; charges to conform accounting policies as a result of the merger of
$605million; and a charge of $2.3billion to increase litigation reserves. excluding these
charges, operating earnings would have been $8.2billion, or $2.86 per share, and return on common
equity would have been 11%. operating earnings represent business results without the
merger-related costs and the significant litigation charges.
during the course of the year, the firm developed a comprehensive plan of merger integration and
began to execute on the plan. significant milestones during the year included: branding decisions
for all businesses; merger of the holding companies, lead banks and credit card banks; conversion
of the bank one credit card portfolio to a new processing platform; announcement of insourcing of
major technology operations; and consolidation and standardization of human resource policies and
benefit plans. as part of the merger, the firm announced that it had targeted reducing operating
expenses by $3.0billion (pre-tax) by the end of 2007. in order to accomplish the cost reductions,
the firm announced that it expects to incur merger costs of approximately $4.0billion to
$4.5billion and reduce its workforce by approximately 12,000 over the same time period.
in 2004, both the u.s. and global economies continued to strengthen overall, even though
momentum slowed during the second half of the year due to rising oil prices. gross domestic product
increased by 3.9% globally and 4.4% in the u.s., both up from 2003. the u.s. economy experienced
rising short-term interest rates, driven by federal reserve board (frb) actions during
the course of the year. the federal funds rate increased from 1.00% to 2.25% during the year and
the yield curve flattened, as long-term interest rates were relatively stable. equity markets, both
domestic and international, enjoyed strong results, with the s&p 500 up 9% and international
indices increasing in similar fashion. capital markets activity during 2004 was healthy, debt
underwriting was consistent with the strong levels experienced in 2003, and equity underwriting
enjoyed strong and consistent activity during the year. the u.s. consumer sector showed continued
strength buoyed by the overall economic strength, despite slowing mortgage origination and
refinance activity. retail sales were up over the prior year, and bankruptcy filings were down
significantly from 2003.
on an operating basis, net income in each of the firms lines of business was affected
primarily by the merger. the discussion that follows highlights other factors which affected
operating results in each business.
despite the relatively beneficial capital markets environment, results for the investment bank were
under pressure during the year. this was primarily due to a decline in trading revenue related to
lower fixed income trading, driven by weaker portfolio
management results, and a
reduction in net interest income, stemming primarily from lower loan balances. this was partially offset by increased investment
banking fees, the result of continued strength in debt underwriting, and higher advisory fees. the
investment bank benefited from a reduction in the allowance for credit losses, primarily due to the
improved credit quality of the loan portfolio, as evidenced by the significant drop in
nonperforming loans and, to a lesser extent, recoveries of previously charged-off loans. expenses
rose, primarily due to higher compensation expenses.
retail financial services
benefited from better spreads earned on deposits and growth in retained residential mortgage
and home equity loan balances. mortgage fees and related income was also up, reflecting higher
mortgage servicing revenue, partially offset by significantly lower prime mortgage production
income related to the slower mortgage origination activity. the provision for credit losses
benefited from improved credit quality in nearly all portfolios and a reduction in the allowance
for credit losses related to the sale of a $4billion manufactured home loan portfolio. higher
compensation expenses were due to continued expansion of the branch office network, including 130
new locations (106net additional branches) opened during 2004 for the combined firm, and expansion of the sales force, partially
offset by ongoing efficiency improvements.
card services revenue benefited from higher loan balances and customer charge volume, which
increased net interest income and higher net interchange income, respectively. expenses
increased due to higher marketing spending and higher volume-based processing expenses.
commercial banking revenues benefited from strong deposit growth and higher investment banking
fees. these benefits were partially offset by lower service charges on deposits, which often
decline when interest rates rise. credit quality continued to improve, resulting in lower net
charge-offs and nonperforming loans.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
treasury & securities services revenues benefited from strong growth in assets under custody and
average deposits, along with deposit spreads, which improved due to the relatively low
interest rate environment for deposits. these benefits were offset by lower service charges on
deposits, which often decline when interest rates rise. revenues and expenses also were affected by
acquisitions, divestitures and growth in business volume. expenses also increased due to software
impairment charges, and legal and technology-related expenses.
asset & wealth management results were positively affected by the strength of global equity
markets, an improved product mix, better investment performance and net asset inflows. results
also benefited from deposit and loan growth.
the corporate segment performance was negatively affected by a repositioning of the
investment securities portfolio and tighter spreads. this was partially offset by improved private
equity results due to an improved climate for investment sales.
the firms balance sheet was likewise significantly affected by the merger. aside from the
merger, the firm took a number of actions during the year to strengthen the balance sheet. notably,
the treasury investment portfolio was repositioned to reduce exposure to rising interest rates;
auto leasing was de-emphasized, and lease receivables were reduced by 16% to $8billion; the $4
billion manufactured home loan portfolio was sold; the $2billion recreational vehicle portfolio
was sold subsequent to year-end; a significant portion of third-party private equity investments
have been sold; and the firm increased its litigation reserves. the firms capital base was also
significantly enhanced following the merger. as of year-end, total stockholders equity was
$106billion, and the tier 1 capital ratio was 8.7%. the capital position allowed the firm to
begin repurchasing common stock during the second half of the year, with more than $700
million, or 19.3million common shares, repurchased during the year.
2005 business outlook
jpmorgan chases outlook for 2005 should be viewed against the backdrop of the global economy,
financial markets and the geopolitical environment, all of which are integrally linked together.
while the firm considers outcomes for, and has contingency plans to respond to, stress
environments, its basic outlook for 2005 is predicated on the interest rate movements implied in
the forward rate curve for u.s. treasuries, the continuation of the favorable u.s. and
international equity markets and continued expansion of the global economy.
the performance of the firms capital markets businesses is highly correlated to overall global
economic growth. the investment bank enters 2005 with a strong pipeline for advisory and
underwriting business, and it continues to focus on growing its client-driven trading business.
compared with 2004, the investment bank expects a reduction in credit portfolio revenues, as both
net interest income on loans and gains from workouts are likely to decrease. financial market
movements and activity levels also affect asset & wealth management and treasury & securities
services. asset & wealth management anticipates revenue growth, driven by net inflows to assets
under supervision and by the highbridge acquisition, as well as deposit and loan growth. treasury &
securities services anticipates modest revenue growth, due to wider spreads on deposits, as well as
increased business volume and activity in the custody, trade, commercial card, american depositary
receipt and collateralized debt obligation businesses. commercial banking anticipates that net
revenues will benefit from growth in treasury services and investment banking fees, offset by
margin compression on loans.
the business outlook varies for the respective consumer businesses. card services
anticipates modest growth in consumer spending and in card outstandings. for rfs, home finance
earnings are likely to weaken given a market-driven decline in mortgage originations, neutralizing
the expected earnings increase in consumer & small business banking. the drop in revenue at home
finance should be mitigated by ongoing efforts to bring expenses in line with lower
expected origination volumes. growth is expected to continue in consumer & small business banking,
with increases in core deposits and associated revenue partially offset by ongoing investments in
the branch distribution network. new branch openings should continue at a pace consistent with or
slightly above those of 2004. at the heritage chase branches, expanded hours and realigned
compensation plans that tie incentives to branch performance are expected to provide improvements
in productivity and incremental net revenue growth. earnings in auto & education finance are
expected to remain under pressure, given the current competitive operating environment. across
all rfs businesses, credit quality trends remain stable, with a slight increase in credit costs
likely in 2005.
the corporate sector includes private equity, treasury and the corporate support units. the revenue
outlook for the private equity business is directly related to the strength of equity market
conditions in 2005. if current market conditions persist, the firm anticipates continued
realization of private equity gains; the firm is not anticipating investment securities gains from
the treasury portfolio in 2005.
the provision for credit losses in 2005 is anticipated to be higher than in 2004, driven
primarily by a return to a more normal level of provisioning for credit losses in the
wholesale businesses over time. the consumer provision for credit losses in 2005 should reflect
increased balances, with generally stable credit quality. the firm plans to implement
higher minimum-payment requirements in the card services business in the third quarter
of 2005; it is anticipated that this will increase delinquency and net charge-off rates, but the
magnitude of the impact is currently being assessed.
the firms 2005 expenses should reflect the realization of $1.5billion in merger savings. these
savings are expected to be offset by a projected $1.1billion of incremental spending related to
firmwide technology infrastructure, distribution enhancement, and product improvement and
expansion in retail financial services, the investment bank and asset & wealth management. in
addition, expenses will increase as a result of recent acquisitions, such as highbridge and
cazenove.
management will seek to continue to strengthen the firms balance sheet through rigorous
financial and risk discipline. any capital generated in excess of the firms capital targets, and
beyond that required to support anticipated modest growth in assets and the underlying risks of the
firms businesses, including litigation risk, will create capital flexibility in 2005 with
respect to common stock repurchases and further investments in the firms businesses.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
consolidated results of operations
the following section provides a comparative discussion of jpmorgan chases consolidated
results of operations on a reported basis for the three-year period ended december31, 2004.
factors that are primarily related to a single business segment are discussed in more detail within
that business segment than they are in this consolidated section. for a discussion of the critical
accounting estimates used by the firm that affect the consolidated results of operations, see pages
77-79 of this annual report.
revenue
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
investment banking fees
$
3,537
$
2,890
$
2,763
trading revenue
3,612
4,427
2,675
lending & deposit related fees
2,672
1,727
1,674
asset management, administration
and commissions
7,967
5,906
5,754
securities/private equity gains
1,874
1,479
mortgage fees and related income
1,004
credit card income
4,840
2,466
2,307
other income
noninterest revenue
26,336
20,419
17,436
net interest income
16,761
12,965
12,178
total net revenue
$
43,097
$
33,384
$
29,614
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
2004 compared with 2003
total net revenues, at $43.1billion, rose by $9.7billion or 29%, primarily due to the merger,
which affected every category of total net revenue. additional factors contributing to the
revenue growth were higher consumer demand for credit products and higher credit card charge
volume, as well as strong retail and wholesale deposit growth. investment banking revenues
increased as a result of growth in global market volumes and market share gains. revenue also
benefited from acquisitions and growth in assets under custody, under management and under
supervision, the result of global equity market appreciation and net asset inflows. private equity
gains were higher due to an improved climate for investment sales. the discussion that follows
highlights factors other than the merger that affected the 2004 versus 2003 comparison.
the increase in investment banking fees was driven by significant gains in underwriting and
advisory activities as a result of increased global market volumes and market share gains. trading
revenue declined by 18%, primarily due to lower portfolio management results in fixed income and
equities. for a further discussion of investment banking fees and trading revenue, which are
primarily recorded in the ib, see the ib segment results on pages
30-32 of this annual report.
lending & deposit related fees were up from 2003 due to the merger. the rise was partially
offset by lower service charges on deposits, as clients paid for services with deposits, versus
fees, due to rising interest rates. throughout 2004, deposit balances grew in response to
rising interest rates.
the increase in asset management, administration and commissions was also driven by the full-year
impact of other acquisitions - such as efs in january2004, bank ones corporate trust business in
november2003 and jpmorgan
retirement plan services in june2003 - as well as the effect of global equity market appreciation,
net asset inflows and a better product mix. in addition, a more active market for trading
activities in 2004 resulted in higher brokerage commissions. for additional information on these
fees and commissions, see the segment discussions for awm on pages 45-46, tss on pages 43-44 and
rfs on pages 33-38 of this annual report.
securities/private equity gains for 2004 rose from the prior year, primarily fueled by the
improvement in the firms private equity investment results. this was offset by lower securities
gains on the treasury investment portfolio as a result of lower volumes of securities sold, and
lower gains realized on sales due to higher interest rates; additionally, rfss home finance
business reported losses in 2004 on available-for-sale (afs) securities, as compared with gains
in 2003. for a further discussion of securities gains, see the rfs and corporate segment
discussions on pages 33-38 and 47-48, respectively, of this annual report. for a further discussion
of private equity gains, which are primarily recorded in the firms private equity business, see
the corporate segment discussion on pages 47-48 of this annual report.
mortgage fees and related income rose as a result of higher servicing revenue; this improvement was
partially offset by lower mortgage servicing rights (msrs) asset risk management results
and prime mortgage production revenue, and lower gains from sales and securitizations of subprime
loans as a result of managements decision in 2004 to retain these loans. mortgage fees and related
income excludes the impact of nii and securities gains related to home mortgage activities. for a
discussion of mortgage fees and related income, which is primarily recorded in rfss home finance
business, see the home finance discussion on pages 34-36 of this annual report.
credit card income increased from 2003 as a result of higher customer charge volume, which
resulted in increased interchange income, and higher credit card servicing fees associated with the
increase of $19.4billion in average securitized loans. the increases were partially offset by
higher volume-driven payments to partners and rewards expense. for a further discussion of credit
card income, see css segment results on pages 39-40 of this annual report.
the increase in other income from 2003 reflected gains on leveraged lease transactions and higher
net results from corporate and bank-owned life insurance policies. these positive factors in 2004
were partially offset by gains on sales of several nonstrategic businesses and real estate
properties in 2003.
net interest income rose from 2003 as growth in volumes of consumer loans and deposits, as well as
wider spreads on deposits, contributed to higher net interest income. these were partially offset
by lower wholesale loan balances in the ib and tighter spreads on loans, investment securities and
trading assets stemming from the rise in interest rates. the firms total average interest-earning
assets for 2004 were $744.1billion, up $154.2billion from 2003. growth was also driven by higher
levels of consumer loans. the net interest yield on these assets, on a fully taxable-equivalent
basis, was 2.27% in 2004, an increase of 6 basis points from the prior year.
2003 compared with 2002
total revenue for 2003 was $33.4billion, up 13% from 2002. all businesses benefited
from improved economic conditions in 2003. in particular, the low-interest rate environment
drove robust fixed income markets and an unprecedented mortgage refinancing boom, which drove the
growth in revenue.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
investment banking fees increased by $127million, primarily due to growth in ibs
equity underwriting, which was up 49%, reflecting increases in market share and
underwriting volumes. this increase was partially offset by lower advisory fees reflecting
depressed levels of m&a activity. trading revenue was up $1.8billion, or 65%, primarily due to
strong client and portfolio management revenue growth in fixed income and equity markets as a
result of the low-interest rate environment, improvement in equity markets and volatility
in credit markets. for a further discussion of investment banking fees and trading revenue, which
are primarily recorded in the investment bank, see the ib segment results on pages 30-32 of this
annual report.
lending & deposit related fees rose, the result of higher fees on standby letters of
credit, due to growth in transaction volume, and higher service charges on deposits. these charges
were driven by an increase in the payment of services with fees, versus deposits, due to lower
interest rates.
the increase in asset management, administration and commissions was attributable to a more
favorable environment for debt and equity activities, resulting in higher fees for the custody,
institutional trust, brokerage and other processing-related businesses. fees for investment
management activities also increased as a result of acquisitions in awm, but these increases were
partially offset by institutional net fund outflows, which resulted in lower
average assets under management.
securities/private equity gains increased to $1.5billion from $817million in 2002, reflecting
significant improvement in private equity gains. these gains were partially offset by lower gains
realized from the sale of securities in treasury and of afs securities in rfss home finance
business, driven by increasing interest rates beginning in the third quarter of 2003. for a further
discussion of private equity gains (losses), see the corporate segment discussion on pages 47-48 of
this annual report.
mortgage fees and related income declined by 7% in 2003, primarily due to a decline in revenue
associated with risk management of the msr asset, mortgage pipeline and mortgage warehouse; these
were partially offset by higher fees from origination and sales activity and other fees derived
from volume and market-share growth. for a discussion of mortgage fees and related income, which is
primarily recorded in rfss home finance business, see the home finance discussion on pages
34-36 of this annual report.
credit card income rose as a result of higher credit card servicing fees associated with the $6.7
billion growth in average securitized credit card receivables. for a further discussion of credit
card income, see css segment results on pages 39-40 of this annual report.
other income rose, primarily from $200million in gains on sales of securities acquired in loan
workouts (compared with $26million in 2002), as well as gains on the sale of several nonstrategic
businesses and real estate properties; these were partly offset by lower net results from corporate
and bank-owned life insurance policies. in addition, 2002 included $73million of write-downs for
several latin american investments.
the increase in net interest income reflected the positive impact of lower interest rates on
consumer loan originations, such as mortgages and automobile loans and leases and related funding
costs. net interest income was partially reduced by a lower volume of wholesale loans and lower
spreads on investment securities. the firms total average interest-earning assets in 2003 were
$590billion, up 6% from the prior year. the net interest yield on these assets, on a fully
taxable-equivalent basis, was 2.21%, the same as in the prior year.
provision for credit losses
2004 compared with 2003
the provision for credit losses of $2.5billion was up $1.0billion, or 65%, compared with the
prior year. the impact of the merger, and of accounting policy conformity charges of $858million,
were partially offset by releases in the allowance for credit losses related to the wholesale loan
portfolio, primarily due to improved credit quality in the ib. wholesale nonperforming loans
decreased by 21% even after the inclusion of bank ones loan portfolio. rfss provision for credit
losses benefited from a reduction in the allowance for credit losses related to the sale of the $4
billion manufactured home loan portfolio and continued positive credit quality trends in the home
and auto finance businesses. the provision related to the credit card portfolio grew by
$919million, principally due to the merger. for further information about the provision for credit
losses and the firms management of credit risk, see the credit risk management discussion
on pages 57-69 of this annual report.
2003 compared with 2002
the 2003 provision for credit losses was $2.8billion lower than in 2002, primarily reflecting
continued improvement in the quality of the wholesale loan portfolio and a higher volume of credit
card securitizations.
noninterest expense
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
compensation expense
$
14,506
$
11,387
$
10,693
occupancy expense
2,084
1,912
1,606
technology and communications
expense
3,702
2,844
2,554
professional & outside services
3,862
2,875
2,587
marketing
1,335
other expense
2,859
1,694
1,802
amortization of intangibles
total noninterest expense
before merger costs and
litigation reserve charge
29,294
21,716
20,254
merger costs
1,365
1,210
litigation reserve charge
3,700
1,300
total noninterest expense
$
34,359
$
21,816
$
22,764
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
2004 compared with 2003
noninterest expense was $34.4billion in 2004, up $12.5billion, or 57%, primarily due to the
merger. excluding $1.4billion of merger costs, and litigation reserve charges, noninterest
expenses would have been $29.3billion, up 35%. in addition to the merger and litigation charges,
expenses increased due to reinvestment in the lines of business, partially offset by merger-related
savings throughout the firm. each category of noninterest expense was affected by the merger. the
discussion that follows highlights other factors which affected the 2004 versus 2003
comparison.
compensation expense was up from 2003, primarily due to strategic investments in the ib and
continuing expansion in rfs. these factors were partially offset by ongoing efficiency improvements
and merger-related savings throughout the firm, and a reduction in pension costs. the decline in
pension costs was mainly attributable to the increase in the expected return on plan assets from a
discretionary $1.1billion contribution to the firms pension
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
plan in april2004, partially offset by changes in actuarial assumptions for 2004 compared
with 2003. for a detailed discussion of pension and other postretirement benefit costs, see note 6
on pages 92-95 of this annual report.
the increase in occupancy expense was partly offset by lower charges for excess real estate,
which were $103million in 2004, compared with $270million in 2003.
technology and communications expense was higher than in the prior year as a result of higher costs
associated with greater use of outside vendors, primarily ibm, to support the global infrastructure
requirements of the firm. after the merger, jpmorgan chase decided to terminate its outsourcing
agreement with ibm, effective december31, 2004. for a further discussion regarding the ibm
outsourcing agreement, see the corporate segment discussion on page 47 of this annual report.
professional & outside services rose due to higher legal costs associated with pending litigation
matters, as well as outside services stemming from recent acquisitions, primarily efs, and growth
in business at tss and cs.
marketing expense rose as cs initiated a more robust marketing campaign during 2004.
other expense was up due to software impairment write-offs of $224million, primarily in tss and
corporate, compared with $60million in 2003; higher accruals for non-enron-related litigation
cases; and the impact of growth in business volume. these were partly offset by a $57million
settlement related to the enron surety bond litigation.
for a discussion of amortization of intangibles and merger costs, refer to note 15 and note
8 on pages 109-111 and 98, respectively.
in june of 2004, jpmorgan chase recorded a $3.7billion (pre-tax) addition to the litigation
reserve. while the outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain, the addition reflected
managements assessment of the appropriate reserve level in light of all then-known
information. by comparison, 2003 included a charge of $100million for enron-related litigation.
2003 compared with 2002
total noninterest expense was $21.8billion, down 4% from the prior year. in 2002, the firm
recorded $1.3billion of charges, principally for enron-related litigation, and $1.2billion for
merger and restructuring costs related to programs announced prior to january1, 2002. excluding
these costs, expenses rose by 8% in 2003, reflecting higher performance-related incentives,
increased costs related to stock-based compensation and pension and other postretirement expenses;
and higher occupancy expenses. the firm began expensing stock options in 2003.
the increase in compensation expense principally reflected higher performance-related incentives,
as well as higher pension and other postretirement benefit costs, primarily as a result of changes
in actuarial assumptions. the increase pertaining to incentives included $266million as a result
of adopting sfas 123, and $120million from the reversal in 2002 of previously accrued expenses for
certain forfeitable key employee stock awards. total compensation expenses declined as a result of
the transfer, beginning april1, 2003, of 2,800 employees to ibm in connection with the
aforementioned technology outsourcing agreement.
the increase in occupancy expense reflected costs of additional leased space in midtown manhattan
and in the south and southwest regions of the united states, higher real estate taxes in new york
city and the cost of enhanced
safety measures. also contributing to the increase were charges for unoccupied excess real estate
of $270million; this compared with $120million in 2002.
technology and communications expense increased primarily due to a shift in expenses: costs that
were previously associated with compensation and other expenses shifted, upon the commencement of
the ibm outsourcing agreement, to technology and communications expense. also contributing to the
increase were higher costs related to software amortization. for a further discussion of the ibm
outsourcing agreement, see corporate on page 47 of this annual report.
professional & outside services rose, reflecting greater utilization of third-party vendors for
processing activities and higher legal costs associated with various litigation and
business-related matters.
higher marketing expense was driven by more robust campaigns for the home finance business.
the decrease in other expense was due partly to expense management initiatives, such as reduced
allowances to expatriates and recruitment costs.
there were no merger costs in 2003. in 2002, merger and restructuring costs of $1.2billion were
for programs announced prior to january1, 2002.
the firm added $100million to the enron-related litigation reserve in 2003 to supplement a $1.3
billion reserve initially recorded in 2002. the 2002 reserve was established to cover enron-related
matters, as well as certain other material litigation, proceedings and investigations in which the
firm is involved.
income tax expense
the firms income before income tax expense, income tax expense and effective tax rate were as
follows for each of the periods indicated:
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except rate)
income before income tax expense
$
6,194
$
10,028
$
2,519
income tax expense
1,728
3,309
effective tax rate
27.9
%
33.0
%
34.0
%
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of
heritage jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage
jpmorgan chase only.
2004 compared with 2003
the reduction in the effective tax rate for 2004, as compared with 2003, was the result of various
factors, including lower reported pre-tax income, a higher level of business tax credits, and
changes in the proportion of income subject to federal, state and local taxes, partially offset by
purchase accounting adjustments related to leveraged lease transactions. the merger costs and
accounting policy conformity adjustments recorded in 2004, and the litigation reserve charge
recorded in the second quarter of 2004, reflected a tax benefit at a 38% marginal tax rate,
contributing to the reduction in the effective tax rate compared with 2003.
2003 compared with 2002
the effective tax rate decline was principally attributable to changes in the proportion of income
subject to state and local taxes.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
explanation and reconciliation of the firms use of non-gaap financial measures
the firm prepares its consolidated financial statements using accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states of america (u.s. gaap); these financial statements appear
on pages 84-87 of this annual report. that presentation, which is referred to as reported basis,
provides the reader with an understanding of the firms results that can be consistently tracked
from year to year and enables a comparison of the firms performance with other companies u.s.
gaap financial statements.
in addition to analyzing the firms results on a reported basis, management reviews
line-of-business results on an operating basis, which is a non-gaap financial measure.
the definition of operating basis starts with the reported u.s. gaap results. in the case of the
ib, operating basis noninterest revenue includes, in trading revenue, net interest income related
to trading activities. trading activities generate revenues, which are recorded for u.s. gaap
purposes in two line items on the income statement: trading revenue, which includes the
mark-to-market gains or losses on trading positions, and net interest income, which includes the
interest income or expense related to those positions. combining both the trading revenue and
related net interest income enables management to evaluate the ibs trading activities, by
considering all revenue related to these activities, and facilitates operating comparisons to other
competitors. the following table reclassifies the firms trading-related net interest income to
trading revenue.
trading-related net interest income reclassification
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
net interest income  reported
$
16,761
$
12,965
$
12,178
trading-related nii
(1,950
)
(2,129
)
(1,880
)
net interest income  adjusted
$
14,811
$
10,836
$
10,298
trading revenue  reported (b)
$
3,612
$
4,427
$
2,675
trading-related nii
1,950
2,129
1,880
trading revenue  adjusted (b)
$
5,562
$
6,556
$
4,555
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of
heritage jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage
jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
reflects trading revenue at the firm level. the majority of trading revenue is
recorded in
the investment bank.
in addition, segment results
reflect revenues on a tax-equivalent basis. the tax-equivalent
gross-up for each business segment is based upon the level, type and
tax jurisdiction of the earnings and assets within each business
segment. operating revenue for the investment bank
includes tax-equivalent adjustments for income tax credits primarily
related to affordable housing investments as well as
tax-exempt income from municipal bond investments. information prior
to the merger has not been restated to conform with this new
presentation. the amount of the tax-equivalent gross-up for each
business segment is eliminated within the corporate segment. for a
further discussion of trading-related revenue and tax-equivalent
adjustments made to operating revenue, see the ib on pages 30-32 of
this annual report.
in the case of card services, operating or managed basis excludes the impact of credit card
securitizations on revenue, the provision for credit losses, net charge-offs and loan receivables.
through securitization the firm transforms a portion of its credit card receivables into
securities, which are sold to investors. the credit card receivables are removed from the
consolidated balance sheet through the transfer of principal credit card receivables to a trust,
and the sale of undivided interests to investors that entitle the investors to specific cash flows
generated from the credit card receivables. the firm retains the remaining undivided interests as
sellers interests, which are recorded in loans on the consolidated balance sheet. a gain or loss
on the sale of credit card receivables to investors is recorded in other income. securitization
also affects the firms consolidated income statement by reclassifying as credit card income,
interest income, certain fee revenue, and recoveries in excess of interest paid to the investors,
gross credit losses and other trust expenses related to the securitized receivables. for a
reconciliation of reported to managed basis of card services results,
see page 40 of this annual
report. for information regarding loans and residual interests sold and securitized, see note 13 on
pages 103-106 of this annual report. jpmorgan chase uses the concept of managed receivables to
evaluate the credit performance and overall financial performance of the underlying credit card
loans, both sold and not sold; as the same borrower is continuing to use the credit card for
ongoing charges, a borrowers credit performance will affect both the loan receivables sold
under sfas 140 and those not sold. thus, in its disclosures regarding managed loan receivables,
jpmorgan chase treats the sold receivables as if they were still on the balance sheet in order to
disclose the credit performance (such as net charge-off rates) of the entire managed credit card
portfolio. in addition, card services operations are funded, operating results are evaluated and
decisions about allocating resources such as employees and capital are based on managed financial
information.
finally, operating basis excludes merger costs, the litigation reserve charge and accounting policy
conformity adjustments related to the merger, as management believes these items are not part of
the firms normal daily business operations (and, therefore, are not indicative of trends) and do
not provide meaningful comparisons with other periods.
management uses certain non-gaap financial measures at the segment level. management believes these
non-gaap financial measures provide information to investors in understanding the underlying
operational performance and trends of the particular business segment and facilitate a comparison
of the business segment with the performance of competitors.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
the following summary table provides a reconciliation from the firms reported gaap results to operating results:
(table continues on next page)
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except
reported
credit
special
operating
reported
credit
special
operating
per share and ratio data)
results
card (b)
items
basis
results
card (b)
items
basis
revenue
investment banking fees
$
3,537
$
$
$
3,537
$
2,890
$
$
$
2,890
trading revenue(c)
5,562
5,562
6,556
6,556
lending & deposit
related fees
2,672
2,672
1,727
1,727
asset management,
administration and
commissions
7,967
7,967
5,906
5,906
securities/private
equity gains
1,874
1,874
1,479
1,479
mortgage fees and
related income
1,004
1,004
credit card income
4,840
(2,267
)
2,573
2,466
(1,379
)
1,087
other income
(86
)
(1)
(71
)
noninterest revenue(c)
28,286
(2,353
)
26,051
22,548
(1,450
)
21,098
net interest income(c)
14,811
5,251
20,062
10,836
3,320
14,156
total net revenue
43,097
2,898
46,113
33,384
1,870
35,254
provision for credit losses
2,544
2,898
(858)
(2)
4,584
1,540
1,870
3,410
noninterest expense
merger costs
1,365
(1,365)
(3)
litigation reserve charge
3,700
(3,700)
(4)
all other noninterest
expense
29,294
29,294
21,716
21,716
total noninterest
expense
34,359
(5,065
)
29,294
21,816
21,816
income before income
tax expense
6,194
6,041
12,235
10,028
10,028
income tax expense
1,728
2,296
(6)
4,024
3,309
3,309
net income
$
4,466
$
$
3,745
$
8,211
$
6,719
$
$
$
6,719
earnings per
share  diluted
$
1.55
$
$
1.31
$
2.86
$
3.24
$
$
$
3.24
return on
common equity
%
%
%
%
%
return on
equity  goodwill(d)
return on assets
0.46
nm
nm
0.81
0.87
nm
nm
0.83
overhead ratio
%
nm
nm
%
%
nm
nm
%
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
the impact of credit card securitizations affects cs. see pages 39-40 of this annual report for further information.
(c)
includes the reclassification of trading-related net interest income to trading revenue. see page 25 of this annual report for further information.
(d)
net income applicable to common stock/total average common equity (net of goodwill).
the firm uses return on equity less goodwill, a non-gaap financial
measure, to evaluate the operating performance of the firm. the firm
utilizes this measure to facilitate operating comparisons to other competitors.
year ended december 31,(e)
(in millions)
reported
securitized
managed
reported
securitized
managed
loans  period-end
$
402,114
$
70,795
$
472,909
$
214,766
$
34,856
$
249,622
total assets  average
962,556
51,084
1,013,640
775,978
32,365
808,343
(e)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of
heritage jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase
only.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
(table continued from previous page)
reported
credit
special
operating
results
card (b)
items
basis
$
2,763
$
$
$
2,763
4,555
4,555
1,674
1,674
5,754
5,754
2,307
(1,341
)
(36
)
19,316
(1,377
)
17,939
10,298
2,816
13,114
29,614
1,439
31,053
4,331
1,439
5,770
1,210
(1,210
)(3)
1,300
(1,300
)(4)
20,254
(98
)(5)
20,156
22,764
(2,608
)
20,156
2,519
2,608
5,127
(6)
1,743
$
1,663
$
$
1,721
$
3,384
$
0.80
$
$
0.86
$
1.66
%
%
%
0.23
nm
nm
0.45
%
nm
nm
%
reported
securitized
managed
$
216,364
$
30,722
$
247,086
733,357
26,519
759,876
special items
the reconciliation of the firms reported results to operating results in the accompanying table
sets forth the impact of several special items incurred by the firm in 2002 and 2004. these special
items are excluded from operating earnings, as management believes these items are not part of the
firms normal daily business operations and, therefore, are not indicative of trends and do not
provide meaningful comparisons with other periods. these items include merger costs,
significant litigation charges, charges to conform accounting policies and other items,
each of which is described below:
(1)
other income in 2004 reflects $118million of other accounting policy
conformity adjustments.
(2)
the provision for credit losses in 2004 reflects $858million of
accounting policy conformity adjustments, consisting of a $1.4billion
charge related to the decertification of the sellers interest in credit
card securitizations, partially offset by a benefit of $584million related to conforming wholesale and consumer credit provision methodologies for the combined firm.
(3)
merger costs of $1.4billion in 2004 reflect costs associated with the
merger; the $1.2billion of charges in 2002 reflect merger and
restructuring costs associated with programs announced prior to
january1, 2002.
(4)
significant litigation charges of $3.7billion and $1.3billion were
taken in 2004 and 2002, respectively.
(5)
all other noninterest expense in 2002 reflects a $98million charge
for excess real estate capacity related to facilities in the west coast
region of the united states.
(6)
income tax expense in 2004 and 2002 of $2.3billion and $887 mil
lion, respectively, represents the tax effect of the above items.
formula definitions for non-gaap metrics
the table below reflects the formulas used to calculate both the following gaap and non-gaap
measures:
return on common equity
reported
net income* /average common equity
operating
operating earnings* /average common equity
return on equity - goodwill
reported
net income* /average common equity less goodwill
operating
operating earnings* /average common equity less goodwill
return on assets
reported
net income / average assets
operating
operating earnings /average managed assets
overhead ratio
reported
total noninterest expense / total net revenue
operating
total noninterest expense / total net revenue
*represents earnings applicable to common stock
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
business segment results
the firm is managed on a line-of-business basis. the business segment financial results
presented reflect the current organization of jpmorgan chase. there are six major reportable
business segments: the investment bank, retail financial services, card services, commercial
banking, treasury & securities services and asset & wealth management, as well as a corporate
segment.
the segments are based on the products and services provided, or the type of customer served, and
they reflect the manner in which financial information is currently evaluated by management.
results of these lines of business are presented on an operating basis.
jpmorgan is the brand name.
jpmorgan chase chase is the brand name.
retail treasury &asset & investment card commercial financial securities wealth bank services banking services services management
product types: businesses: businesses: businesses: businesses: businesses:
investment banking: home finance credit card
middle market treasury services investment banking
investor services management  advisory consumer & small merchant acquiring  debt and equity business banking corporate banking- institutional
institutional trust underwriting auto & education commercial realservices- retail
market-makingfinanceestate private banking and trading: insurance business credit
private client  fixed income  equipment leasingservices  equities  credit
corporate lending
in connection with the merger, business segment reporting was realigned to reflect the
new business structure of the combined firm. treasury was transferred from the ib into
corporate. the segment formerly known as chase financial services had been comprised of chase home
finance, chase cardmember services, chase auto finance, chase regional banking and chase middle
market; as a result of the merger, this segment is now called retail financial services and is
comprised of home finance, auto & education finance, consumer & small business banking and
insurance. chase middle market moved into commercial banking, and chase cardmember services
is now its own segment called card services. tss remains unchanged. investment management & private
banking has been renamed asset &
wealth management. jpmorgan partners, which formerly was a stand-alone business segment, was moved
into corporate. corporate is currently comprised of private equity (jpmorgan partners
and one equity partners), treasury, as well as corporate support areas, which include central technology and
operations, internal audit, executive office, finance, general services, human
resources, marketing & communications, office of the general
counsel, real estate and business
services, risk management and strategy and development.
segment results for periods prior to july1, 2004, reflect heritage jpmorgan chase-only results and
have been restated to reflect the current business segment organization and reporting
classifications.
segment results  operating basis (a)(b)
(table continues on next page)
year ended december 31,
total net revenue
noninterest expense
(in millions, except ratios)
change
change
investment bank
$
12,605
$
12,684
(1
)%
$
8,696
$
8,302
%
retail financial services
10,791
7,428
6,825
4,471
card services
10,745
6,144
3,883
2,178
commercial banking
2,374
1,352
1,343
treasury & securities services
4,857
3,608
4,113
3,028
asset & wealth management
4,179
2,970
3,133
2,486
corporate
1,068
(47
)
1,301
total
$
46,113
$
35,254
%
$
29,294
$
21,816
%
(a)
represents the reported results excluding the impact of credit card securitizations and, in
2004, merger costs, the significant litigation reserve charges and accounting policy
conformity adjustments
related to the merger.
(b)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
as a result of the merger, new capital allocation methodologies were implemented during the
third quarter of 2004. the capital allocated to each line of business considers several
factors: stand-alone peer comparables, economic risk measures and regulatory capital requirements. in addition,
effective with the third quarter of 2004, goodwill, as well as the associated capital, is only
allocated
to the corporate line of business. prior periods have not been revised to reflect these new
methodologies and are not comparable to the presentation beginning in the third quarter of 2004.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
description of business
segment reporting methodology
results of the business segments are intended to reflect each segment as if it were essentially
a stand-alone business. the management reporting process that derives these results allocates
income and expense using market-based methodologies. at the time of the merger, several of the
allocation methodologies were revised, as noted below. the changes became effective july1, 2004.
as prior periods have not been revised to reflect these new methodologies, they are not comparable
to the presentation of periods beginning with the third quarter of 2004. further, the firm intends
to continue to assess the assumptions, methodologies and reporting reclassifications used for
segment reporting, and it is anticipated that further refinements may be implemented in
future periods.
revenue sharing
when business segments join efforts to sell products and services to the firms clients, the
participating business segments agree to share revenues from those transactions. these revenue
sharing agreements were revised on the merger date to provide consistency across the lines
of businesses.
funds transfer pricing
funds transfer pricing (ftp) is used to allocate interest income and interest expense to each
line of business and also serves to transfer interest rate risk to corporate. while
business segments may periodically retain interest rate exposures related to customer pricing
or other business-specific risks, the balance of the firms overall interest rate risk exposure is
included and managed in corporate. in the third quarter of 2004, ftp was revised to conform the
policies of the combined firms.
expense allocation
where business segments use services provided by support units within the firm, the costs of
those support units are allocated to the business segments. those expenses are allocated based on
their actual cost, or the lower of actual cost or market cost, as well as upon usage of the
services provided. effective
with the third quarter of 2004, the cost allocation methodologies of the heritage firms were
aligned to provide consistency across the business segments. in addition, expenses related to
certain corporate functions, technology and operations ceased to be allocated to the business
segments and are retained in corporate. these retained expenses include parent company costs that
would not be incurred if the segments were stand-alone businesses; adjustments to align certain
corporate staff, technology and operations allocations with market prices; and other one-time items
not aligned with the business segments.
capital allocation
each business segment is allocated capital by taking into consideration stand-alone peer comparisons,
economic risk measures and regulatory capital requirements. the amount of capital assigned to each
business is referred to as equity. effective with the third quarter of 2004, new methodologies were
implemented to calculate the amount of capital allocated to each segment. as part of the new
methodology, goodwill, as well as the associated capital, is allocated solely to corporate.
although u.s. gaap requires the allocation of goodwill to the business segments for impairment
testing (see note 15 on page 109 of this annual report), the firm has elected not to include
goodwill or the related capital in each of the business segments for management reporting purposes.
see the capital management section on page 50 of this annual report for a discussion of the
equity framework.
credit reimbursement
tss reimburses the ib for credit portfolio exposures the ib manages on behalf of clients the
segments share. at the time of the merger, the reimbursement methodology was revised to be based on
pre-tax earnings, net of the cost of capital related to those exposures. prior to the merger, the
credit reimbursement was based on pre-tax earnings, plus the allocated capital associated with the
shared clients.
tax-equivalent adjustments
segment results reflect revenues on a tax-equivalent basis for segment
reporting purposes. refer to page 25 of this annual report for
additional details.
segment results  operating basis(a)(b)
(table continued from previous page)
year ended december 31,
operating earnings
return on common equity - goodwill(c)
(in millions, except ratios)
change
investment bank
$
2,948
$
2,805
%
%
%
retail financial services
2,199
1,547
card services
1,274
commercial banking
treasury & securities services
asset & wealth management
corporate
(91
)
nm
nm
total
$
8,211
$
6,719
%
%
%
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
investment bank
jpmorgan chase is one of the worlds leading investment banks, as evidenced by the breadth of its
client relationships and product capabilities. the investment bank has extensive relationships with
corporations, financial institutions, governments and institutional investors worldwide. the firm
provides a full range of investment banking products and services, including advising on corporate
strategy and structure, capital raising in equity and debt markets, sophisticated risk management,
and market-making in cash securities and derivative instruments in all major capital markets. the
investment bank also commits the firms own capital to proprietary investing and trading
activities.
as a result of the merger, the treasury business has been transferred to the corporate sector, and
prior periods have been restated to reflect the reorganization.
selected income statement data
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios)
revenue
investment banking fees:
advisory
$
$
$
equity underwriting
debt underwriting
1,853
1,532
1,494
total investment banking fees
3,572
2,871
2,707
trading-related revenue:(b)
fixed income and other
5,008
6,016
4,607
equities
credit portfolio
(186
)
(143
)
total trading-related revenue
5,441
6,386
4,484
lending & deposit related fees
asset management, administration and commissions
1,400
1,217
1,244
other income
(125
)
noninterest revenue
11,280
11,017
8,704
net interest income(b)
1,325
1,667
1,978
total net revenue(c)
12,605
12,684
10,682
provision for credit losses
(640
)
(181
)
2,392
credit reimbursement from (to)tss(d)
(36
)
(82
)
noninterest expense
compensation expense
4,893
4,462
4,298
noncompensation expense
3,803
3,840
3,500
total noninterest expense
8,696
8,302
7,798
operating earnings before income tax expense
4,639
4,527
income tax expense (benefit)
1,691
1,722
(3
)
operating earnings
$
2,948
$
2,805
$
financial ratios
roe
%
%
%
roa
0.62
0.64
0.10
overhead ratio
compensation expense as
% of total net revenue
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
trading revenue, on a reported basis, excludes the impact of net interest income related to
ibs trading activities; this income is recorded in net interest income. however, in this
presentation, to assess the profitability of ibs trading business, the firm combines these
revenues for segment reporting purposes. the amount reclassified from net interest income to
trading
revenue was $1.9billion, $2.1billion and $1.9billion for 2004, 2003 and 2002,
respectively.
(c)
total net revenue includes tax-equivalent adjustments, primarily due to tax-exempt income
from municipal bond investments, and income tax credits related to affordable housing investments
of $274million, $117million and $112million for 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively.
(d)
tss is charged a credit reimbursement related to certain exposures managed within the ib credit
portfolio on behalf of clients shared with tss. for a further discussion, see credit reimbursement
on page 29 of this annual report.
2004 compared with 2003
in 2004, operating earnings of $2.9billion were up 5% from the prior year. increases in investment
banking fees, a reduction in the provision for credit losses and the impact of the merger were
partially offset by decreases in trading revenues and net interest income. return on equity was
17%.
total net revenue of $12.6billion was relatively flat from the prior year, primarily due to lower
fixed income markets revenues and total credit portfolio revenues, offset by increases in
investment banking fees and the impact of the merger. the decline in revenue from fixed income
markets was driven by weaker portfolio management trading results, mainly in the interest rate
markets business. total credit portfolio revenues were down due to lower net interest income and
lending fees, primarily driven by lower loan balances; these were partially offset by higher
trading revenue due to more severe credit spread tightening in 2003 relative to 2004. investment
banking fees increased by 24% over the prior year, driven by significant gains in advisory and debt
underwriting. the advisory gains were a result of increased global market volumes and market share,
while the higher underwriting fees were due to stronger client activity.
the provision for credit losses was a benefit of $640million, compared with a benefit of $181
million in 2003. the improvement in the provision was the result of a $633million decline in net
charge-offs, partially offset by lower reductions in the allowance for credit losses in 2004
relative to 2003. for additional information, see credit risk
management on pages 57-69 of this
annual report.
for the year ended december31, 2004, noninterest expense was up 5% from the prior year. the
increase from 2003 was driven by higher compensation expense, including strategic investments and
the impact of the merger.
2003 compared with 2002
operating earnings of $2.8billion were up significantly over 2002. the increase in earnings was
driven by a significant decline in the provision for credit losses, coupled with strong growth in
fixed income and equity markets revenues.
total net revenue was $12.7billion, an increase of $2.0billion from the prior year. the low
interest rate environment, improvement in equity markets and volatility in credit markets produced
increased client and portfolio management revenue in fixed income and equities. market share gains
in equity underwriting contributed to the increase in investment banking fees over 2002.
the provision for credit losses was a benefit of $181million in 2003, compared with a cost of $2.4
billion in 2002, reflecting improvement in the overall credit quality of the wholesale portfolio
and the restructuring of several nonperforming wholesale loans.
noninterest expense increased by 6% from 2002, reflecting higher incentives related to improved
financial performance and the impact of expensing stock options. noncompensation expenses were up
10% from the prior year due to increases in technology and occupancy costs.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except headcount and ratios)
revenue by business
investment banking fees
$
3,572
$
2,871
$
2,707
fixed income markets
6,314
6,987
5,450
equities markets
1,491
1,406
1,018
credit portfolio
1,228
1,420
1,507
total net revenue
$
12,605
$
12,684
$
10,682
revenue by region
americas
$
6,870
$
7,250
$
6,360
europe/middle east/africa
4,082
4,331
3,215
asia/pacific
1,653
1,103
1,107
total net revenue
$
12,605
$
12,684
$
10,682
selected balance sheet (average)
total assets
$
473,121
$
436,488
$
429,866
trading
assets  debt and equity instruments
173,086
156,408
134,191
trading
assets  derivatives receivables
58,735
83,361
70,831
loans(b)
42,618
45,037
55,998
adjusted assets(c)
393,646
370,776
359,324
equity
17,290
18,350
19,134
headcount
17,478
14,691
15,012
credit data and quality statistics
net charge-offs
$
$
$
1,627
nonperforming assets:
nonperforming loans(d)(e)
1,708
3,328
other nonperforming assets
allowance for loan losses
1,547
1,055
1,878
allowance for lending related commitments
net charge-off rate(b)
0.13
%
1.65
%
3.15
%
allowance for loan losses to average loans(b)
4.27
2.56
3.64
allowance for loan losses to nonperforming loans(d)
nonperforming loans to average loans
2.24
3.79
5.94
market risk-average trading and credit portfolio var
trading activities:
fixed income(f)
$
$
na
foreign exchange
na
equities
na
commodities and other
na
diversification
(43
)
(39
)
na
total trading var
na
credit portfolio var(g)
na
diversification
(9
)
(14
)
na
total trading and credit portfolio var
$
$
na
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
the year-to-date average loans held for sale are $6.4billion, $3.8billion and $4.3billion
for 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. these amounts are not included in the allowance coverage
ratios and net charge-off rates. the 2002 net charge-offs and net charge-off rate exclude
charge-offs of $212million taken on lending-related commitments.
(c)
adjusted assets equals total average assets minus (1)securities purchased under resale
agreements and securities borrowed less securities sold, not yet purchased; (2)assets of variable
interest entities (vies) consolidated under fin 46r; (3)cash and securities segregated and on
deposit for regulatory and other purposes; and (4)goodwill and intangibles.
the amount of adjusted assets is presented to assist the reader in comparing the ibs asset and
capital levels to other investment banks in the securities industry. asset-to-equity leverage
ratios are commonly used as one measure to assess a companys capital adequacy. the ib believes
an adjusted asset amount, which excludes certain assets considered to have a low risk profile,
provides a more meaningful measure of balance sheet leverage in the securities industry. see
capital management on pages 50-52 of this annual report for a discussion of the firms overall
capital adequacy and capital management.
(d)
nonperforming loans include loans held for sale of $2million, $30million and $16million as
of december31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. these amounts are not included in the allowance
coverage ratios.
(e)
nonperforming loans exclude loans held for sale of $351million, $22million and $2million as
of december31, 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively, that were purchased as part of the ibs
proprietary investing activities.
(f)
includes all mark-to-market trading activities, plus available-for-sale securities held for ib
investing purposes.
(g)
includes var on derivative credit valuation adjustments, credit valuation adjustment hedges and
mark-to-market loan hedges, which are reported in trading revenue. this var does not include the
accrual loan portfolio, which is not marked to market.
na  data for 2002 is not available on a comparable basis.
according to thomson financial, in 2004, the firm improved its ranking in u.s. announced m&a from
#8 to #1, and global announced m&a from #4 to #2, while increasing its market share significantly.
the firms u.s. initial public offerings ranking improved from #16 to #4, with the firm moving to
#6 from #4 in the u.s. equity & equity-related category. the firm maintained its #1 ranking in u.s.
syndicated loans, with a 32% market share, and its #3 position in global debt, equity and
equity-related.
market shares and rankings(a)
market
market
market
december 31,
share
rankings
share
rankings
share
rankings
global debt, equity and equity-related
%
# 3
%
# 3
%
#3
global syndicated loans
# 1
# 1
#1
global long-term debt
# 2
# 2
#2
global equity and equity-related
# 6
# 4
#8
global announced m&a
# 2
# 4
#5
u.s. debt, equity and equity-related
# 5
# 3
#2
u.s. syndicated loans
# 1
# 1
#1
u.s. long-term debt
# 2
# 3
#2
u.s. equity and equity-related
# 6
# 4
#6
u.s. announced m&a
# 1
# 8
#7
(a)
sourced from thomson financial securities data. global announced m&a is based on rank value;
all other rankings are based on proceeds, with full credit to each book manager/equal if joint.
because of joint assignments, market share of all participants will add up to more than 100%.
market share and rankings are presented on a combined basis for all periods presented, reflecting
the merger of jpmorgan chase and bank one.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
composition of revenue
asset
year ended
trading-
lending &
management,
december 31,(a)
investment
related
deposit
administration
other
total net
(in millions)
banking fees
revenue
related fees
and commissions
income
nii
revenue
investment banking fees
$
3,572
$
$
$
$
$
$
3,572
fixed income markets
5,008
6,314
equities markets
1,076
(95
)
1,491
credit portfolio
1,228
total
$
3,572
$
5,441
$
$
1,400
$
$
1,325
$
12,605
investment banking fees
$
2,871
$
$
$
$
$
$
2,871
fixed income markets
6,016
6,987
equities markets
(85
)
1,406
credit portfolio
(186
)
1,134
1,420
total
$
2,871
$
6,386
$
$
1,217
$
$
1,667
$
12,684
investment banking fees
$
2,707
$
$
$
$
$
$
2,707
fixed income markets
4,607
(20
)
5,450
equities markets
(53
)
1,018
credit portfolio
(143
)
(52
)
1,345
1,507
total
$
2,707
$
4,484
$
$
1,244
$
(125
)
$
1,978
$
10,682
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
ibs revenues are comprised of the following:
investment banking fees includes advisory, equity underwriting, bond underwriting and loan
syndication fees.
fixed income markets includes client and portfolio management revenue related to both market-making
and proprietary risk-taking across global fixed income markets, including government and corporate
debt, foreign exchange, interest rate and commodities markets.
equities markets includes client and portfolio management revenue related to market-making
and proprietary risk-taking across global equity products, including cash instruments, derivatives
and convertibles.
credit portfolio revenue includes net interest income, fees and loan sale activity for ibs credit
portfolio. credit portfolio revenue also includes gains or losses on securities received as part of
a loan restructuring, and changes in the credit valuation adjustment (cva), which is the
component of the fair value of a derivative that reflects the credit quality of the counterparty.
see page 63 of the credit risk management section of this annual report for a further discussion of
the cva. credit portfolio revenue also includes the results of risk management related to the
firms lending and derivative activities. see pages 64-65 of the credit risk management section of
this annual report for a further discussion on credit derivatives.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
retail financial services
rfs includes home finance, consumer & small business banking, auto & education finance and
insurance. through this group of businesses, the firm provides consumers and small businesses with
a broad range of financial products and services including deposits, investments, loans and
insurance. home finance is a leading provider of consumer real estate loan products and is one of
the largest originators and servicers of home mortgages. consumer & small business banking offers
one of the largest branch networks in the united states, covering 17 states with 2,508 branches and
6,650 automated teller machines (atms). auto & education finance is the largest bank originator
of automobile loans as well as a top provider of loans for college students. through its insurance
operations, the firm sells and underwrites an extensive range of financial protection products and
investment alternatives, including life insurance, annuities and debt protection products.
selected income statement data
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios)
revenue
lending & deposit related fees
$
1,013
$
$
asset management, administration and commissions
securities/private equity gains (losses)
(83
)
mortgage fees and related income
1,037
credit card income
other income
(28
)
noninterest revenue
3,077
2,208
2,525
net interest income
7,714
5,220
3,823
total net revenue
10,791
7,428
6,348
provision for credit losses
noninterest expense
compensation expense
2,621
1,695
1,496
noncompensation expense
3,937
2,773
2,234
amortization of intangibles
total noninterest expense
6,825
4,471
3,733
operating earnings before income tax expense
3,517
2,436
2,281
income tax expense
1,318
operating earnings
$
2,199
$
1,547
$
1,432
financial ratios
roe
%
%
%
roa
1.18
1.05
1.25
overhead ratio
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
2004 compared with 2003
operating earnings were $2.2billion, up from $1.5billion a year ago. the increase was largely due
to the merger. excluding the benefit of the merger, earnings declined as lower msr risk management
results and reduced prime mortgage production revenue offset the benefits of growth in loan
balances, wider spreads on deposit products and improvement in credit costs.
total net revenue increased to $10.8billion, up 45% from the prior year. net interest income
increased by 48% to $7.7billion, primarily due to the merger, growth in retained loan balances and
wider spreads on deposit products. noninterest revenue increased to $3.1billion, up 39%, due to
the merger and higher mortgage servicing income. both components of total revenue included declines
associated with risk managing the msr asset and lower prime mortgage originations.
the provision for credit losses was down 14% to $449million, despite the influence of the merger.
the effect of the merger was offset by a reduction in the allowance for loan losses, resulting from
the sale of the manufactured home loan portfolio, and continued positive credit quality trends in
the consumer lending businesses.
noninterest expense totaled $6.8billion, up 53% from the prior year, primarily due to the merger
and continued investments to expand the branch network. partially offsetting the increase were
merger-related expense savings in all businesses.
2003 compared with 2002
total net revenue was $7.4billion in 2003, an increase of 17% over 2002. net interest income
increased by 37% to $5.2billion, reflecting the positive impact of the low interest rate
environment on consumer loan originations, particularly in home finance, and on spreads earned on
retained loans.
the provision for credit losses of $521million increased by 56% compared with the prior year due
to continued growth in the retained loan portfolios. credit quality remained stable in 2003, as
charge-offs decreased slightly, to $381million.
noninterest expense rose 20% to $4.5billion. the increase reflected higher business volumes and
compensation costs.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except headcount and ratios)
selected balance sheet (ending)
total assets
$
226,560
$
139,316
na
loans(b)
202,473
121,921
na
core deposits(c)
157,256
75,850
na
total deposits
182,765
86,162
na
selected balance sheet (average)
total assets
$
185,928
$
147,435
$
114,248
loans(d)
162,768
120,750
93,125
core deposits(c)
121,121
80,116
68,551
total deposits
137,796
89,793
79,348
equity
9,092
4,220
3,907
headcount
59,632
32,278
29,096
credit data and quality statistics
net charge-offs(e)
$
$
$
nonperforming
loans(f)
1,161
nonperforming assets
1,385
allowance for loan losses
1,228
1,094
net charge-off rate
0.67
%
0.40
%
0.48
%
allowance for loan losses to ending loans(b)
0.67
1.04
na
allowance for loan losses to nonperforming loans(f)
nonperforming loans to total loans
0.57
0.47
na
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
end-of-period loans include loans held for sale of $18,022million, $17,105million and $19,948
million at december31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. those amounts are not included in the
allowance coverage ratios.
(c)
includes demand and savings deposits.
(d)
average loans include loans held for sale of $14,736million, $25,293million and $13,500
million for 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. these amounts are not included in the net charge-off
rate.
(e)
includes $406million of charge-offs related to the manufactured home loan portfolio in the
fourth quarter of 2004.
(f)
nonperforming loans include loans held for sale of $13million, $45million and $25million at
december31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. these amounts are not included in the allowance
coverage ratios.
na  data for 2002 is not available on a comparable basis.
home finance
home finance is comprised of two key business segments: prime production & servicing and consumer
real estate lending. the prime production & servicing segment includes the operating results
associated with the origination, sale and servicing of prime mortgages. consumer real estate
lending reflects the operating results of consumer loans that are
secured by real estate, retained by
the firm and held in the portfolio. this portfolio includes prime and subprime first mortgages, home
equity lines and loans, and manufactured home loans. the firm stopped originating manufactured home
loans early in 2004 and sold substantially all of its remaining portfolio at the end of the year.
selected income statement data by business
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
prime production and servicing
production
$
$
1,339
$
1,052
servicing:
mortgage
servicing revenue, net of amortization
msr risk management results
total net revenue
1,492
2,576
2,208
noninterest expense
1,115
1,124
operating earnings
consumer real estate lending
total net revenue
2,376
1,473
provision for credit losses
noninterest expense
operating earnings
total home finance
total net revenue
3,868
4,049
2,920
provision for credit losses
noninterest expense
2,037
1,730
1,338
operating earnings
1,121
1,332
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
2004 compared with 2003
operating earnings in the prime production & servicing segment dropped to $240million from $918
million in the prior year. results reflected a decrease in prime mortgage production revenue, to
$728million from $1.3billion, due to a decline in mortgage originations. operating earnings were
also impacted by a drop in msr risk management revenue, to $113million from $784million in the
prior year. results in 2004 included realized losses of $89million on the sale of afs securities
associated with risk management of the msr asset, compared with securities gains of $359million in
the prior year. noninterest expense was relatively flat at $1.1billion.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
operating earnings for the consumer real estate lending segment more than doubled to $881million
from $414million in the prior year. the increase was largely due to the addition of the bank one
home equity lending business but also reflected growth in retained loan balances and a $95million
net benefit associated with the sale of the $4billion manufactured home loan portfolio; partially
offsetting these increases were lower subprime mortgage securitization gains. these factors
contributed to total net revenue rising 61% to $2.4billion. the provision for credit losses, at
$74million, decreased by 69% from a year ago. this was the result of an $87million reduction in
the allowance for loan losses associated with the manufactured home loan portfolio sale, improved
credit quality and lower delinquencies, partially offset by the merger. noninterest expense totaled
$922million, up 52% from the year-ago period, largely due to the merger.
2003 compared with 2002
home finance achieved record financial performance in 2003, as operating earnings of $1.3billion
increased by 48% from 2002.
total net revenue of $4.0billion increased by 39% over 2002, given record production revenue,
improved margins and higher home equity revenue.
the provision for credit losses of $240million for 2003 increased by 26% over 2002, primarily due
to higher retained loan balances. credit quality continued to be strong relative to 2002, as
evidenced by a lower net charge-off ratio and reduced delinquencies.
noninterest expense of $1.7billion increased by 29% from 2002, primarily a result of growth in
origination volume. the increase in expenses was also a result of higher performance-related
incentives and strategic investments made to further expand certain distribution channels. these
were partially offset by production-related expense reduction efforts initiated in the fourth
quarter of 2003.
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios and where otherwise noted)
origination volume by channel (in billions)
retail
$
74.2
$
90.8
$
56.3
wholesale
48.5
65.6
36.2
correspondent
22.8
44.5
20.6
correspondent negotiated transactions
41.5
83.3
42.6
total
187.0
284.2
155.7
origination volume by business (in billions)
mortgage
$
144.6
$
259.5
$
141.8
home equity
42.4
24.7
13.9
total
187.0
284.2
155.7
business metrics (in billions)
loans serviced (ending)
$
562.0
$
470.0
$
426.0
msr net carrying value (ending)
5.1
4.8
3.2
end of period loans owned
mortgage loans held for sale
14.2
15.9
18.8
mortgage loans retained
42.6
34.5
26.9
home equity and other loans
67.9
24.1
18.5
total end of period loans owned
124.7
74.5
64.2
average loans owned
mortgage loans held for sale
12.1
23.5
12.0
mortgage loans retained
40.7
32.0
27.7
home equity and other loans
47.0
19.4
17.2
total average loans owned
99.8
74.9
56.9
overhead ratio
%
%
%
credit quality statistics
30+ day delinquency rate
1.27
%
1.81
%
3.07
%
net charge-offs
mortgage
$
$
$
home equity and other loans(b)
total net charge-offs
net charge-off rate
mortgage
0.05
%
0.08
%
0.18
%
home equity and other loans
1.18
0.56
0.53
total net charge-off rate(c)
0.65
0.26
0.32
nonperforming assets
$
$
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes $406million of charge-offs related to the manufactured home loan portfolio in the
fourth quarter of 2004.
(c)
excludes mortgage loans held for sale.
home finances origination channels are comprised of the following:
retail - a mortgage banker employed by the firm directly contacts borrowers who are buying or
refinancing a home through a branch office, through the internet or by phone. borrowers are
frequently referred to a mortgage banker by real estate brokers, home builders or other third
parties.
wholesale - a third-party mortgage broker refers loans to a mortgage banker at the firm. brokers
are independent loan originators that specialize in finding and counseling borrowers but do not
provide funding for loans.
correspondent - banks, thrifts, other mortgage banks and other financial institutions sell closed
loans to the firm.
correspondent negotiated transactions (cnt) - mid- to large-sized
mortgage lenders, banks and
bank-owned mortgage companies sell servicing to the firm on an as-originated basis. these
transactions supplement traditional production channels and provide growth
opportunities in the servicing portfolio in stable and rising-rate periods.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
the table below reconciles managements disclosure of home finances revenue into the reported u.s.
gaap line items shown on the consolidated statement of income and in the related notes to
consolidated financial statements:
year ended december 31,(a)
prime production and servicing
consumer real estate lending
total revenue
(in millions)
net interest income
$
$
1,556
$
$
2,245
$
1,226
$
$
2,945
$
2,782
$
1,439
securities / private equity gains (losses)
(89
)
(89
)
mortgage fees and related income(b)
1,012
total
$
1,492
$
2,576
$
2,208
$
2,376
$
1,473
$
$
3,868
$
4,049
$
2,920
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes activity reported elsewhere as other income.
the following table details the msr risk management results in the home finance business:
msr risk management results
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
reported amounts:
msr valuation adjustments(b)
$
(248
)
$
(253
)
$
(4,040
)
derivative valuation adjustments and other risk management gains (losses)(c)
1,037
4,710
msr risk management results
$
$
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
excludes subprime loan msr activity of $(2) million and $(13) million in 2004 and 2002,
respectively. there was no subprime loan msr activity in 2003.
(c)
includes gains, losses and interest income associated with derivatives both designated and not
designated as a sfas 133 hedge, and securities classified as both trading and available-for-sale.
home finance uses a combination of derivatives, afs securities and trading securities to manage
changes in the fair value of the msr asset. these risk management activities are intended to
protect the economic value of the msr asset by providing offsetting changes in the fair value of
related risk management instruments. the type and amount of hedging instruments used in this risk
management activity change over time as market conditions and approach dictate.
during 2004, negative msr valuation adjustments of $248million were more than offset by $361
million of aggregate risk management gains, including net interest earned on afs securities. in
2003, negative msr valuation adjustments of $253million were more than offset by $1.0billion of
aggregate risk management gains, including net interest earned on afs securities. unrealized
gains/(losses) on afs securities were $(3) million, $(144) million and $377million at december31,
2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. for a further discussion of msrs, see critical accounting
estimates on page 79 and note 15 on pages 109-111 of this annual report.
consumer & small business banking
consumer & small business banking offers a full array of financial services through a branch
network spanning 17 states as well as through the internet. product offerings include checking and
savings accounts, mutual funds and annuities, credit cards, mortgages and home equity loans, and
loans for small business customers (generally with annual sales less than $10million). this
segment also includes community development loans.
selected income statement data
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
total net revenue
$
5,385
$
2,422
$
2,648
provision for credit losses
(31
)
noninterest expense
3,981
2,358
2,055
operating earnings
(4
)
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
2004 compared with 2003
operating earnings totaled $760million, up from a loss of $4million in the prior-year period. the
increase was largely due to the merger but also reflected wider spreads on deposits and lower
expenses. these benefits were partially offset by a higher provision for credit losses.
total net revenue was $5.4billion, compared with $2.4billion in the prior year. while the
increase is primarily attributable to the merger, total net revenue also benefited from wider
spreads on deposits.
the provision for credit losses increased to $165million from $76million in the prior year. the
increase was in part due to the merger but also reflected an increase in the allowance for credit
losses to cover high-risk portfolio segments.
the increase in noninterest expense to $4.0billion was largely attributable to the merger.
incremental expense from investments in the branch distribution network was also a contributing
factor.
2003 compared with 2002
total net revenue of $2.4billion decreased by 9% compared with 2002. net interest income
declined by 10% to $1.6billion, primarily due to the low-interest rate environment. noninterest
revenue decreased by 5% to $828million given lower deposit fee income, decreased debit card fees
and one-time gains in 2002.
noninterest expense of $2.4billion increased by 15% from 2002. the increase was largely due to
investments in technology within the branch network and higher compensation expenses related to
increased staff levels.
the provision for credit losses of $76million increased by $107million compared with 2002. this
reflected a reduction in the allowance for loan losses in 2002.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios and where otherwise noted)
business metrics (in billions)
end-of-period balances
small business loans
$
12.5
$
2.2
na
consumer and other loans(b)
2.2
2.0
na
total loans
14.7
4.2
na
core deposits(c)
146.7
66.4
na
total deposits
172.2
76.7
na
average balances
small business loans
$
7.3
$
2.1
$
1.9
consumer and other loans(b)
2.1
2.0
2.6
total loans
9.4
4.1
4.5
core deposits(c)
110.0
64.8
57.9
total deposits
126.6
74.4
68.7
number of:
branches
2,508
atms
6,650
1,931
1,876
personal bankers
5,324
1,820
1,587
personal checking accounts (in thousands)
7,286
1,984
2,037
business checking accounts (in thousands)
online customers (in thousands)
6,587
na
na
debit cards issued (in thousands)
8,392
2,380
2,352
overhead ratio
%
%
%
retail brokerage business metrics
investment sales volume
$
7,324
$
3,579
na
number of dedicated investment sales representatives
1,364
credit quality statistics
net charge-offs
small business
$
$
$
consumer and other loans
total net charge-offs
net charge-off rate
small business
1.05
%
1.67
%
1.26
%
consumer and other loans
3.67
2.00
1.96
total net charge-off rate
1.64
1.83
1.67
nonperforming assets
$
$
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
primarily community development loans.
(c)
includes demand and savings deposits.
na  data is not available on a comparable basis.
auto & education finance
auto & education finance provides automobile loans and leases to consumers and loans to commercial
clients, primarily through a national network of automotive dealers. the segment also offers loans
to students via colleges and universities across the united states.
selected income statement data
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
total net revenue
$
1,145
$
$
provision for credit losses
noninterest expense
operating earnings
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
2004 compared with 2003
operating earnings totaled $270million, up 31% from the prior year. while the increase was
reflective of the merger, performance for the year was moderated by narrower spreads and reduced
origination volumes arising from a competitive operating environment.
total net revenue increased by 36% to $1.1billion from the prior year. this increase reflected the
merger but included a decline in net interest income, given the competitive operating environment
in 2004 and incremental charges associated with the firms lease residual exposure.
the provision for credit losses totaled $210million, up 2% from the prior year. the increase was
due to the merger but was largely offset by a lower provision for credit losses, reflecting
favorable credit trends.
noninterest expense increased by 68% to $490million, largely due to the merger.
the following is a brief description of selected business metrics within consumer & small
business banking.
personal bankers  retail branch office personnel who acquire, retain and expand new and existing
customer relationships by assessing customer needs and recommending and selling appropriate banking
products and services.
investment sales representatives  licensed retail branch sales personnel, assigned to support
several branches, who assist with the sale of investment products including college planning
accounts, mutual funds, annuities and retirement accounts.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
2003 compared with 2002
in 2003, operating earnings were $206million, 24% higher than in 2002. total net revenue grew by
23% to $842million. net interest income grew by 33% in comparison to 2002, driven by higher
average loans and leases outstanding and wider spreads.
the provision for credit losses increased by 18% to $205million, primarily reflecting a 32%
increase in average loan and lease receivables. credit quality continued to be strong relative to
2002, as evidenced by a lower net charge-off ratio and a reduced delinquency rate.
noninterest expense of $291million increased by 18% compared with 2002. the increase in expenses
was driven by higher origination volume and higher performance-based incentives.
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios and where otherwise noted)
business metrics (in billions)
end of period loans and lease receivables
loans receivables
$
54.6
$
33.7
$
28.0
lease receivables
8.0
9.5
9.4
total end-of-period loans and lease receivables
62.6
43.2
37.4
average loans and lease receivables
loans outstanding (average)(b)
$
44.3
$
32.0
$
23.3
lease receivables (average)
9.0
9.7
8.4
total average loans and lease receivables(b)
53.3
41.7
31.7
overhead ratio
%
%
%
credit quality statistics
30+ day delinquency rate
1.55
%
1.42
%
1.49
%
net charge-offs
loans
$
$
$
lease receivables
total net charge-offs
net charge off rate
loans(b)
0.52
%
0.43
%
0.58
%
lease receivables
0.49
0.42
0.45
total net charge-off rate(b)
0.52
0.43
0.54
nonperforming assets
$
$
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
average loans include loans held for sale of $2.3billion, $1.8billion and $1.5billion for,
2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. these are not included in the net charge-off rate.
insurance
insurance is a provider of financial protection products and services, including life insurance,
annuities and debt protection. products and services are distributed through both internal lines of
business and external markets.
selected income statement data
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
total net revenue
$
$
$
noninterest expense
operating earnings
memo: consolidated gross insurance-related revenue(b)
1,191
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes revenue reported in the results of other businesses.
2004 compared with 2003
insurance operating earnings totaled $48million on total net revenue of $393million in 2004. the
increases in total net revenue and noninterest expense over the prior year were almost entirely due
to the merger.
2003 compared with 2002
operating earnings in 2003 reflected a 19% increase in total net revenue, while expenses were
essentially flat.
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except where otherwise noted)
business metrics  ending balances
invested assets
$
7,368
$
1,559
$
policy loans
insurance policy and claims reserves
7,279
1,096
term premiums  first year annualized
proprietary annuity sales
number of policies in force  direct/assumed (in thousands)
2,611
na
insurance in force  direct/assumed
$
277,827
$
31,992
na
insurance in force  retained
80,691
31,992
na
a.m. best rating
a
a
a
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
na  data for 2002 is not available on a comparable basis.
the following is a brief description of selected business metrics within insurance.
proprietary annuity sales represent annuity contracts marketed through and issued by subsidiaries
of the firm.
insurance in force  direct/assumed includes the aggregate face amount of insurance policies
directly underwritten and assumed through reinsurance.
insurance in force  retained includes the aggregate face amounts of insurance policies directly
underwritten and assumed through reinsurance, after reduction for face amounts ceded to reinsurers.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
card services
card services is the largest issuer of general purpose credit cards in the united states, with
approximately 94million cards in circulation, and is the largest merchant acquirer. cs offers a
wide variety of products to satisfy the needs of its cardmembers, including cards issued on behalf
of many well-known partners, such as major airlines, hotels, universities, retailers and other
financial institutions.
jpmorgan chase uses the concept of managed receivables to evaluate the credit performance of the
underlying credit card loans, both sold and not sold: as the same borrower is continuing to use the
credit card for ongoing charges, a borrowers credit performance will affect both the receivables
sold under sfas 140 and those not sold. thus, in its disclosures regarding managed receivables,
jpmorgan chase treats the sold receivables as if they were still on the balance sheet in order to
disclose the credit performance (such as net charge-off rates) of the entire managed credit card
portfolio. operating results exclude the impact of credit card securitizations on revenue, the
provision for credit losses, net charge-offs and receivables. securitization does not change
reported net income versus operating earnings; however, it does affect the classification of items
on the consolidated statements of income.
selected income statement
data  managed basis
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios)
revenue
asset management,
administration and commissions
$
$
$
credit card income
2,179
other income
noninterest revenue
2,371
1,092
net interest income
8,374
5,052
4,930
total net revenue
10,745
6,144
5,913
provision for credit losses
4,851
2,904
2,751
noninterest expense
compensation expense
noncompensation expense
2,485
1,336
1,320
amortization of intangibles
total noninterest expense
3,883
2,178
2,129
operating earnings before
income tax expense
2,011
1,062
1,033
income tax expense
operating earnings
$
1,274
$
$
financial metrics
roe
%
%
%
overhead ratio
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
2004 compared with 2003
operating earnings of $1.3billion increased by $591million compared with the prior year,
primarily due to the merger. in addition, earnings benefited from higher loan balances and charge
volume, partially offset by a higher provision for credit losses and higher expenses.
total net revenue of $10.7billion increased by $4.6billion. net interest income of $8.4billion
increased by $3.3billion, primarily due to the merger and higher loan balances. noninterest
revenue of $2.4billion increased by $1.3billion, primarily due to the merger and higher charge
volume, which generated increased interchange income. this was partially offset by higher
volume-driven payments to partners, reflecting the sharing of income and increased rewards expense.
the provision for credit losses of $4.9billion increased by $1.9billion,
primarily due to the
merger and growth in credit card receivables. credit ratios remained strong,
benefiting from reduced contractual and bankruptcy charge-offs. the net charge-off ratio was 5.27%.
the 30-day delinquency ratio was 3.70%.
noninterest expense of $3.9billion increased by $1.7billion, primarily related to the merger. in
addition, expenses increased due to higher marketing expenses and volume-based processing expenses,
partially offset by lower compensation expenses.
2003 compared with 2002
operating earnings of $683million increased by $19million or 3% compared with the prior year.
earnings benefited from higher revenue, partially offset by a higher provision for credit losses
and expenses.
total net revenue of $6.1billion increased by 4%. net interest income of $5.1billion increased by
2% due to higher spread and loan balances. noninterest revenue of $1.1billion increased by 11% due
to higher charge volume, which generated increased interchange income. this was partially offset by
higher rewards expense.
the provision for credit losses was $2.9billion, an increase of 6%, primarily due to the higher
provision for credit losses and higher losses due to loan growth. conservative risk management and
rigorous collection practices contributed to stable credit quality.
noninterest expense was $2.2billion, an increase of 2%, due to volume-based processing expenses,
partially offset by disciplined expense management.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except headcount, ratios
and where otherwise noted)
memo: net securitization
gains (amortization)
$
(8
)
$
$
% of average managed outstandings:
net interest income
9.16
%
9.95
%
10.08
%
provision for credit losses
5.31
5.72
5.62
noninterest revenue
2.59
2.15
2.01
risk adjusted margin(b)
6.45
6.38
6.46
noninterest expense
4.25
4.29
4.35
pre-tax income
2.20
2.09
2.11
operating earnings
1.39
1.35
1.36
business metrics
charge volume (in billions)
$
193.6
$
88.2
$
79.0
net accounts opened (in thousands)
7,523
4,177
3,680
credit cards issued (in thousands)
94,285
35,103
33,488
number of registered
internet customers (in millions)
13.6
3.7
2.2
merchant acquiring business
bank card volume (in billions)
$
396.2
$
261.2
$
226.1
total transactions (in millions)
12,066
7,154
6,509
selected ending balances
loans:
loans on balance sheet
$
64,575
$
17,426
$
20,101
securitized loans
70,795
34,856
30,722
managed loans
$
135,370
$
52,282
$
50,823
selected average balances
managed assets
$
94,741
$
51,406
$
49,648
loans:
loans on balance sheet
$
38,842
$
17,604
$
22,410
securitized loans
52,590
33,169
26,519
managed loans
$
91,432
$
50,773
$
48,929
equity
7,608
3,440
3,444
headcount
19,598
10,612
10,885
credit quality statistics  managed
net charge-offs
$
4,821
$
2,996
$
2,887
net charge-off rate
5.27
%
5.90
%
5.90
%
delinquency ratios  managed
30+ days
3.70
%
4.68
%
4.69
%
90+ days
1.72
2.19
2.16
allowance for loan losses
$
2,994
$
1,225
$
1,459
allowance for loan losses to
period-end loans
4.64
%
7.03
%
7.26
%
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
represents total net revenue less provision for credit losses.
the financial information presented below reconciles reported basis and managed basis to disclose
the effect of securitizations.
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
income statement data
credit card income
reported data for the period
$
4,446
$
2,309
$
2,167
securitization adjustments
(2,267
)
(1,379
)
(1,341
)
managed credit card income
$
2,179
$
$
other income
reported data for the period
$
$
$
securitization adjustments
(86
)
(71
)
(36
)
managed other income
$
$
$
net interest income
reported data for the period
$
3,123
$
1,732
$
2,114
securitization adjustments
5,251
3,320
2,816
managed net interest income
$
8,374
$
5,052
$
4,930
total net revenue(b)
reported data for the period
$
7,847
$
4,274
$
4,474
securitization adjustments
2,898
1,870
1,439
managed total net revenue
$
10,745
$
6,144
$
5,913
provision for credit losses
reported data for the period
$
1,953
$
1,034
$
1,312
securitization adjustments
2,898
1,870
1,439
managed provision for credit losses
$
4,851
$
2,904
$
2,751
balance sheet  average balances
total average assets
reported data for the period
$
43,657
$
19,041
$
23,129
securitization adjustments
51,084
32,365
26,519
managed average assets
$
94,741
$
51,406
$
49,648
credit quality statistics
net charge-offs
reported net charge-offs data
for the period
$
1,923
$
1,126
$
1,448
securitization adjustments
2,898
1,870
1,439
managed net charge-offs
$
4,821
$
2,996
$
2,887
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes credit card income, other income and net interest income.
the following is a brief description of selected business metrics within card services.
charge volume  represents the dollar amount of cardmember purchases, balance transfers and cash
advance activity.
net accounts opened  includes originations, purchases and sales.
merchant acquiring business  represents an entity that processes payments for merchants.
jpmorgan chase is a majority owner of paymentech, inc. and a 50% owner of chase merchant services.
bank card volume  represents the dollar amount of transactions processed for the merchants.
total transactions  represents the number of transactions and authorizations processed for
the merchants.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
commercial banking
commercial banking serves more than 25,000 corporations, municipalities, financial institutions and
not-for-profit entities, with annual revenues generally ranging from $10million to $2billion. a
local market presence and a strong customer service model, coupled with a focus on risk management,
provide a solid infrastructure for commercial banking to provide the firms complete product set
lending, treasury services, investment banking and investment management  for both corporate
clients and their executives. commercial bankings clients benefit greatly from the firms
extensive branch network and often use the firm exclusively to meet their financial services needs.
commercial banking operates in 10 of the top 15 major u.s. metropolitan areas. within this network,
commercial banking is divided into three customer coverage segments. general coverage for corporate
clients is done by middle market banking, which generally covers clients up to $500million, and
corporate banking, which generally covers clients over $500million. corporate banking typically
focuses on clients that have broader investment banking needs. the third segment, commercial real
estate, serves investors in and developers of for-sale housing, multifamily rental, retail, office
and industrial properties. in addition to these three customer groupings, commercial banking offers
several products to the firms entire customer base. chase business credit is a leading national
provider of highly structured asset-based financing, syndications and collateral analysis. chase
equipment leasing finances a variety of equipment types and offers vendor programs for leading
capital and technology equipment manufacturers. given this structure, commercial banking manages a
customer base and loan portfolio that is highly diversified across a broad range of industries and
geographic locations.
commercial banking was known prior to the merger as chase middle market and was a business within
the former chase financial services.
selected income statement data
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios)
revenue
lending & deposit related fees
$
$
$
asset management, administration
and commissions
other income(b)
noninterest revenue
net interest income
1,692
total net revenue
2,374
1,352
1,365
provision for credit losses
noninterest expense
compensation expense
noncompensation expense
amortization of intangibles
total noninterest expense
1,343
operating earnings before income
tax expense
income tax expense
operating earnings
$
$
$
financial ratios
roe
%
%
%
roa
1.67
1.87
1.77
overhead ratio
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
ib-related and commercial card revenues are included in other income.
2004 compared with 2003
operating earnings were $608million, an increase of 98%, primarily due to the merger.
total net revenue was $2.4billion, an increase of 76%, primarily due to the merger. in addition to
the overall increase related to the merger, net interest income of $1.7billion was positively
affected by higher deposit balances, partially offset by lower lending-related revenue. noninterest
revenue of $682million was positively affected by higher investment banking fees and higher gains
on the sale of loans and securities acquired in satisfaction of debt, partially offset by lower
service charges on deposits, which often decline as interest rates rise.
the provision for credit losses was $41million, an increase of $35million, primarily due to the
merger. excluding the impact of the merger, the provision was higher in 2004. lower net charge-offs
in 2004 were partially offset by lower reductions in the allowance for credit losses in 2004
relative to 2003.
noninterest expense was $1.3billion, an increase of $521million, or 63%, primarily related to the
merger.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
2003 compared with 2002
operating earnings were $307million, an increase of 8% compared with 2002.
total net revenue of $1.4billion decreased by 1% compared with 2002. net interest income of $1.0
billion decreased by 4% compared with the prior year, primarily due to lower deposit and loan
spreads, partially offset by higher deposit and loan balances. noninterest revenue was $393
million, an increase of 7%, primarily reflecting higher service charges on deposits and investment
banking fees.
the provision for credit losses was $6million, a decrease of $66million, which resulted from a
larger reduction in the allowance for credit losses and lower net charge-offs in 2003, reflecting
an improvement in credit quality.
noninterest expense was $822million, an increase of 2% compared with 2002. the increase was the
result of higher severance costs and performance-based incentives, partially offset by a decrease
in other expenses.
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except headcount and ratios)
revenue by product:
lending
$
$
$
treasury services
1,467
investment banking
other
(6
)
(25
)
total commercial banking revenue
2,374
1,352
1,365
selected balance sheet (average)
total assets
$
36,435
$
16,460
$
15,973
loans and leases
32,417
14,049
13,642
deposits
51,620
32,880
29,403
equity
2,093
1,059
1,199
headcount
4,555
1,730
1,807
credit data and quality statistics:
net charge-offs
$
$
$
nonperforming loans
allowance for loan losses
1,322
allowance for lending-related commitments(b)
net charge-off rate
0.19
%
0.54
%
0.78
%
allowance for loan losses to average loans
4.08
0.87
1.33
allowance for loan losses to
nonperforming loans
nonperforming loans to average loans
1.63
0.88
1.45
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
in 2002, the allowance for lending-related commitments was allocated to the ib. had the amount
been allocated to cb, the allowance would have been $24million.
commercial banking revenues are comprised of the following:
lending incorporates a variety of financing alternatives, such as term loans, revolving lines of
credit and asset-based structures and leases, which are often secured by receivables, inventory,
equipment or real estate.
treasury services incorporates a broad range of products and services to help clients manage
short-term liquidity through deposits and sweeps, and longer-term investment needs through money
market accounts, certificates of deposit and mutual funds; manage working capital through lockbox,
global trade, global clearing and commercial card products; and have ready access to information to
manage their business through online reporting tools.
investment banking products provide clients with more sophisticated capital-raising alternatives,
through loan syndications, investment-grade debt, asset-backed securities, private placements,
high-yield bonds and equity underwriting, and balance sheet and risk management tools through
foreign exchange, derivatives, m&a and advisory services.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
treasury & securities services
treasury & securities services is a global leader in providing transaction, investment and
information services to support the needs of corporations, issuers and institutional investors
worldwide. tss is the largest cash management provider in the world and one of the top three global
custodians. the treasury services business provides clients with a broad range of capabilities,
including u.s. dollar and multi-currency clearing, ach, trade, and short-term liquidity and working
capital tools. the investor services business provides a wide range of capabilities, including
custody, funds services, securities lending, and performance measurement and execution products.
the institutional trust services business provides trustee, depository and administrative services
for debt and equity issuers. treasury services partners with the commercial banking, consumer &
small business banking and asset & wealth management segments to serve clients firmwide. as a result,
certain treasury services revenues are included in other segments results.
selected income statement data
year ending december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios)
revenue
lending & deposit related fees
$
$
$
asset management, administration
and commissions
2,445
1,903
1,800
other income
noninterest revenue
3,474
2,661
2,573
net interest income
1,383
total net revenue
4,857
3,608
3,535
provision for credit losses
credit reimbursement (to)from ib(b)
(90
)
noninterest expense
compensation expense
1,629
1,257
1,131
noncompensation expense
2,391
1,745
1,616
amortization of intangibles
total noninterest expense
4,113
3,028
2,771
operating earnings before income
tax expense
income tax expense
operating earnings
$
$
$
financial ratios
roe
%
%
%
overhead ratio
memo
treasury services firmwide overhead ratios(c)
treasury & securities services
firmwide overhead ratio(c)
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
tss is charged a credit reimbursement related to certain exposures managed within the ib credit
portfolio on behalf of clients shared with tss. for a further discussion, see credit reimbursement
on page 29 of this annual report.
(c)
tss and ts firmwide overhead ratios have been calculated based on the firmwide revenues
described in footnote (b)on page 44 of this annual report and tss or ts expenses, respectively,
including those allocated to certain other lines of business.
2004 compared with 2003
operating earnings for the year were $440million, an increase of $18million, or 4%. results in
2004 include an after-tax gain of $10million on the sale of an investor services business.
prior-year results include an after-tax gain of $22million on the sale of an institutional trust
services business. excluding these one-time gains, operating earnings increased by $30million, or
8%. both net revenue and noninterest expense increased primarily as a result of the merger, the
acquisition of bank ones corporate trust business in november2003 and the acquisition of efs in
january2004.
tss net revenue improved by 35% to $4.9billion. this revenue growth reflected the benefit of the
merger and the acquisitions noted above and improved product revenues across tss. net interest
income grew to $1.4billion from $947million as a result of average deposit balance growth of 44%,
to $128billion, a change in the corporate deposit pricing methodology in 2004 and wider deposit
spreads. growth in fees and commissions was driven by a 20% increase in assets under custody to
$9.1 trillion as well as new business growth in trade, commercial card, global equity products,
securities lending, fund services, clearing and ach. partially offsetting these improvements were
lower service charges on deposits, which often decline as interest rates rise, and a soft municipal
bond market.
treasury services
(ts) net revenue grew to $2.0billion, investor
services (is) to $1.7billion and
institutional trust services (its) to $1.2billion. tss firmwide net revenue grew 41% to $6.5billion.
tss firmwide net revenues include treasury services net revenues recorded in other lines of
business.
credit reimbursement to the investment bank was $90million, compared with a credit from the
investment bank of $36million in the prior year, principally due to the merger and a change in
methodology. tss is charged a credit reimbursement related to certain exposures managed within the
investment bank credit portfolio on behalf of clients shared with tss.
noninterest expense totaled $4.1billion, up from $3.0billion, reflecting the merger and the
acquisitions noted above, $155million of software impairment charges, upfront transition expenses
related to on-boarding new custody and fund accounting clients, and legal and technology-related
expenses.
on january7, 2005, jpmorgan chase agreed to acquire vastera, a provider of global trade management
solutions, for a total transaction value of approximately $129million. vasteras business will be
combined with the logistics and trade services businesses of the treasury services unit. the
transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2005.
2003 compared with 2002
tss operating earnings decreased by 23% from 2002 while delivering a return on allocated capital of
15%. a 9% increase in noninterest expense and a lower credit reimbursement contributed to
the lower earnings.
total net revenue increased by 2%, with growth at its of 11%. its revenue growth was the result of
debt product lines, increased volume in asset servicing, a pre-tax gain of $36million on the sale
of an institutional trust services business in 2003, and the result of acquisitions which
generated $29million of new revenue in 2003. tss revenue rose by 8% on higher trade and
commercial payment card revenue and increased balance-related earnings, including
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
higher balance-deficiency fees resulting from the lower interest rate environment. iss revenue
contracted by 7%, the result of lower nii due to lower interest rates, lower foreign exchange and
securities lending revenue, and a pre-tax gain of $50million on the sale of the firms interest in
a non-u.s. securities clearing firm in 2002.
noninterest expense increased by 9%, attributable to higher severance, the impact of acquisitions,
the cost associated with expensing of options, increased pension costs and charges to provide for
losses on subletting unoccupied excess real estate.
tss was assigned a credit reimbursement of pre-tax earnings and the associated capital
related to certain credit exposures managed within ibs credit portfolio on behalf of clients
shared with tss. for 2003, the impact to tss was to increase pre-tax operating earnings by $36
million and average allocated capital by $712million.
treasury & securities services firmwide metrics include certain tss product revenues and deposits
reported in other lines of business for customers who are also customers of those lines of
business. in order to capture the firmwide impact of ts and tss products and revenues, management
reviews firmwide metrics such as firmwide deposits, firmwide revenue and firmwide overhead ratios
in assessing financial performance for tss. firmwide metrics are necessary in order to understand
the aggregate tss business.
selected metrics
year ending december 31,(a)
(in millions, except headcount and where
otherwise noted)
revenue by business
treasury services(b)
$
1,994
$
1,200
$
1,111
investor services
1,709
1,448
1,561
institutional trust services
1,154
total net revenue
$
4,857
$
3,608
$
3,535
memo
treasury services firmwide revenue(b)
$
3,665
$
2,214
$
2,125
treasury & securities services
firmwide revenue(b)
6,528
4,622
4,549
business metrics
assets under custody (in billions)
$
9,137
$
7,597
$
6,336
corporate trust securities
under administration (in billions)(c)
6,676
6,127
na
selected balance sheet (average)
total assets
$
23,430
$
18,379
$
17,239
loans
7,849
6,009
5,972
deposits
u.s. deposits
82,928
54,116
$
32,698
non-u.s. deposits
45,022
34,518
34,919
total deposits
127,950
88,634
67,617
equity
2,544
2,738
2,700
memo
treasury services firmwide deposits(d)
$
99,587
$
65,194
$
41,508
treasury & securities services
firmwide deposits(d)
175,327
119,245
88,865
headcount
22,612
15,145
14,810
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
tss and treasury services firmwide revenues include ts revenues recorded in certain other lines
of business. revenue associated with treasury services customers who are also customers of the
commercial banking, consumer & small business banking and asset & wealth management lines of
business are reported in these other lines of business and are excluded from treasury services, as
follows:
(in millions)
treasury services revenue reported in
commercial banking
$
1,467
$
$
treasury services revenue reported in
other lines of business
note: foreign exchange revenues are apportioned between tss and the ib, and only tsss share is
included in tss firmwide revenue.
(c)
corporate trust securities under administration include debt held in trust on behalf of third
parties and debt serviced as agent.
(d)
tss and ts firmwide deposits include tss deposits recorded in certain other lines of business.
deposits associated with treasury services customers who are also customers of the commercial
banking line of business are reported in that line of business and are excluded from treasury
services.
na
data for 2002 is not available on a comparable basis.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
asset & wealth management
asset & wealth management provides investment management to retail and institutional investors,
financial intermediaries and high-net-worth families and individuals globally. for retail
investors, awm provides investment management products and services, including a global mutual fund
franchise, retirement plan administration, and consultation and brokerage services. awm delivers
investment management to institutional investors across all asset classes. the private bank and
private client services businesses provide integrated wealth management services to
ultra-high-net-worth and high-net-worth clients, respectively.
selected income statement data
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios)
revenue
lending & deposit related fees
$
$
$
asset management, administration
and commissions
3,140
2,258
2,228
other income
noninterest revenue
3,383
2,482
2,465
net interest income
total net revenue
4,179
2,970
2,932
provision for credit losses
(14
)
noninterest expense
compensation expense
1,579
1,213
1,141
noncompensation expense
1,502
1,265
1,261
amortization of intangibles
total noninterest expense
3,133
2,486
2,408
operating earnings before
income tax expense
1,060
income tax expense
operating earnings
$
$
$
financial ratios
roe
%
%
%
overhead ratio
pre-tax margin ratio(b)
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
pre-tax margin represents operating earnings before income taxes / total net revenue, which is
a comprehensive measure of pre-tax performance and is another basis by which awm management
evaluates its performance and that of its competitors. pre-tax margin is an effective measure of
awms earnings, after all costs are taken into consideration.
2004 compared with 2003
operating earnings were $681million, up 137% from the prior year, due largely to the merger but
also driven by increased revenue and a decrease in the provision for credit losses; these were
partially offset by higher compensation expense.
total net revenue was $4.2billion, up 41%, primarily due to the merger. additionally, fees and
commissions increased due to global equity market appreciation, net asset inflows and the
acquisition of jpmorgan retirement plan services (rps) in the second quarter of 2003. fees and
commissions also increased due to an improved product mix, with an increased percentage of assets
in higher-yielding products. net interest income increased due to deposit and loan growth.
the provision for credit losses was a benefit of $14million, a decrease of $49million, due to an
improvement in credit quality.
noninterest expense was $3.1billion, up 26%, due to the merger as well as increased compensation
expense and the impact of increased technology and marketing initiatives.
2003 compared with 2002
operating earnings were $287million, up 3% from the prior year, reflecting an improved credit
portfolio, the benefit of slightly higher revenues. during the second quarter of 2003, the firm
acquired american century retirement plan services inc., a provider of defined contribution
recordkeeping services, as part of its strategy to grow its u.s. retail investment management
business. the business was renamed jpmorgan retirement plan services (rps).
total net revenue was $3.0billion, up 1% from the prior year. the increase in fees and commissions
reflected the acquisition of rps and increased average equity market valuations in client
portfolios, partly offset by institutional net outflows. net interest income increased due to
higher brokerage account balances and spreads. the decline in other income primarily reflected
non-recurring items in 2002.
the provision for credit losses decreased by 59%, due to an improvement in credit quality and
recoveries.
noninterest expense was $2.5billion, up $78million from 2002, reflecting the acquisition of rps,
higher compensation expense, and real estate and software write-offs, partly offset by the
continued impact of expense-management programs.
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except headcount and ratios)
revenue by client segment
private bank
$
1,554
$
1,437
$
1,467
retail
1,081
institutional
private client services
total net revenue
$
4,179
$
2,970
$
2,932
business metrics
number of:
client advisors
1,226
brown co. average daily trades
29,901
27,150
24,584
retirement plan services
participants
918,000
756,000
star rankings(b)
% of customer assets in funds
ranked 4 or better
%
%
na
% of customer assets in funds
ranked 3 or better
na
selected balance sheet (average)
total assets
$
37,751
$
33,780
$
35,813
loans
21,545
16,678
18,926
deposits
32,039
20,249
19,329
equity
3,902
5,507
5,649
headcount
12,287
8,520
8,546
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except ratios)
credit data and quality statistics
net charge-offs
$
$
$
nonperforming loans
allowance for loan losses
allowance for lending-related commitments
net charge-off rate
0.33
%
0.05
%
0.59
%
allowance for loan losses to average loans
1.00
0.78
0.51
allowance for loan losses to nonperforming
loans
nonperforming loans to average loans
0.37
1.04
0.73
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
derived from morningstar for the united states; micropal for the united kingdom, luxembourg,
hong kong and taiwan; and nomura for japan.
na-data for 2002 is not available on a comparable basis.
awms client segments are comprised of the following:
the private bank addresses every facet of wealth management for ultra-high-net-worth individuals
and families worldwide, including investment management, capital markets and risk management, tax
and estate planning, banking, capital raising and specialty wealth advisory services.
retail provides more than 2million customers worldwide with investment management, retirement
planning and administration, and brokerage services through third-party and direct distribution
channels.
institutional serves more than 3,000 large and mid-size corporate and public institutions,
endowments and foundations, and governments globally. awm offers institutions comprehensive global
investment services, including investment management across asset classes, pension analytics,
asset-liability management, active risk budgeting and overlay strategies.
private client services offers high-net-worth individuals, families and business owners
comprehensive wealth management solutions that include financial planning, personal trust,
investment and banking products and services.
assets under supervision
2004 compared with 2003
assets under supervision (aus) at december31, 2004 were $1.3 trillion, up 66% from 2003, and
assets under management (aum) were $791billion, up 41% from the prior year. the increases were
primarily the result of the merger, as well as market appreciation, net asset inflows and the
acquisition of a majority interest in highbridge capital management. the firm also has a 43%
interest in american century companies, inc., whose aum totaled $98billion and $87billion at
december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. custody, brokerage, administration, and deposits were
$478billion, up 135%, primarily due to the merger, as well as market appreciation and net inflows
across all products.
2003 compared with 2002
aus at december31, 2003, totaled $764billion, up 19% from the prior year-end. aum totaled $561
billion, up 9%, and custody, brokerage, administration and deposit accounts were $203billion, up
54%. the increase in aum was driven by higher equity market valuations in client portfolios, partly
offset by institutional net outflows. custody, brokerage, administration and deposits grew by $70
billion, driven by the acquisition of rps ($41billion), higher equity market valuations in client
portfolios and net inflows from private bank clients.
the diversification of aus across product classes, client segments and geographic regions helped to
mitigate the impact of market volatility on revenue. the firm also had a 44% interest in american
century companies, inc., whose aum totaled $87billion and $72billion at december31, 2003 and
2002, respectively.
assets under supervision(a)(b)
(in billions)
asset class
liquidity
$
$
fixed income
equities, balanced and other
assets under management
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
total assets under supervision
$
1,269
$
client segment
private bank
assets under management
$
$
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
retail
assets under management
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
institutional
assets under management
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
private client services
assets under management
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
total assets under supervision
$
1,269
$
geographic region
americas
assets under management
$
$
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
1,006
international
assets under management
custody/brokerage/administration/deposits
assets under supervision
total assets under supervision
$
1,269
$
memo:
mutual fund assets:
liquidity
$
$
fixed income
equity, balanced and other
total mutual funds assets
$
$
assets under supervision rollforward(b)
beginning balance
$
$
net asset flows
(16
)
acquisitions(c)
market/other impact
ending balance
$
1,269
$
(a)
excludes assets under management of american century.
(b)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
reflects the merger with bank one ($376billion) in the third quarter of 2004, the acquisition
of a majority interest in highbridge capital management ($7billion) in the fourth quarter of 2004
and the acquisition of rps in the second quarter of 2003.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
corporate
the corporate sector is
comprised of private equity, treasury, and
corporate staff and other centrally managed expenses. private equity includes jpmorgan partners and one
equity partners businesses. treasury manages the structural interest rate
risk and investment portfolio for the firm. the corporate staff areas include central technology and operations,
internal audit, executive office, finance, general services, human resources, marketing
& communications, office of the general counsel, real estate and business services, risk
management, and strategy and development. other centrally managed expenses include items such as
the firms occupancy and pension expense, net of allocations to the business.
selected income statement data
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
revenue
securities / private equity gains
$
1,786
$
1,031
$
other income
(2
)
(11
)
noninterest revenue
1,784
1,245
net interest income
(1,222
)
(177
)
(45
)
total net revenue
1,068
provision for credit losses
(110
)
noninterest expense
compensation expense
2,426
1,893
1,867
noncompensation expense
4,088
3,216
2,711
net expenses allocated to other businesses
(5,213
)
(4,580
)
(4,070
)
total noninterest expense
1,301
operating earnings before income
tax expense
(629
)
(363
)
income tax expense (benefit)
(690
)
(253
)
(128
)
operating earnings
$
$
$
(235
)
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
2004 compared with 2003
operating earnings were $61million, down from earnings of $668million in the prior year.
noninterest revenue was $1.8billion, up 43% from the prior year. the primary component of
noninterest revenue is securities/private equity gains, which totaled $1.8billion, up 73% from the
prior year. the increase was a result of net gains in the private equity portfolio of $1.4billion
in 2004, compared with $27million in net gains in 2003. partially offsetting these gains were
lower investment securities gains in treasury.
net interest income was a negative $1.2billion, compared with a negative $177million in the prior
year. the decline was driven primarily by actions and policies adopted in conjunction with the
merger.
noninterest expense of $1.3billion was up $772million from the prior year due to the merger. the
merger resulted in higher gross compensation and noncompensation expenses, which were partially
offset by higher allocation of these expenses to the businesses. incremental allocations to the
businesses were lower than the gross expense increase due to certain policies adopted in
conjunction with the merger. these policies retain overhead costs that would not be incurred by the
lines of business if operated on a stand-alone basis, as well as costs in excess of the market
price for services provided by the corporate staff and technology and operations areas.
on september15, 2004, jpmorgan chase and ibm announced the firms plans to reintegrate the
portions of its technology infrastructure  including data centers, help desks, distributed
computing, data networks and voice networks  that were previously outsourced to ibm. in january
2005, approximately 3,100 employees and 800 contract employees were transferred to the firm.
2003 compared with 2002
for 2003, corporate had operating earnings of $668million, compared with an operating loss of $235
million in 2002, driven primarily by higher gains in the private equity portfolio and income tax
benefits not allocated to the business segments.
selected metrics
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except headcount)
selected average balance sheet
short-term investments(b)
$
14,590
$
4,076
$
7,691
investment portfolio(c)
63,475
63,506
61,816
goodwill(d)
21,773
1,166
total assets
162,234
104,395
97,089
headcount
24,806
13,391
16,960
treasury
securities gains (losses)(e)
$
$
$
1,073
investment portfolio (average)
57,776
56,299
54,197
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
represents federal funds sold, securities borrowed, trading assets  debt and equity
instruments and trading assets  derivative receivables.
(c)
represents investment securities and private equity investments.
(d)
as of july1, 2004, the firm changed the allocation methodology of goodwill to retain all
goodwill in corporate.
(e)
excludes gains/losses on securities used to manage risk associated with msrs.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
selected income statement and
balance sheet data  private equity
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
private equity gains (losses)
direct investments
realized gains
$
1,423
$
$
write-ups / write-downs
(192
)
(404
)
(825
)
mark-to-market gains (losses)
(210
)
total direct investments
1,395
(583
)
third-party fund investments
(319
)
(150
)
total private equity gains (losses)
1,429
(733
)
other income
net interest income
(271
)
(264
)
(302
)
total net revenue
1,211
(190
)
(976
)
total noninterest expense
operating earnings (loss)before income
tax expense
(458
)
(1,272
)
income tax expense (benefit)
(168
)
(466
)
operating earnings (losses)
$
$
(290
)
$
(806
)
private equity portfolio information(b)
direct investments
public securities
carrying value
$
1,170
$
$
cost
quoted public value
1,758
private direct securities
carrying value
5,686
5,508
5,865
cost
7,178
6,960
7,316
third-party fund investments(c)
carrying value
1,099
1,843
cost
1,042
1,736
2,333
total private equity portfolio
carrying value
$
7,497
$
7,250
$
8,228
cost
$
8,964
$
9,147
$
10,312
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
for further information on the firms policies regarding the valuation of the private equity
portfolio, see note 9 on pages 98100 of this annual report.
(c)
unfunded commitments to private third-party equity funds were $563million, $1.3billion and
$2.0billion at december31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
2004 compared with 2003
private equitys operating earnings for the year totaled $602million, compared with a loss of $290
million in 2003. this improvement reflected a $1.4billion increase in total private equity gains.
in 2004, markets improved for investment sales, resulting in $1.4billion of realized gains on
direct investments, compared with $535million in 2003. net write-downs on direct investments were
$192million in 2004, compared with $404million in 2003, as valuations continued to stabilize amid
positive market conditions.
the carrying value of the private equity portfolio at december31, 2004, was $7.5billion, an
increase of $247million from december31, 2003. the increase was primarily the result of the
merger. otherwise, the portfolio declined as a result of sales of investments, consistent with
managements intention to reduce over time the capital committed to private equity. sales of
third-party fund investments resulted in a decrease in carrying value of $458million, to $641
million at december31, 2004, compared with $1.1billion at december31, 2003.
2003 compared with 2002
the private equity portfolio recognized negative total net revenue of $190million and operating
losses of $290million in 2003. opportunities to realize value through sales, recapitalizations and
initial public offerings (ipos) of investments, although limited, improved during the year as the
m&a and ipo markets started to recover.
private equity gains totaled $27million in 2003, compared with losses of $733million in 2002.
private equity recognized gains of $346million on direct investments and losses of $319million on
sales and writedowns of private third-party fund investments.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
balance sheet analysis
selected balance sheet data
december 31, (in millions)
2003(a)
assets
trading assets  debt and equity instruments
$
222,832
$
169,120
trading assets  derivative receivables
65,982
83,751
securities:
available-for-sale
94,402
60,068
held-to-maturity
loans, net of allowance
394,794
210,243
goodwill and other intangible assets
57,887
14,991
all other assets
321,241
232,563
total assets
$
1,157,248
$
770,912
liabilities
deposits
$
521,456
$
326,492
trading liabilities
debt and equity instruments
87,942
78,222
trading liabilities  derivative payables
63,265
71,226
long-term debt
95,422
48,014
all other liabilities
283,510
200,804
total liabilities
1,051,595
724,758
stockholders equity
105,653
46,154
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
1,157,248
$
770,912
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
balance sheet overview
at december31, 2004, the firms total assets were $1.2 trillion, an increase of $386billion, or
50%, from the prior year, primarily as a result of the merger. merger-related growth in assets was
primarily in: available-for-sale securities; interests in purchased receivables related to bank
ones conduit business; wholesale and consumer loans; and goodwill and other intangibles, which was
primarily the result of the purchase accounting impact of the merger. nonmerger-related growth was
primarily due to the ibs increased trading activity, which is reflected in securities purchased under
resale agreements and securities borrowed, as well as trading assets.
at december31, 2004, the firms total liabilities were $1.1 trillion, an increase of $327billion,
or 45%, from the prior year, again primarily as a result of the merger. merger-related growth in
liabilities was primarily in interest-bearing u.s. deposits, long-term debt, trust preferred
securities and beneficial interests issued by consolidated variable interest entities.
nonmerger-related growth in liabilities was primarily driven by increases in noninterest-bearing
u.s. deposits and the ibs trading activity, which is reflected in securities sold under repurchase
agreements, partially offset by reductions in federal funds purchased.
trading assets  debt and equity instruments
the firms debt and equity trading assets consist primarily of fixed income (including government
and corporate debt) and cash equity and convertible instruments used for both market-making and
proprietary risk-taking activities. the increase over 2003 was primarily due to growth in
client-driven market-making activities across interest rate, credit and equity markets, as well as
an increase in proprietary trading activities.
trading assets and liabilities  derivative receivables and payables
the firm uses various interest rate, foreign exchange, equity, credit and commodity derivatives for
market-making, proprietary risk-taking and risk management purposes. the decline from 2003 was
primarily due to the firms election, effective january1, 2004, to report the fair value of
derivative assets and liabilities net of cash received and paid, respectively, under legally
enforceable master netting agreements. for additional information, refer to credit risk management
and note 3 on pages 5769 and 9091, respectively, of this annual report.
securities
afs securities include fixed income (e.g., u.s. government agency and asset-backed securities, as
well as non-u.s. government and corporate debt) and equity instruments. the firm uses afs
securities primarily to manage interest rate risk. the afs portfolio grew by $34.3billion from the
2003year-end primarily due to the merger. partially offsetting the increase were net sales in the
treasury portfolio since the second quarter of 2004. in anticipation of the merger, both heritage
firms reduced the level of their afs securities to reposition the combined firm. for additional
information related to securities, refer to note 9 on pages 98100 of this annual report.
loans
loans, net of allowance, were $394.8billion at december31, 2004, an increase of 88% from the
prior year, primarily due to the merger. also contributing to the increase was growth in both the
rfs and cs loan portfolios, partially offset by lower wholesale loans in the ib. for a more
detailed discussion of the loan portfolio and allowance for credit losses, refer to credit risk
management on pages 5769 of this annual report.
goodwill and other intangible assets
the $42.9billion increase in goodwill and other intangible
assets from the prior year was
primarily the result of the merger and, to a lesser extent, the
firms other acquisitions such as efs and
the majority stake in highbridge. for additional information, see note 15 on pages 109111 of this
annual report.
deposits
deposits are a key source of funding. the stability of this funding source is affected by such
factors as returns available to customers on alternative investments, the quality of customer
service levels and competitive forces. deposits increased by 60% from december31, 2003, primarily
the result of the merger and growth in deposits in tss. for more information, refer to the tss
segment discussion and the liquidity risk management discussion on pages 4344 and 5556,
respectively, of this annual report.
long-term debt
long-term debt increased by 99% from the prior year, primarily due to the merger and net new debt
issuances. for additional information on the firms long-term debt activity, see the liquidity risk
management discussion on pages 5556 of this annual report.
stockholders equity
total stockholders equity increased by 129% to $105.7billion, primarily as a result of the
merger. for a further discussion of capital, see capital management on pages 5052 of this annual
report.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
capital management
the firms capital management framework is intended to ensure that there is capital sufficient
to support the underlying risks of the firms business activities, measured by economic risk
capital, and to maintain well-capitalized status under regulatory requirements. in addition, the
firm holds capital
above these requirements in amounts deemed appropriate to achieve managements debt rating
objectives. the firms capital framework is integrated
into the process of assigning equity to the lines of business. the firm may refine its methodology
for assigning equity to the lines of business as the
merger integration process continues.
line of business equity
the firms framework for allocating capital is based on the following objectives:
integrate firmwide capital management activities with capital management activities within each
of the lines of business.
measure performance in each business segment consistently across all lines of business.
provide comparability with peer firms for each of the lines of business.
equity for a line of business represents the amount the firm believes the business would require if
it were operating independently, incorporating sufficient capital to address economic risk
measures, regulatory capital requirements, and capital levels for similarly rated peers. return on
equity is measured and internal targets for expected returns are established as a primary measure
of a business segments performance.
for performance management purposes, the firm does not allocate goodwill to the lines of business
because it believes that the accounting-driven allocation
of goodwill could distort assessment of relative returns. in managements view, this approach
fosters better comparison of line of business returns with other
internal business segments, as well as with peers. the firm assigns an amount of equity capital
equal to the then current book value of its goodwill to the
corporate segment. the return on invested capital related to the firms goodwill assets is managed
within this segment. in accordance with sfas 142, the firm
allocates goodwill to the lines of business based on the underlying fair values of the businesses
and then performs the required impairment testing. for a further
discussion of goodwill and impairment testing, see critical accounting estimates and note 15 on
pages 7779 and 109111 respectively, of this annual report.
this integrated approach to assigning equity to the lines of business is a new methodology
resulting from the merger. therefore, current year line of
business equity is not comparable to equity assigned to the lines of business in prior years. the
increase in average common equity in the table below for
2004 was primarily attributable to the merger.
(in billions)
yearly average
line of business equity(a)
investment bank
$
17.3
$
18.4
retail financial services
9.1
4.2
card services
7.6
3.4
commercial banking
2.1
1.1
treasury & securities services
2.5
2.7
asset & wealth management
3.9
5.5
corporate(b)
33.1
7.7
total common stockholders equity
$
75.6
$
43.0
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of
heritage jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
2004 includes $25.9billion of equity to offset goodwill and $7.2billion of equity primarily
related to treasury, private equity and the corporate pension plan.
economic risk capital
jpmorgan chase assesses its capital adequacy relative to the underlying risks of the firms
business activities, utilizing internal risk-assessment methodologies. the firm assigns economic
capital based primarily on five risk factors: credit risk, market risk, operational risk and
business risk for each business; and private equity risk, principally for the firms private equity
business.
(in billions)
yearly average
economic risk capital(a)
credit risk
$
16.5
$
13.1
market risk
7.5
4.5
operational risk
4.5
3.5
business risk
1.9
1.7
private equity risk
4.5
5.4
economic risk capital
34.9
28.2
goodwill
25.9
8.1
other(b)
14.8
6.7
total common stockholders equity
$
75.6
$
43.0
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of
heritage jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
additional capital required to meet internal regulatory/debt rating objectives.
credit risk capital
credit risk capital is estimated separately for the wholesale businesses (investment bank,
commercial banking, asset & wealth management and
treasury & securities services) and consumer businesses (retail financial services and card
services).
credit risk capital for the overall wholesale credit portfolio is defined in terms of unexpected
credit losses, from both defaults and declines in market value
due to credit deterioration, measured over a one-year period at a confidence level consistent with
the level of capitalization necessary to achieve a targeted aa solvency standard. unexpected
losses are in excess of those for which provisions for credit losses are maintained. in addition to
maturity and correlations, capital allocation is differentiated by several principal drivers of
credit risk: exposure at default (or loan equivalent amount), likelihood of default, loss severity,
and market credit spread.
loan equivalent amount for counterparty exposures in an over-the-counter derivative transaction
is represented by the expected positive exposure based on potential movements of underlying
market rates. loan equivalents for unused revolving credit facilities represent the portion of an
unused commitment likely, based on the firms average portfolio historical experience, to become
outstanding in the event an obligor defaults.
default likelihood is closely aligned with current market conditions for all publicly traded
names or investment banking clients, yielding a forward-looking measure of credit risk. this
facilitates more active risk management by utilizing the growing market in credit derivatives and
secondary market loan sales. for privately-held firms in the commercial banking portfolio, default
likelihood is based on longer term averages over an entire credit cycle.
loss severity of exposure is based on the firms average historical experience during workouts,
with adjustments to account for collateral or subordination.
market credit spreads are used in the evaluation of changes in exposure value due to credit
deterioration.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
credit risk capital for the consumer portfolio is intended to represent a capital level
sufficient to support an aa rating, and its allocation is based on product and other relevant
risk segmentation. actual segment level default and severity experience are used to estimate
unexpected losses for a one-year horizon at a confidence level equivalent to the aa solvency
standard. statistical results for certain segments or portfolios are adjusted upward to ensure that
capital is consistent with external benchmarks, including subordination levels on market
transactions and capital held at representative monoline competitors, where appropriate.
market risk capital
the firm allocates market risk capital guided by the principle that capital should reflect the
extent to which risks are present in businesses. daily var, monthly stress-test results and other
factors determine appropriate capital charges for major business segments. see market risk
management on pages 7074 of this annual report for more information about these market risk
measures. the firm allocates market risk capital to each business segment according to a formula
that weights that segments var and stress test exposures.
operational risk capital
capital is allocated to the lines of business for operational risk using a risk-based capital
allocation methodology which estimates operational risk on a bottoms-up basis. the operational risk
capital model is based on actual losses and potential scenario-based stress losses, with
adjustments to the capital calculation to reflect changes in the quality of the control environment
and with a potential offset for the use of risk-transfer products. the firm believes the model is
consistent with the new basel ii framework and expects to propose it eventually for qualification
under the advanced measurement approach for operational risk.
business risk capital
business risk is defined as the risk associated with volatility in the firms earnings due to
factors not captured by other parts of its economic-capital framework. such volatility can arise
from ineffective design or execution of business strategies, volatile economic or financial market
activity, changing client expectations and demands, and restructuring to adjust for changes in the
competitive environment. for business risk, capital is allocated to each business based on
historical revenue volatility and measures of fixed and variable expenses. earnings volatility
arising from other risk factors, such as credit, market, or operational risk, is excluded from the
measurement of business risk capital, as those factors are captured under their respective risk
capital models.
private equity risk capital
capital is allocated to publicly- and privately-held securities and third party fund investments
and commitments in the private equity portfolio to cover the potential loss associated with a
decline in equity markets and related asset devaluations. in addition to negative market
fluctuations, potential losses in private equity investment portfolios can be magnified by
liquidity risk. the capital allocation for the private equity portfolio is based upon measurement
of the loss experience suffered by the firm and other market participants over a prolonged period
of adverse equity market conditions.
regulatory capital
the firms federal banking regulator, the frb, establishes capital requirements, including
well-capitalized standards for the consolidated financial holding company. the office of the
comptroller of the currency (occ) establishes similar capital requirements and standards for the
firms national
banks, including jpmorgan chase bank, national association (jpmorgan chase bank)
and chase bank usa, national association.
on march1, 2005, the
frb issued a final rule that continues the inclusion of trust
preferred securities in tier1 capital, subject to stricter
quantitative limits. the rule provides for a five-year transition
period. the firm is currently assessing the impact of the final rule.
the effective date of the final rule is dependent on the date of
publication in the federal register.
on july20, 2004, the federal banking regulatory agencies issued a final rule that excludes assets
of asset-backed commercial paper programs that are consolidated as a result of fin 46r from
risk-weighted assets for purposes of computing tier 1 and total risk-based capital ratios. the
final rule also requires that capital be held against short-term liquidity facilities supporting
asset-backed commercial paper programs. the final rule became effective september30, 2004.
adoption of the rule did not have a material effect on the capital ratios of the firm. in addition,
under the final rule, both short- and long-term liquidity facilities will be subject to certain
asset quality tests effective september30, 2005.
the following tables show that jpmorgan chase maintained a well-capitalized position based on tier
1 and total capital ratios at december31, 2004 and 2003.
capital ratios
well-
capitalized
december 31,
2003(a)
ratios
tier 1 capital ratio
8.7
%
8.5
%
6.0
%
total capital ratio
12.2
11.8
10.0
tier 1 leverage ratio
6.2
5.6
na
total stockholders equity to assets
9.1
6.0
na
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
risk-based capital components and assets
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
total tier 1 capital
$
68,621
$
43,167
total tier 2 capital
28,186
16,649
total capital
$
96,807
$
59,816
risk-weighted assets
$
791,373
$
507,456
total adjusted average assets
1,102,456
765,910
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
tier 1 capital was $68.6billion at december31, 2004, compared with $43.2billion at december
31, 2003, an increase of $25.4billion. the increase was due to an increase in common stockholders
equity of $60.2billion, primarily driven by stock issued in connection with the merger of $57.3
billion and net income of $4.5billion; these were partially offset by dividends paid of $3.9
billion and common share repurchases of $738million. the merger added tier 1 components such as
$3.0billion of additional qualifying trust preferred securities and $493million of minority
interests in consolidated subsidiaries; tier 1 deductions resulting from the merger included $34.1
billion of merger-related goodwill, and $3.4billion of nonqualifying intangibles.
additional information regarding the firms capital ratios and the associated components and
assets, and a more detailed discussion of federal regulatory capital standards are presented in
note 24 on pages 116117 of this annual report.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004
annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
basel ii
the basel committee on banking supervision published the new basel ii framework in 2004 in an
effort to update the original international bank capital accord (basel i), in effect since 1988.
the goal of the basel ii framework is to improve the consistency of capital requirements
internationally, make regulatory capital more risk sensitive, and promote enhanced risk management
practices among large, internationally active banking organizations. jpmorgan chase supports the
overall objectives of the basel ii framework.
u.s. banking regulators are in the process of incorporating the basel ii framework into the
existing risk-based capital requirements. jpmorgan chase will be required to implement advanced
measurement techniques employing its internal estimates of certain key risk drivers to derive
capital requirements. prior to implementation of the new basel ii framework, jpmorgan chase will be
required to demonstrate to the frb that its internal criteria meet the relevant supervisory
standards. the basel ii framework will be fully effective in january2008. jpmorgan chase expects
to implement the basel ii framework within this timeframe.
jpmorgan chase is currently analyzing local basel ii requirements in major jurisdictions outside
the u.s. where it operates. based on the results of this analysis, different approaches may be
implemented in various jurisdictions.
dividends
the firms common stock dividend policy reflects its earnings outlook, desired payout ratios,
the need to maintain an adequate capital level and alternative investment opportunities. in 2004,
jpmorgan chase declared a quarterly cash dividend on its common stock of $0.34 per share. the firm
anticipates a dividend payout ratio in 2005 of 30-40% of operating earnings.
stock repurchases
on july20, 2004, the board of directors approved an initial stock repurchase program in the
aggregate amount of $6.0billion. this amount includes shares to be repurchased to offset issuances
under the firms employee equity-based plans. the actual amount of shares repurchased will be
subject to various factors, including market conditions; legal considerations affecting the amount
and timing of repurchase activity; the firms capital position (taking into account purchase
accounting adjustments); internal capital generation; and alternative potential investment
opportunities. during 2004, under the stock repurchase program, the firm repurchased 19.3million
shares for $738million at an average price per share of $38.27. the firm did not repurchase any
shares of its common stock during 2003.
offbalance sheet arrangements and contractual cash obligations
special-purpose entities
jpmorgan chase is involved with several types of off-balance sheet arrangements including
special purpose entities (spes), lines of credit and loan commitments. the principal uses of spes
are to obtain sources of liquidity for jpmorgan chase and its clients by securitizing their
financial assets, and to create other investment products for clients. these arrangements are an
important part of the financial markets, providing market liquidity by facilitating investors
access to specific portfolios of assets and risks. for example, spes are integral to the markets
for mortgage-backed securities, commercial paper, and other asset-backed securities.
the basic spe structure involves a company selling assets to the spe. the spe funds the purchase of
those assets by issuing securities to investors. to insulate investors from creditors of other
entities, including the seller of assets, spes are often structured to be bankruptcy-remote.
jpmorgan chase is involved with spes in three broad categories of transactions: loan
securitizations, multi-seller conduits and client intermediation. capital is held, as appropriate,
against all spe-related transactions and related exposures, such as derivative transactions and
lending-related commitments. for a further discussion of spes and the firms accounting for them,
see note 1 on page 88, note 13 on pages 103106 and note 14 on pages 106109 of this annual
report.
the firm has no commitments to issue its own stock to support any spe transaction, and its policies
require that transactions with spes be conducted at arms length and reflect market pricing.
consistent with this policy, no jpmorgan chase employee is permitted to invest in spes with which
the firm is involved where such investment would violate the firms worldwide rules
of conduct.
these rules prohibit employees from self-dealing and prohibit employees from acting on behalf of
the firm in transactions with which they or their family have any significant financial interest.
for certain liquidity commitments to spes, the firm could be required to provide funding if the
credit rating of jpmorgan chase bank were downgraded below specific levels, primarily p-1, a-1 and
f1 for moodys, standard & poors and fitch, respectively. the amount of these liquidity
commitments was $79.4billion and $34.0billion at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
alternatively, if jpmorgan chase bank were downgraded, the firm could be replaced by another
liquidity provider in lieu of funding under the liquidity commitment, or, in certain circumstances,
could facilitate the sale or refinancing of the assets in the spe in order to provide liquidity.
of its $79.4billion in liquidity commitments to spes at december31, 2004, $47.7billion is
included in the firms total other unfunded commitments to extend credit, included in the table
below (compared with $27.7billion at december31, 2003). as a result of the firms consolidation
of multi-seller conduits in accordance with fin 46r, $31.7billion of these commitments are
excluded from the table (compared with $6.3billion at december31, 2003), as the underlying assets
of the spes have been included on the firms consolidated balance sheets.
the revenue reported in the table below primarily represents servicing and custodial fee income.
the firm also has exposure to certain spes arising from derivative transactions; these transactions
are recorded at fair value on the firms consolidated balance sheets with changes in fair value
(i.e., mtm gains and losses) recorded in trading revenue. such mtm gains and losses are not
included in the revenue amounts reported in the table below.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
the following table summarizes certain revenue information related to variable interest
entities (vies) with which the firm has significant involvement, and qualifying spes (qspes).
for a further discussion of vies and qspes, see note 1 on page 88 of this annual report.
revenue from vies and qspes
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
vies(b)
qspes
total
$
$
1,438
$
1,592
1,058
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes vie-related revenue (i.e., revenue associated with consolidated and significant
nonconsolidated vies).
contractual cash obligations
in the normal course of business, the firm enters into various contractual obligations that may
require future cash payments. the accompanying table summarizes jpmorgan chases offbalance sheet
lending-related financial
instruments and significant contractual cash obligations, by remaining
maturity, at december31, 2004. for a discussion regarding long-term debt and trust preferred
capital securities, see note 17 on pages 112113 of this annual report. for a discussion regarding
operating leases, see note 25 on page 117 of this annual report.
contractual purchases include commitments for future cash expenditures, primarily related to
services. capital expenditures primarily represent future cash payments for real estaterelated
obligations and equipment. contractual purchases and capital expenditures at december31, 2004,
reflect the minimum contractual obligation under legally enforceable contracts with contract terms
that are both fixed and determinable. excluded from the following table are a number of obligations
to be settled in cash, primarily in under one year. these obligations are reflected on the firms
consolidated balance sheets and include federal funds purchased and securities sold under
repurchase agreements; other borrowed funds; purchases of debt and equity instruments that settle
within standard market timeframes (e.g., regular-way); derivative payables that do not require
physical delivery of the underlying instrument; and certain purchases of instruments that resulted
in settlement failures.
offbalance sheet lending-related financial instruments
by remaining maturity at december 31, 2004
under
after
(in millions)
1 year
years
years
5 years
total
consumer
$
552,748
$
3,603
$
2,799
$
42,046
$
601,196
wholesale:
other unfunded commitments to extend credit(a)(b)
114,555
57,183
48,987
4,427
225,152
standby letters of credit and guarantees(a)
22,785
30,805
21,387
3,107
78,084
other letters of credit(a)
4,631
1,297
6,163
total wholesale
141,971
89,285
70,564
7,579
309,399
total lending-related commitments
$
694,719
$
92,888
$
73,363
$
49,625
$
910,595
contractual cash obligations
by remaining maturity at december31, 2004 (in millions)
certificates of deposit of $100,000 and over
$
38,946
$
7,941
$
1,176
$
1,221
$
49,284
long-term debt
15,833
30,890
23,527
25,172
95,422
trust preferred capital securities
10,296
10,296
fin 46r long-term beneficial interests(c)
3,072
2,410
6,393
operating leases(d)
1,060
1,878
1,614
5,301
9,853
contractual purchases and capital expenditures
1,791
2,742
obligations under affinity and co-brand programs
2,442
1,086
4,402
other liabilities(e)
1,567
1,885
6,546
10,966
total
$
62,538
$
45,944
$
29,743
$
51,133
$
189,358
(a)
represents contractual amount net of risk participations totaling $26billion at december
31, 2004.
(b)
includes unused advised lines of credit totaling $23billion at december31, 2004, which are
not legally binding. in regulatory filings with the frb, unused advised lines are not reportable.
(c)
included on the consolidated balance sheets in beneficial interests issued by consolidated
variable interest entities.
(d)
excludes benefit of noncancelable sublease rentals of $689million at december31, 2004.
(e)
includes deferred annuity contracts and expected funding for pension and other postretirement
benefits for 2005. funding requirements for pension and postretirement benefits after 2005 are
excluded due to the significant variability in the assumptions required to project the timing of
future cash payments.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
risk management
risk is an inherent part of jpmorgan chases business activities. the firms risk
management framework and governance structure is intended to provide comprehensive controls and
ongoing management of its major risks. in addition, this framework recognizes the diversity among
the firms core businesses, which helps reduce the impact of volatility in any particular area on
its operating results as a whole.
the firms ability to properly identify, measure, monitor and report risk is critical to its
soundness and profitability.
risk identification: the firm identifies risk by dynamically assessing
the potential impact of internal and external factors on transactions and
positions. business and risk professionals develop appropriate mitigation
strategies for the identified risks.
risk measurement: the
firm measures risk using a variety of methodologies,
including calculating probable loss, unexpected loss and
value-at-risk,
and by conducting stress tests and making comparisons to external
benchmarks. measurement models and related assumptions are routinely
reviewed to ensure that the firms risk estimates are reasonable and reflective of underlying positions.
risk monitoring/control: the firm establishes risk management policies
and procedures. these policies contain approved limits by customer, product and business that are monitored on a daily, weekly and monthly basis
as appropriate.
risk reporting: risk reporting covers all lines of business and is provided to management on a
daily, weekly and monthly basis as appropriate.
risk governance
the firms risk governance structure is built upon the premise that each line of business is
responsible for managing the risks inherent in its business activity. there are seven major risk
types identified in the business activities of the firm: liquidity risk, credit risk, market risk,
operational risk, legal and reputation risk, fiduciary risk and principal risk. as
part of the risk management structure, each line of business has a risk committee responsible for
decisions relating to risk strategy, policies and control. where appropriate, the risk committees
escalate risk issues to the firms operating committee, comprised of senior officers of the firm,
or to the risk working group, a subgroup of the operating committee.
in addition to the risk
committees, there is an asset & liability committee
(alco), which oversees
structural interest rate and liquidity risk as well as the firms funds transfer pricing
policy, through which lines of business transfer market-hedgable interest rate risk to treasury.
treasury also has responsibility for decisions relating to its risk strategy, policies and
control. there is also an investment committee, which reviews key aspects of the firms global m&a
activities that are undertaken for its own account and that fall outside the scope of
established private equity and other principal finance activities.
overlaying risk management within the lines of business is the corporate function of risk
management which, under the direction of the chief risk officer reporting to the president and
chief operating officer, provides an independent firmwide function for control and management of
risk. within
risk management are those units responsible for credit risk, market risk, operational risk,
fiduciary risk, principal risk, and risk technology and operations, as well as risk
management services, which is responsible for credit risk policy and methodology, risk reporting
and risk education.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
the board of directors exercises oversight of risk management as a whole and through the boards
audit committee and the risk policy committee. the audit committee is responsible for oversight of
guidelines and policies to govern the process by which risk assessment and management is
undertaken. in addition, the audit committee reviews with management the system of internal
controls and financial reporting that is relied upon to provide reasonable assurance of compliance
with the firms operational risk management processes. the risk policy committee is responsible for
oversight of managements
responsibilities to assess and manage the firms credit risk, market risk, interest rate risk,
investment risk and liquidity risk, and is also responsible for review of the firms fiduciary and
asset management activities. both committees are responsible for oversight of reputational risk.
the chief risk officer and other management report on the risks of the firm to the board of
directors, particularly through the boards audit committee and risk policy committee.
the major risk types identified by the firm are discussed in the following sections.
liquidity risk management
liquidity risk arises from the general funding needs of the firms activities and in the
management of its assets and liabilities. jpmorgan chases liquidity management framework is
intended to maximize liquidity access and minimize funding costs. through active liquidity
management, the firm seeks to preserve stable, reliable and cost-effective sources of funding. this
enables the firm to replace maturing obligations when due and fund assets at appropriate maturities
and rates in all market environments. to accomplish this, management uses a variety of liquidity
risk measures that take into consideration market conditions, prevailing interest rates, liquidity
needs and the desired maturity profile of liabilities.
risk identification and measurement
treasury is responsible for setting the firms liquidity strategy and targets, understanding
the firms on- and off-balance sheet liquidity obligations, providing policy guidance, overseeing
policy adherence, and maintaining contingency planning and stress testing. in addition, it
identifies and measures internal and external liquidity warning signals, such as the unusual
widening of spreads, to permit early detection of liquidity issues.
the firms three primary measures of liquidity are:
holding company short-term position: measures the parent holding
companys ability to repay all obligations with a maturity less than one
year at a time when the ability of the firms banks to pay dividends to
the parent holding company is constrained.
cash capital surplus: measures the firms ability to fund assets on a
fully collateralized basis, assuming access to unsecured funding is lost.
basic surplus: measures jpmorgan chase banks ability to sustain a
90-day stress event that is specific to the firm where no new funding
can be raised to meet obligations as they come due.
all three primary liquidity measures are managed to provide sufficient surplus in the
firms liquidity position.
risk monitoring and reporting
treasury is responsible for measuring, monitoring, reporting and managing the liquidity profile of
the firm through both normal and stress periods. treasury analyzes reports to monitor the diversity
and maturity structure of the firms sources of funding, and to assess downgrade impact scenarios,
contingent funding needs, and overall collateral availability and pledging status. a contingency
funding plan is in place, intended to help the firm manage through periods when access to funding
is temporarily impaired. a downgrade analysis considers the potential impact of a one- and
two-notch
downgrade at both the parent and bank level, and calculates the estimated loss of funding as well
as the increase in annual funding costs in both scenarios. a trigger-risk funding analysis
considers the impact of a bank downgrade below a-1/p-1, including the funding requirements that
would be required if such an event were to occur. these liquidity analytics rely on managements
judgment about jpmorgan chases ability to liquidate assets or use them as collateral for
borrowings and take into account credit risk managements historical data on the funding of loan
commitments (e.g., commercial paper back-up facilities), liquidity commitments to spes, commitments
with rating triggers and collateral posting requirements. for a further discussion of spes and
other off-balance sheet arrangements, see off-balance sheet arrangements and contractual cash
obligations on pages 52-53, as well as note 1, note 13, note 14 and note 27 on pages 88,
103-106, 106-109, and 119-120, respectively, of this annual report.
funding
sources of funds
the diversity of the firms funding sources enhances financial flexibility and limits
dependence on any one source, thereby minimizing the cost of funds. a major source of liquidity for
jpmorgan chase bank is provided by its large core deposit base. core deposits include all u.s.
deposits insured by the fdic, up to the legal limit of $100,000 per depositor. in 2004, core bank
deposits grew approximately 116% from 2003year-end levels, primarily the result of the merger, as
well as growth within rfs and tss. in addition to core deposits, the firm benefits from
substantial, stable deposit balances originated by tss, commercial banking and the ib through the
normal course of their businesses.
additional funding flexibility is provided by the firms ability to access the repurchase and asset
securitization markets. at december31, 2004, $72billion of securities were available for
repurchase agreements, and $36billion of credit card, automobile and mortgage loans were available
for securitizations. these alternatives are evaluated on an ongoing basis to achieve an appropriate
balance of secured and unsecured funding. the ability to securitize loans, and the associated gains
on those securitizations, are principally dependent on the credit quality and yields of the assets
securitized and are generally not dependent on the credit ratings of the issuing entity.
transactions between the firm and its securitization structures are reflected in jpmorgan chases
consolidated financial statements; these relationships include retained interests in securitization
trusts, liquidity facilities and derivative transactions. for further details, see notes 13 and 14
on pages 103-106 and 106-109, respectively, of this annual report.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
the firm is an active participant in the global financial markets. these markets serve as a
cost-effective source of funds and are a critical component of the firms liquidity management.
decisions concerning the timing and tenor of accessing these markets are based on relative costs,
general market conditions, prospective views of balance sheet growth and a targeted liquidity
profile.
issuance
corporate credit spreads narrowed in 2004 across most industries and sectors, reflecting the market
perception that credit risks were improving, as the number of downgrades declined, corporate
balance sheet cash positions increased, and corporate profits exceeded expectations. jpmorgan
chases credit spreads performed in line with peer spreads in 2004. the firm took advantage of
narrowing credit spreads globally by opportunistically issuing long-term debt and capital
securities throughout the year. consistent with its liquidity management policy, the firm has
raised funds at the parent holding
company sufficient to cover maturing obligations over the next 12months and to support the less
liquid assets on its balance sheet. high investor cash positions and increased foreign investor
participation in the corporate markets allowed jpmorgan chase to diversify further its funding
across the global markets while decreasing funding costs and lengthening maturities.
during 2004, jpmorgan chase issued approximately $25.3billion of long-term debt and capital
securities. these issuances were partially offset by $ 16.0billion of long-term debt and capital
securities that matured or were redeemed, and the firms redemption of $670million of
preferred stock. in addition, in 2004 the firm securitized approximately $6.5billion of
residential mortgage loans, $8.9billion of credit card loans and $1.6billion of automobile loans,
resulting in pre-tax gains (losses)on securitizations of $47million, $52million and $(3)
million, respectively. for a further discussion of loan securitizations, see note 13 on pages
103-106 of this annual report.
credit ratings
the credit ratings of jpmorgan chases parent holding company and each of its significant
banking subsidiaries, as of december31, 2004, were as follows:
short-term debt
senior long-term debt
moody's
s&p
fitch
moody's
s&p
fitch
jpmorgan chase & co.
p-1
a-1
f1
aa3
a+
a+
jpmorgan chase bank, n.a.
p-1
a-1 +
f1 +
aa2
aa-
a+
chase bank usa, n.a.
p-1
a-1 +
f1 +
aa2
aa-
a+
the firms principal insurance subsidiaries had the following financial strength ratings
as of december31, 2004:
moody's
s&p
a.m. best
chase insurance life and annuity company
a2
a+
a
chase insurance life company
a2
a+
a
in connection with the merger, moodys upgraded the ratings of the firm by one notch, moving the
parent holding companys senior long-term debt rating to aa3 and jpmorgan chase banks senior
long-term debt rating to aa2; and changed its outlook to stable. also at that time, fitch affirmed
its ratings and changed its outlook to positive, while s&p affirmed all its ratings and kept its
outlook stable.
the cost and availability of unsecured financing are influenced by credit ratings. a reduction in
these ratings could adversely affect the firms access to
liquidity sources, increase the cost of funds, trigger additional collateral requirements and
decrease the number of investors and counterparties willing to lend. critical factors in
maintaining high credit ratings include a stable and diverse earnings stream; strong capital
ratios; strong credit quality and risk management controls; diverse funding sources; and strong
liquidity monitoring procedures.
if the firms ratings were downgraded by one notch, the firm estimates the incremental cost of
funds and the potential loss of funding to be negligible. additionally, the firm estimates the
additional funding requirements for vies and other third-party commitments would not be
material. in the current environment, the firm believes a downgrade is unlikely. for
additional information on the impact of a credit ratings downgrade on funding requirements for
vies, and on derivatives and collateral agreements, see off-balance sheet arrangements on pages
52-53 and ratings profile of derivative receivables mark-to-market (mtm) on page 64, of this
annual report.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
credit risk management
credit risk is the risk of loss from obligor or counterparty default. the firm provides
credit to customers of all sizes, from large corporate clients to loans for the individual
consumer. management manages the risk/reward relationship of each portfolio, discouraging the
retention of loan assets that do not generate a positive return above the cost of risk-adjusted
capital. the firms business strategy for its large corporate wholesale loan portfolio remains
primarily one of origination for distribution; the majority of the firms wholesale
loan originations (primarily to ib clients) continue to be distributed into the marketplace, with
residual holds by the firm averaging less than 10%. with regard to the prime consumer credit
market, the firm focuses on creating a portfolio that is diversified from both a product and a
geographical perspective.
the firms credit risk management governance structure consists of the primary functions as
described in the organizational chart below.
credit risk organization
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
in 2004, the firm continued to enhance its risk management discipline, managing wholesale
single-name and industry concentration through its threshold and limit structure and using credit
derivatives and loan sales in its portfolio management activity. the firm manages wholesale
exposure concentrations by obligor, risk rating, industry and geography. in addition, the firm
continued to make progress under its multi-year initiative to reengineer specific components of the
credit risk infrastructure. the goal is to enhance the firms ability to provide immediate and
accurate risk and exposure information; actively manage credit risk in the retained portfolio;
support client relationships; more quickly manage the allocation of economic capital; and comply
with basel ii initiatives.
in 2004, the firm continued to grow its consumer loan portfolio, focusing on businesses providing
the most appropriate risk/reward relationship while keeping within the firms desired risk
tolerance. during the past year, the firm also completed a strategic review of all consumer lending
portfolio segments. this action resulted in the sale of the $4billion manufactured home loan
portfolio, de-emphasizing vehicle leasing and, subsequent to year-end 2004, the sale of a $2
billion recreational vehicle portfolio. continued growth in the core consumer lending product set
(residential real estate, auto and education finance, credit cards and small business) reflected a
focus on the prime credit quality segment of the market.
risk identification
the firm is exposed to credit risk through its lending (e.g., loans and lending-related
commitments), derivatives trading and capital markets activities. credit risk also arises due to
country or sovereign exposure, as well as indirectly through the issuance of guarantees.
risk measurement
to measure credit risk, the firm employs several methodologies for estimating the likelihood of
obligor or counterparty default. losses generated by consumer loans are more predictable than
wholesale losses but are subject to cyclical and seasonal factors. although the frequency of loss
is higher on consumer loans than on wholesale loans, the severity of loss is typically lower and
more manageable. as a result of these differences, methodologies vary depending on certain factors,
including type of asset (e.g., consumer installment versus wholesale loan), risk measurement
parameters (e.g., delinquency status and credit bureau score versus wholesale risk rating) and risk
management and collection processes (e.g., retail collection center versus centrally managed
workout groups).
credit risk measurement is based on the amount of exposure should the obligor or the counterparty
default, and the loss severity given a default event. based on these factors and related
market-based inputs, the firm estimates both probable and unexpected losses for the wholesale and
consumer portfolios. probable losses, reflected in the provision for credit losses, are
statistically-based estimates of credit losses over time, anticipated as a result of obligor or
counterparty default. however, probable losses are not the sole indicators of risk. if losses were
entirely predictable, the probable loss rate could be factored into pricing and covered as a normal
and recurring cost of doing business. unexpected losses, reflected in the allocation of credit risk
capital, represent the potential volatility of actual losses relative to the probable level of
losses (refer to capital management on pages 50-51 of this annual report for a further discussion
of the credit risk capital methodology). risk measurement for the wholesale portfolio is primarily
based on risk-rated exposure; and for the consumer portfolio it is based on credit-scored exposure.
risk-rated exposure
for portfolios that are risk-rated, probable and unexpected loss calculations are based on
estimates of probability of default and loss given default. probability of default is expected
default calculated on an obligor basis. loss given default is an estimate of losses that are based
on collateral and structural support for each credit facility. calculations and assumptions are
based on management information systems and methodologies under continual review. risk ratings are
assigned and reviewed on an ongoing basis by credit risk management and revised, if needed, to
reflect the borrowers current risk profile and the related collateral and structural position.
credit-scored exposure
for credit-scored portfolios (generally retail financial services and card services), probable loss
is based on a statistical analysis of inherent losses over discrete periods of time. probable
losses are estimated using sophisticated portfolio modeling, credit scoring and decision-support
tools to project credit risks and establish underwriting standards. in addition, common measures of
credit quality derived from historical loss experience are used to predict consumer losses. other
risk characteristics evaluated include recent loss experience in the portfolios, changes in
origination sources, portfolio seasoning, loss severity and underlying credit practices, including
charge-off policies. these analyses are applied to the firms current portfolios in
order to forecast delinquencies and severity of losses, which determine the amount of probable
losses. these factors and analyses are updated on a quarterly basis.
risk monitoring
the firm has developed policies and practices that are designed to preserve the independence and
integrity of decision-making and ensure credit risks are accurately assessed, properly approved,
continually monitored and actively managed at both the transaction and portfolio levels. the policy
framework establishes credit approval authorities, credit limits, risk-rating methodologies,
portfolio-review parameters and problem-loan management. wholesale credit risk is continually
monitored on both an aggregate portfolio level and on an individual customer basis. for consumer
credit risk, the key focus items are trends and concentrations at the portfolio level, where
potential problems can be remedied through changes in underwriting policies and portfolio
guidelines. consumer credit risk management monitors trends against business expectations and
industry benchmarks.
in order to meet its credit risk management objectives, the firm seeks to maintain a risk profile
that is diverse in terms of borrower, product type, industry and geographic concentration.
additional diversification of the firms exposure is accomplished through syndication of credits,
participations, loan sales, securitizations, credit derivatives and other risk-reduction
techniques.
risk reporting
to enable monitoring of credit risk and decision-making, aggregate credit exposure, credit metric
forecasts, hold-limit exceptions and risk profile changes are reported to senior credit risk management
regularly. detailed portfolio reporting of industry, customer and geographic concentrations
occurs monthly, and the appropriateness of the allowance for credit losses is reviewed by
senior management on a quarterly basis. through the risk governance structure, credit risk trends
and limit exceptions are regularly provided to, and discussed with, the operating committee.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
credit portfolio
the following table presents jpmorgan chases credit portfolio as of december31, 2004 and 2003.
total wholesale credit exposure increased by $167billion, and total consumer
exposure increased by $584billion, at year-end 2004 from year-end 2003.
this increase in total exposure (including $71billion of securitized credit cards) was primarily the result of the merger.
wholesale and consumer credit portfolio
as of or for the
year ended
nonperforming
average annual
december 31,(a)
credit exposure
assets(t)(u)
net charge-offs
net charge-off rate
(in millions, except ratios)
wholesale(b)(c)(d)
loans  reported(e)
$
135,067
$
75,419
$
1,574
$
2,004
$
$
0.19
%
0.97
%
derivative receivables(f)(g)
65,982
83,751
na
na
na
na
interests in purchased receivables
31,722
4,752
na
na
na
na
other receivables
na
na
na
na
total wholesale credit-related assets(e)
232,771
164,030
1,815
2,365
0.19
0.97
lending-related commitments(h)(i)
309,399
211,483
na
na
na
na
na
na
total wholesale credit exposure(e)(j)
$
542,170
$
375,513
$
1,815
$
2,365
$
$
0.19
%
0.97
%
consumer(c)(k)(l)
loans  reported(m)
$
267,047
$
139,347
$
1,169
$
$
2,913
$
1,507
1.56
%
1.33
%
loans  securitized(m)(n)
70,795
34,856
2,898
1,870
5.51
5.64
total managed consumer loans(m)
$
337,842
$
174,203
$
1,169
$
$
5,811
$
3,377
2.43
%
2.31
%
lending-related commitments
601,196
181,198
na
na
na
na
na
na
total consumer credit exposure(o)
$
939,038
$
355,401
$
1,169
$
$
5,811
$
3,377
2.43
%
2.31
%
total credit portfolio
loans  reported
$
402,114
$
214,766
$
2,743
$
2,584
$
3,099
$
2,272
1.08
%
1.19
%
loans  securitized(n)
70,795
34,856
2,898
1,870
5.51
5.64
total managed loans
472,909
249,622
2,743
2,584
5,997
4,142
1.76
1.84
derivative receivables(f)(g)
65,982
83,751
na
na
na
na
interests in purchased receivables
31,722
4,752
na
na
na
na
other receivables
na
na
na
na
total managed credit-related assets
570,613
338,233
2,984
2,945
5,997
4,142
1.76
1.84
wholesale lending-related commitments(h)(i)
309,399
211,483
na
na
na
na
na
na
consumer lending-related commitments
601,196
181,198
na
na
na
na
na
na
assets acquired in loan satisfactions(p)
na
na
na
na
na
na
total credit portfolio(q)
$
1,481,208
$
730,914
$
3,231
$
3,161
$
5,997
$
4,142
1.76
%
1.84
%
purchased held-for-sale wholesale loans(r)
$
$
$
$
na
na
na
na
credit derivative hedges notional(s)
(37,200
)
(37,282
)
(15
)
(123
)
na
na
na
na
collateral held against derivatives
(9,301
)
(36,214
)
na
na
na
na
na
na
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes investment bank, commercial banking, treasury & securities services and asset & wealth
management.
(c)
amounts are presented gross of the allowance for loan losses.
(d)
net charge-off rates exclude year-to-date average wholesale loans hfs of $6.4billion and $3.8
billion for 2004 and 2003, respectively.
(e)
wholesale loans past-due 90days and over and accruing were $8million and $42million
at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
(f)
the 2004 amount includes the effect of legally enforceable master netting agreements.
effective january1, 2004, the firm elected to report the fair value of derivative assets and
liabilities net of cash
received and paid, respectively, under legally enforceable master netting agreements. as of
december31, 2004, derivative receivables were $98billion before netting of $32billion
of cash collateral held.
(g)
the firm also views its credit exposure on an economic basis. for derivative receivables,
economic credit exposure is the three-year averages of a measure known as average exposure
(which is the expected
mtm value of derivative receivables at future time periods, including the benefit of collateral).
average exposure was $38billion and $34billion at december31, 2004 and december31, 2003,
respectively.
see pages 62-64 of this annual report for a further discussion of the firms derivative
receivables.
(h)
the firm also views its credit exposure on an economic basis. for lending-related
commitments, economic credit exposure is represented by a loan equivalent, which is the
portion of the unused commitments or other contingent exposure that is expected, based on average portfolio historical
experience, to become outstanding in the event of a default by the obligor. loan equivalents
were $162billion and $104billion at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
see page 65 of this annual report for a further discussion of this measure.
(i)
includes unused advised lines of credit totaling $23billion and $19billion at december
31, 2004 and 2003, respectively, which are not legally binding. in regulatory filings with the
frb, unused advised lines are not reportable.
(j)
represents total wholesale loans, derivative receivables, interests in purchased receivables,
other receivables and wholesale lending-related commitments.
(k)
net charge-off rates exclude year-to-date average hfs consumer loans (excluding card) in the
amount of $14.7billion and $25.3billion for 2004 and 2003, respectively.
(l)
includes retail financial services and card services.
(m)
past-due loans 90days and over and accruing includes credit card receivables of $998
million and $273million, and related credit card securitizations of $1.3billion and $879
million, at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
(n)
represents securitized credit cards. for a further discussion of credit card securitizations,
see card services on pages 39-40 of this annual report.
(o)
represents total consumer loans, credit card securitizations and consumer lending-related
commitments.
(p)
at december31, 2004 and 2003, includes $23million and $10million, respectively, of
wholesale assets acquired in loan satisfactions, and $224million and $206million,
respectively, of consumer assets acquired in loan satisfactions.
(q)
at december31, 2004 and 2003, excludes $1.5billion and $2.3billion, respectively, of
residential mortgage receivables in foreclosure status that are insured by government
agencies. these amounts are excluded as reimbursement is proceeding normally.
(r)
represents distressed wholesale loans purchased as part of ibs proprietary investing
activities.
(s)
represents the notional amount of single-name and portfolio credit derivatives used to manage
the credit risk of wholesale credit exposure; these derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting
under sfas 133.
(t)
excludes purchased held-for-sale (hfs) wholesale loans.
(u)
nonperforming assets include wholesale hfs loans of $2million and $30million for 2004 and
2003, respectively, and consumer hfs loans of $13million and $45million for 2004 and 2003,
respectively. hfs loans are carried at the lower of cost or market, and declines in value
are recorded in other income.
na  not applicable.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
wholesale credit portfolio
the increase in total wholesale exposure was almost entirely due to the merger.
derivative receivables declined by $18billion, primarily because, effective january1, 2004, the
firm elected to report the fair value of derivative assets and liabilities net of cash received and
paid, respectively, under legally enforceable master netting agreements. loans, lending-related
commitments
and interests in purchased receivables increased by $60billion, $98billion and $27billion,
respectively, primarily as a result of the merger.
below are summaries of the maturity and ratings profiles of the wholesale portfolio as of december
31, 2004 and 2003. the ratings scale is based on the firms internal risk ratings and is presented
on an s&p-equivalent basis.
wholesale exposure
maturity profile(a)
ratings profile
investment-grade ("ig")
noninvestment-grade
at december 31, 2004
aaa
a+
bbb+
bb+
ccc+
total %
(in billions, except ratios)
<1 year
1-5 years
> 5 years
total
to aa-
to a-
to bbb
to b-
& below
total
of ig
loans
%
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
derivative receivables(b)
interests in purchased
receivables
lending-related
commitments(b)(c)
total exposure(d)
%
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
%
credit derivative hedges
notional(e)
%
%
%
%
$
(11
)
$
(11
)
$
(13
)
$
(2
)
$
$
(37
)
%
maturity profile(a)
ratings profile
investment-grade ("ig")
noninvestment-grade
at december 31, 2003(f)
aaa
a+
bbb+
bb+
ccc+
total %
(in billions, except ratios)
<1 year
1-5 years
> 5 years
total
to aa-
to a-
to bbb
to b-
& below
total
of ig
loans
%
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
derivative receivables(b)
interests in purchased
receivables
lending-related
commitments(b)(c)
total exposure(d)
%
%
%
%
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
credit derivative hedges notional(e)
%
%
%
%
$
(10
)
$
(12
)
$
(12
)
$
(12
)
$
(1
)
$
(37
)
%
(a)
the maturity profile of loans and lending-related commitments is based upon the remaining
contractual maturity. the maturity profile of derivative receivables is based upon the
maturity profile of
average exposure. see page 63 of this annual report for a further discussion of average exposure.
(b)
based on economic credit exposure, the total percentage of investment grade for derivative
receivables was 92% and 91% as of december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively, and for
lending-related
commitments was 85% and 88% as of december31, 2004 and 2003,
respectively. see footnotes (g)and (h) on page 59 of this annual report for a further discussion of economic credit exposure.
(c)
based on economic credit exposure, the maturity profile for the <1year, 1-5years and
>5years categories would have been 31%, 65% and 4%, respectively, as of december31, 2004,
and 38%,
58% and 4%, respectively, as of december31, 2003. see footnote (h)on page 59 of this annual
report for a further discussion of economic credit exposure.
(d)
based on economic credit exposure, the maturity profile for <1year, 1-5years and >5
years categories would have been 35%, 54% and 11%, respectively, as of december31, 2004, and
36%, 46% and 18%, respectively, as of december31, 2003. see footnotes (g)and (h)on page 59 of this
annual report for a further discussion of economic credit exposure.
(e)
ratings are based on the underlying referenced assets.
(f)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
as of december31, 2004, the wholesale exposure ratings profile remained relatively
stable compared with december31, 2003.
wholesale credit exposure  selected industry concentration
the firm actively manages the size and diversification of its industry concentrations, with
particular attention paid to industries with actual or potential credit concerns. following the
merger, the firm commenced a thorough review of industry definitions and assignments in each of the
heritage firms portfolios. as a result of this review, the firms industry structure was modified,
resulting in two new industry groups within the top-10 industry concen-
trations at december31, 2004: banks and finance companies (consists of the industries termed
commercial banks and finance companies and lessors at year-end 2003) and retail and consumer
services (previously separate industries at december31, 2003). the merger resulted in increases in
nearly every top 10 industry concentration. exposures to banks and finance companies and asset
managers declined, primarily as a result of the firms election to report fair value of derivative
assets and liabilities net of cash received and paid, respectively, under legally enforceable
master netting agreements, which affected derivative receivables. a significant portion of the
firms derivatives portfolio is transacted with customers in these industries.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
collateral
noninvestment-grade(d)
net
credit
held against
as of december 31, 2004
credit
investment
criticized
criticized
charge-offs
derivative
derivative
(in millions, except ratios)
exposure
(c)
grade
noncriticized
performing
nonperforming
(recoveries)
hedges
(e)
receivables
(c)
top 10 industries(a)
banks and finance companies
$
56,184
%
$
5,419
$
$
$
$
(11,695
)
$
(3,464
)
real estate
28,230
9,264
(800
)
(45
)
healthcare
22,003
4,381
(741
)
(13
)
retail and consumer services
21,732
4,871
(1,767
)
(42
)
consumer products
21,427
6,382
(1,189
)
(50
)
utilities
21,262
2,339
(2,247
)
(27
)
asset managers
20,389
4,225
(15
)
(80
)
(655
)
state and municipal governments
19,794
(394
)
(18
)
securities firms and exchanges
18,176
2,278
(1,398
)
(2,068
)
media
15,314
4,937
(5
)
(1,600
)
(45
)
all other
297,659
47,261
4,001
(15,289
)
(2,874
)
total
$
542,170
%
$
91,956
$
6,469
$
1,815
$
$
(37,200
)
$
(9,301
)
collateral
noninvestment-grade(d)
net
credit
held against
as of december 31,
2003(b)
credit
investment
criticized
criticized
charge-offs
derivative
derivative
(in millions, except ratios)
exposure
(c)
grade
noncriticized
performing
nonperforming
(recoveries)
hedges
(e)
receivables
(c)
top 10 industries(a)
banks and finance companies
$
62,652
%
$
2,633
$
$
$
$
(12,538
)
$
(24,822
)
real estate
14,544
4,058
(718
)
(182
)
healthcare
11,332
1,403
(467
)
(35
)
retail and consumer services
14,451
3,615
(1,637
)
(17
)
consumer products
13,774
3,628
(1,104
)
(122
)
utilities
15,296
1,714
(1,960
)
(176
)
asset managers
21,794
3,899
(245
)
(1,133
)
state and municipal governments
14,354
(405
)
(12
)
securities firms and exchanges
15,599
2,582
(1,369
)
(4,168
)
media
14,075
3,285
1,307
(1,678
)
(186
)
all other
177,642
30,002
3,652
1,095
(15,161
)
(5,361
)
total
$
375,513
%
$
56,855
$
6,488
$
2,365
$
$
(37,282
)
$
(36,214
)
(a)
based on december31, 2004, determination of top 10 industries.
(b)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
credit exposure is net of risk participations and excludes the benefit of credit
derivative hedges and collateral held against derivative receivables or loans. for 2004,
collateral held against derivative
receivables excludes $32billion of cash collateral as a result of the firm electing to
report the fair value of derivative assets and liabilities net of cash received and paid,
respectively, under legally
enforceable master netting agreements.
(d)
excludes purchased nonaccrual loans held for sale of $351million and $22million at december
31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
(e)
represents notional amounts only; these credit derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting
under sfas 133.
selected industry discussion
presented below is a discussion of several industries to which the firm has significant exposure
and which it continues to monitor because of actual or potential credit concerns.
banks and finance companies: this industry group, primarily consisting
of exposure to commercial banks, is the largest segment of the firms
wholesale credit portfolio. credit quality is high, as 90% of the exposure
in this category is rated investment-grade.
real estate: wholesale real estate grew considerably as a result of the
merger. the resulting exposure is diversified by transaction type, borrower
base, geography and property type. in 2004, the portfolio continued to
benefit from disciplined underwriting, low interest rates, high liquidity
and increased capital demand.
all other: all other at december31, 2004, included $298billion of credit exposure to 21
industry segments. exposures related to spes and high-net-worth individuals totaled 45% of this
category. spes provide secured financing (generally backed by receivables, loans or bonds on a
bankruptcy-remote, non-recourse or limited-recourse basis) originated by companies in a diverse
group of industries that are not highly correlated. the remaining all other exposure is well
diversified across other industries, none of which comprises more than 3% of total exposure.
wholesale criticized exposure
exposures deemed criticized generally represent a ratings profile similar to a rating of ccc+/caa1
and lower, as defined by standard & poors/moodys. despite the merger, the criticized component of
the portfolio decreased to $8.3billion at december31, 2004, from $8.9billion at year-end 2003.
the portfolio continued to experience improvement due to debt repayments and
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
facility upgrades as a result of client recapitalizations; additional security and
collateral taken in refinancings; client upgrades from improved financial performance; gross
charge-offs; and a lack of migration of new exposures into the portfolio.
criticized exposure  industry concentrations
as of december 31, 2004 (in millions)
utilities
$
10.7
%
real estate
9.2
media
6.1
chemicals/plastics
5.9
consumer products
5.8
machinery and equipment manufacturing
5.6
airlines
5.4
business services
5.4
metals/mining
5.3
building materials/construction
5.2
all other
2,932
35.4
total
$
8,284
%
wholesale nonperforming assets (excluding purchased held-for-sale wholesale loans) decreased from
december31, 2003, as a result of gross charge-offs of $543million taken during 2004. wholesale
net charge-offs improved significantly compared with 2003, as a result of lower gross charge-offs
and slightly higher recoveries. the 2004 wholesale net charge-off rate was 0.19%, compared
with 0.97% in 2003.
although future charge-offs in the wholesale portfolio and overall credit quality are subject to uncertainties, which may cause actual results to differ from historic
performance, the firm anticipates that the wholesale provision for credit losses will be higher in
2005 than it was in 2004, as the provision for credit losses moves to more normal levels over
time.
derivative contracts
in the normal course of business, the firm utilizes derivative instruments to meet the needs of
customers, to generate revenues through trading activities, to manage exposure to fluctuations in
interest rates, currencies and other markets and to manage its own credit risk. the firm uses the
same credit risk management procedures as those used for traditional lending to assess and approve
potential credit exposures when entering into derivative transactions.
the following table summarizes the aggregate notional amounts and the reported derivative
receivables (i.e., the mtm or fair value of the derivative contracts after taking into account the
effects of legally enforceable master netting agreements) at each of the dates indicated:
notional amounts and derivative receivables marked to market (mtm)
as of december 31,
notional amounts(a)
derivative receivables mtm
(in billions)
2003(b)
2003(b)
interest rate
$
37,022
$
31,252
$
$
foreign exchange
1,886
1,545
equity
credit derivatives
1,071
commodity
total
40,514
33,764
collateral held against derivative receivables
na
na
(9
)(c)
(36
)
exposure net of collateral
na
na
$
$
(a)
the notional amounts represent the gross sum of long and short third-party
notional derivative contracts, excluding written options and foreign exchange spot contracts.
(b)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
the firm held $41billion of collateral against derivative receivables as of december31,
2004, consisting of $32billion in net cash received under credit support annexes to
legally enforceable master netting agreements, and $9billion of other highly liquid
collateral. the benefit of the $32billion is reflected within the $66billion of
derivative receivables mtm. excluded from the $41billion of collateral is $10billion of
collateral delivered by clients at the initiation of transactions; this collateral secures
exposure that could arise in the existing portfolio of derivatives should the mtm of the
clients transactions move in the firms favor. also excluded are credit enhancements in
the form of letter-of-credit and surety receivables.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
the $41 trillion of notional principal of the firms derivative contracts outstanding at
december31, 2004, significantly exceeds the possible credit losses that could arise from such
transactions. for most derivative transactions, the notional principal amount does not change
hands; it is simply used as a reference to calculate payments. the appropriate measure of current
credit risk is, in the firms view, the mtm value of the contract, which represents the cost to
replace the contracts at current market rates should the counterparty default. when jpmorgan chase
has more than one transaction outstanding with a counterparty, and a legally enforceable master
netting agreement exists with that counterparty, the netted mtm exposure, less collateral held,
represents, in the firms view, the appropriate measure of current credit risk. at december31,
2004, the mtm value of derivative receivables (after taking into account the effects of legally
enforceable master netting agreements and the impact of net cash received under credit support
annexes to such legally enforceable master netting agreements) was $66billion. further, after
taking into account $9billion of other highly liquid collateral held by the firm, the net current
mtm credit exposure was $57billion.
while useful as a current view of credit exposure, the net mtm value of the derivative receivables
does not capture the potential future variability of that credit exposure. to capture the potential
future variability of credit exposure, the firm calculates, on a client-by-client basis, three
measures of potential derivatives-related credit loss: peak, derivative risk equivalent (dre) and
average exposure (avg). these measures all incorporate netting and collateral benefits, where
applicable.
peak exposure to a counterparty is an extreme measure of exposure calculated at a 97.5% confidence
level. however, the total potential future credit risk embedded in the firms derivatives portfolio
is not the simple sum of all peak client credit risks. this is because, at the portfolio level,
credit risk is reduced by the fact that when offsetting transactions are done with separate
counterparties, only one of the two trades can generate a credit loss, even if both counterparties
were to default simultaneously. the firm refers to this effect as market diversification, and the
market-diversified peak (mdp) measure is a portfolio aggregation of counterparty peak measures,
representing the maximum losses at the 97.5% confidence level that would occur if all
counterparties defaulted under any one given market scenario and timeframe.
derivative risk equivalent exposure is a measure that expresses the riskiness of derivative
exposure on a basis intended to be equivalent to the riskiness of loan exposures. this is done by
equating the unexpected loss in a derivative counterparty exposure (which takes into consideration
both the loss volatility and the credit rating of the counterparty) with the unexpected loss in a
loan exposure (which takes into consideration only the credit rating of the counterparty). dre is a
less extreme measure of potential credit loss than peak and is the primary measure used by the firm
for credit approval of derivative transactions.
finally, average exposure is a measure of the expected mtm value of the firms derivative
receivables at future time periods, including the benefit of collateral. avg exposure over the
total life of the derivative contract is used as the primary metric for pricing purposes and is
used to calculate credit capital and the credit valuation adjustment (cva), as described further
below.
the chart below shows the exposure profiles to derivatives over the next 10years as calculated by
the mdp, dre and avg metrics. all three measures generally show declining exposure after the first
year, if no new trades were added to the portfolio.
exposure profile of
derivatives measures
december 31, 2004
(in billions)
(a)
excludes $5billion from the $57billion of reported derivative receivables mtm net of
collateral. the exclusion reflects risk mitigation for exchange traded deals and equity option
calls.
the mtm value of the firms derivative receivables incorporates an adjustment, the cva, to
reflect the credit quality of counterparties. the cva is based on the firms avg to a counterparty,
and on the counterpartys credit spread in the credit derivatives market. the primary components of
changes in cva are credit spreads, new deal activity or unwinds, and changes in the underlying
market environment. the firm believes that active risk management is essential to controlling the
dynamic credit risk in the derivatives portfolio. the firm risk manages its exposure to changes in
cva by entering into credit derivative transactions, as well as interest rate, foreign exchange,
equity and commodity derivatives transactions. the mtm value of the firms derivative payables does
not incorporate a valuation adjustment to reflect jpmorgan chases credit quality.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
the following table summarizes the ratings profile of the firms consolidated balance sheet
derivative receivables mtm, net of cash and other highly liquid collateral, for the dates
indicated:
ratings profile of derivative receivables mtm
rating equivalent
2003(b)
december 31,
exposure net
% of exposure
exposure net
% of exposure
(in millions)
of collateral(a)
net of collateral
of collateral
net of collateral
aaa to aa-
$
30,384
%
$
24,697
%
a+ to a-
9,109
7,677
bbb+ to bbb-
9,522
7,564
bb+ to b-
7,271
6,777
ccc+ and below
total
$
56,681
%
$
47,537
%
(a)
the firm held $41billion of collateral against derivative receivables as of
december31, 2004, consisting of $32billion in net cash received under credit support
annexes to legally enforceable master netting agreements, and $9billion of other highly liquid collateral. the benefit of the
$32billion is reflected within the $66billion of derivative receivables mtm. excluded from
the $41billion of
collateral is $10billion of collateral delivered by clients at the initiation of transactions;
this collateral secures exposure that could arise in the existing portfolio of derivatives
should the mtm of the
clients transactions move in the firms favor. also excluded are credit enhancements in the
form of letter-of-credit and surety receivables.
(b)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the firm actively pursues the use of collateral agreements to mitigate counterparty credit risk
in derivatives. the percentage of the firms derivatives transactions subject to collateral
agreements increased slightly, to 79% as of december31, 2004, from 78% at december31, 2003. the
firm held $41billion of collateral as of december31, 2004 (including $32billion of net cash
received under credit support annexes to legally enforceable master netting agreements), compared
with $36billion as of december31, 2003. the firm posted $31billion of collateral as of december
31, 2004, compared with $27billion at the end of 2003.
certain derivative and collateral agreements include provisions that require the counterparty
and/or the firm, upon specified downgrades in their respective credit ratings, to post collateral
for the benefit of the other party. as of december31, 2004, the impact of a single-notch ratings
downgrade to jpmorgan chase bank, from its current rating of aa- to a+, would have been an
additional $1.5billion of collateral posted by the firm; the impact of a six-notch ratings
downgrade (from aa- to bbb-) would have been $3.9billion of additional collateral. certain
derivative contracts also provide for termination of the contract, generally upon a downgrade of
either the firm or the counterparty, at the then-existing mtm value of the derivative contracts.
use of credit derivatives
the following table presents the firms notional amounts of credit derivatives protection bought
and sold by the respective businesses as of december31, 2004 and 2003:
credit derivatives positions
notional amount
portfolio management
dealer/client
december 31,
protection
protection
protection
protection
(in millions)
bought(b)
sold
bought
sold
total
$
37,237
$
$
501,266
$
532,335
$
1,070,875
2003(a)
37,349
264,389
275,888
577,693
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes $2billion at both december31, 2004 and 2003, of portfolio credit derivatives.
jpmorgan chase has limited counterparty exposure as a result of credit derivatives
transactions. of the $66billion of total derivative receivables at december31, 2004,
approximately $3billion, or 5%, was associated with credit derivatives, before the benefit of
highly liquid collateral. the use of credit derivatives to manage exposures by the credit portfolio
group does not reduce the reported level of assets on the balance sheet or the level of reported
off-balance sheet commitments.
credit portfolio management activity
in managing its wholesale credit exposure, the firm purchases single-name and portfolio credit
derivatives. as of december31, 2004, the notional outstanding amount of protection bought via
single-name and portfolio credit derivatives was $35billion and $2billion, respectively. the firm
also diversifies its exposures by providing (i.e., selling) credit protection, which increases
exposure to industries or clients where the firm has little or no client-related exposure. this
activity is not material to the firms overall credit exposure.
use of single-name and portfolio credit derivatives
december 31,
notional amount of protection bought
(in millions)
2003(a)
credit derivative hedges of:
loans and lending-related commitments
$
25,002
$
22,471
derivative receivables
12,235
14,878
total
$
37,237
$
37,349
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the credit derivatives used by jpmorgan chase for its portfolio management activities do not
qualify for hedge accounting under sfas 133, and therefore, effectiveness testing under sfas 133 is
not performed. these derivatives are reported at fair value, with gains and losses recognized as
trading revenue. the mtm value incorporates both the cost of credit derivative premiums and changes
in value due to movement in spreads and credit events, whereas the loans and lending-related
commitments being risk managed are accounted for on an accrual basis. loan interest and fees are
generally recognized in net interest income, and impairment is recognized in the provision for
credit losses. this asymmetry in accounting treatment, between loans and lending-related
commitments and the credit derivatives utilized in portfolio management
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
activities, causes earnings volatility that is not representative of the true changes in value
of the firms overall credit exposure. the mtm treatment of both the firms credit derivatives used
for managing credit exposure (short credit positions) and the cva, which reflects the credit
quality of derivatives counterparty exposure (long credit positions), provides some natural
offset.
in 2004, there were $44million of losses in trading revenue from credit portfolio
management activities. the losses consisted of $297million related to credit derivatives used to
manage the firms credit exposure; of this amount, $234million was associated with credit
derivatives used to manage accrual lending activities, and $63million with credit derivatives used
to manage the derivatives portfolio. the losses were largely due to the ongoing cost of buying
credit protection and some additional impact due to the global tightening of credit spreads. these
losses were partially offset by $253million of gains from a decrease in the mtm value of
the cva, a result of the same factors.
the 2003 credit portfolio management activity resulted in $191million of losses included
in trading revenue. these losses included $746million related to credit derivatives that were used
to risk manage the firms credit exposure; approximately $504million of this
amount was associated with credit derivatives used to manage accrual lending activities, and
the remainder was primarily related to credit derivatives used to manage the credit risk of mtm
derivative receivables. the losses were generally driven by an overall global tightening of credit
spreads. the $746million loss was partially offset by $555million of trading revenue gains,
primarily related to the decrease in the mtm value of the cva due to credit spread tightening.
the firm also actively manages its wholesale credit exposure through loan and commitment sales.
during 2004 and 2003, the firm sold $5.9billion and $5.2billion of loans and commitments,
respectively, resulting in losses of $8million and $54million, respectively, in connection with
the management of its wholesale credit exposure. these activities are not related to the firms
securitization activities, which are undertaken for liquidity and
balance sheet management purposes. for a further discussion of securitization activity, see note 13 on pages 103-106 of this annual report.
dealer/client activity
as of december31, 2004, the total notional amounts of protection purchased and sold by the dealer
business were $501billion and $532billion, respectively. the mismatch between these notional
amounts is attributable to the firm selling protection on large, diversified, predominantly
investment-grade portfolios (including the most senior tranches) and then risk managing these
positions by buying protection on the more subordinated tranches of the same portfolios. in
addition, the firm may use securities to risk manage certain derivative positions.
consequently, while there is a mismatch in notional amounts of credit derivatives, in the firms
view, the risk positions are largely matched.
lending-related commitments
the contractual amount of wholesale lending-related commitments was $309billion at december31,
2004, compared with $211billion at december31, 2003. the increase was primarily due to the
merger. in the firms view, the total contractual amount of these instruments is not representative
of the firms actual credit risk exposure or funding requirements. in determining the amount of
credit risk exposure the firm has to wholesale lending-related commitments, which is used as the
basis for allocating credit risk capital to these instruments, the firm has established a
loan-equivalent amount for each commitment; this represents the portion of the unused commitment
or other contingent exposure that is expected, based on average portfolio historical experience, to
become outstanding in the event of a default by an obligor. the amount of the loan
equivalents as of december31, 2004 and 2003, was $162billion and $104billion,
respectively.
country exposure
the firm has a
comprehensive process for measuring and managing its exposures and
risk in emerging markets countries  defined as those countries
potentially vulnerable to sovereign events. exposures to a country
include all credit-related lending, trading, and investment
activities, whether cross-border or locally funded. exposure amounts
are adjusted for credit enhancements (e.g. guarantees and letters of
credit) provided by third parties located outside the country, if the
enhancements fully cover the country risk, as well as the business
risk. as of december31, 2004, the firms exposure to any
individual country was not material. in addition to monitoring
country exposures, the firm uses stress tests to measure and manage
the risk of extreme loss associated with sovereign crises.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
consumer credit portfolio
jpmorgan chases consumer portfolio consists primarily of residential mortgages and home
equity loans, credit cards, auto and education financings and loans to small businesses. the
domestic consumer portfolio reflects the
benefit of diversification from both a product and a geographical perspective. the primary focus is
on serving the prime consumer credit market.
the following table presents managed consumer
credit-related information for the dates indicated:
consumer portfolio
as of or for the year ended
credit-related
nonperforming
average annual
december 31,
exposure
assets
net charge-offs
net charge-off rate(e)
(in millions, except ratios)
(d)
(d)
(d)
(d)
consumer real estate
home finance
home equity and other(a)
$
67,837
$
24,179
$
$
$
$
1.18
%
0.56
%
home finance
mortgage
56,816
50,381
0.05
0.08
total home finance(a)
124,653
74,560
0.65
0.26
auto & education finance
62,712
43,157
0.52
0.43
consumer & small business and other
15,107
4,204
1.64
1.83
credit card
receivables  reported(b)
64,575
17,426
1,923
1,126
4.95
6.40
total
consumer loans  reported
267,047
139,347
1,169
2,913
1,507
1.56
1.33
credit card securitizations (b)(c)
70,795
34,856
2,898
1,870
5.51
5.64
total
consumer loans  managed(b)
337,842
174,203
1,169
5,811
3,377
2.43
2.31
assets acquired in loan satisfactions
na
na
na
na
na
na
total consumer related
assets  managed
337,842
174,203
1,393
5,811
3,377
2.43
2.31
consumer lending-related commitments:
home finance
53,223
31,626
na
na
na
na
na
na
auto & education finance
5,193
2,637
na
na
na
na
na
na
consumer & small business and other
10,312
5,792
na
na
na
na
na
na
credit cards
532,468
141,143
na
na
na
na
na
na
total lending-related commitments
601,196
181,198
na
na
na
na
na
na
total consumer credit portfolio
$
939,038
$
355,401
$
1,393
$
$
5,811
$
3,377
2.43
%
2.31
%
(a)
includes $406million of charge-offs related to the manufactured home loan portfolio in the
fourth quarter of 2004.
(b)
past-due loans 90days and over and accruing includes credit card receivables of $998
million and $273million, and related credit card securitizations of $1.3billion and
$879million at
december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
(c)
represents securitized credit cards. for a further discussion of credit card securitizations,
see card services on page 39 of this annual report.
(d)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(e)
net charge-off rates exclude average loans hfs in the amount of $14.7billion and $25.3billion for 2004 and 2003, respectively.
na-not applicable.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
total managed consumer loans as of december31, 2004, were $338billion, up from $174billion
at year-end 2003, reflecting the addition of the bank one consumer credit portfolios. consumer
lendingrelated commitments increased by 232% to $601billion at december31, 2004, reflecting the
impact of the merger. the following discussion relates to the specific loan and lending-related
categories within the consumer portfolio:
retail financial services
average rfs loan balances for 2004 were $163billion. new loans originated in 2004 reflect higher
credit quality, consistent with managements focus on the prime credit market segment. the net
charge-off rate for retail loans in 2004 was 0.67%, an increase of 27 basis points from 2003.
this increase was primarily attributable to the merger and to $406million of charge-offs
in the fourth quarter of 2004, which were associated with the sale of the $4billion
manufactured home loan portfolio.
future rfs charge-offs and credit quality are subject to uncertainties which may cause actual
results to differ from current anticipated performance, including the direction and level of loan
delinquencies, changes in consumer behavior, bankruptcy trends, portfolio seasoning, interest rate
movements and portfolio mix, among other factors.
the firm proactively manages its retail credit operation. ongoing efforts include continual review
and enhancement of credit underwriting criteria and refinement of pricing and risk management
models.
home finance: home finance loans on the balance sheet as of december31, 2004, were $125billion.
this consisted of $68billion of home equity and other loans and $57billion of mortgages,
including mortgage loans held-for-sale. home equity and other loans previously included
manufactured home loans, a product the firm stopped originating at mid-year 2004; the firm sold
substantially all of its manufactured home loan portfolio at the end of 2004. the $125billion in
home finance receivables as of december31, 2004, reflects an increase of $50billion from year-end
2003, driven by the addition of bank ones home equity and mortgage portfolios. home finance
provides real estate lending to the full spectrum of credit
borrowers, which included $7billion in sub-prime credits at december31, 2004. the geographic distribution of outstanding
consumer real estate loans is well diversified.
consumer real estate loan portfolio by geographic location
december 31,
2003(a)
(in billions)
outstanding
%
outstanding
%
top 10 u.s. states
california
$
22.8
%
$
17.3
%
new york
18.4
16.3
illinois
8.0
1.9
texas
7.9
4.5
florida
7.1
4.7
ohio
6.1
0.7
arizona
5.2
1.0
michigan
5.2
1.2
new jersey
4.5
3.1
colorado
3.2
1.5
total top 10
88.4
52.2
other
36.3
22.4
total
$
124.7
%
$
74.6
%
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
auto & education finance: as of december31, 2004, auto & education finance loans increased to $63
billion, up from $43billion at year-end 2003. the acquisition of the bank one portfolio was
responsible for the increase. the auto & education loan portfolio reflects a high concentration of
prime quality credits. during the past year, the firm completed a strategic review of all consumer
lending portfolio segments. this review resulted in the firm choosing to de-emphasize vehicle
leasing, which, as of december31, 2004, comprised $8billion of outstandings. it is anticipated
that over time vehicle leases will account for a smaller share of balance sheet receivables and
exposure. the strategic review also resulted in the sale of a $2billion recreational vehicle
portfolio in early 2005.
consumer & small business/insurance: as of december31, 2004, small business & other consumer loans
increased to $15billion compared with 2003year-end levels of $4billion. this portfolio segment
is primarily comprised of loans to small businesses, and the increase reflects the acquisition of
the bank one small business portfolio. the portfolio reflects highly collateralized loans, often
with personal loan guarantees.
card services
jpmorgan chase analyzes its credit card portfolio on a managed basis, which includes credit card
receivables on the consolidated balance sheet and those receivables sold to investors through
securitization. managed credit card receivables were $135billion at december31, 2004, an increase
of $83billion from year-end 2003, reflecting the acquisition of the bank one portfolio.
consumer credit quality trends continue to improve overall, reflecting general economic conditions
and reduced consumer bankruptcy filings versus the prior year. the decrease in the managed credit
card net charge-off rate, to 5.27% in 2004 from 5.90% in 2003, reflected the impact of the merger,
as well as managements continued emphasis on prudent credit risk management, including
disciplined underwriting and account management practices targeted to the prime and super-prime
credit sectors. credit risk management tools used to manage the level and volatility of losses for
credit card accounts have been continually updated, and, where appropriate, these tools were
adjusted to reduce credit risk. the managed credit card portfolio continues to reflect a
well-seasoned portfolio that has good u.s. geographic diversification.
future charge-offs in the credit card portfolio and overall credit quality are subject to
uncertainties, which may cause actual results to differ from historic performance. this could
include the direction and level of loan delinquencies, changes in consumer behavior, bankruptcy
trends, portfolio seasoning, interest rate movements and portfolio mix, among other factors. while
current economic and credit data suggest that consumer credit quality will not significantly
deteriorate, significant deterioration in the general economy could materially change these
expectations.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
allowance for credit losses
jpmorgan chases allowance for credit losses is intended to cover probable credit
losses, including losses where the asset is not specifically identified or the size of the loss has
not been fully determined. at least quarterly, the allowance for credit losses is reviewed by
the chief risk officer and the deputy chief risk officer of the firm and is discussed with a risk
subgroup of the operating committee, relative to the risk profile of the firms credit
portfolio and current economic conditions. the allowance is adjusted based on that review if, in
managements judgment, changes are warranted. the allowance
includes an asset-specific component and a formula-based component, the latter of which consists of
a statistical calculation and adjustments to the statistical calculation. for further discussion of
the components of the allowance for credit losses, see critical accounting estimates used by the
firm on page77 and note12 on pages 102-103 of this annual report. at december31, 2004,
management deemed the allowance for credit losses to be sufficient to absorb losses that are
inherent in the portfolio, including losses that are not specifically
identified or for which the size of the
loss has not yet been fully determined.
summary of changes in the allowance for credit losses
for the year ended
december 31,(a)
(in millions)
wholesale
consumer
total
wholesale
consumer
total
loans:
beginning balance
$
2,204
$
2,319
$
4,523
$
2,936
$
2,414
$
5,350
addition allowance resulting
from the merger, july1, 2004
1,788
1,335
3,123
gross charge-offs
(543
)
(3,262)
(c)
(3,805
)
(1,113
)
(1,705
)
(2,818
)
gross recoveries
net charge-offs
(186
)
(2,913
)
(3,099
)
(765
)
(1,507
)
(2,272
)
provision for loan losses:
provision excluding accounting policy conformity
(605
)
2,403
1,798
1,554
1,579
accounting policy conformity
(103
)
1,188
(d)
1,085
total provision for loan losses
(708
)
3,591
2,883
1,554
1,579
other
(110
)
(110)
(f)
(142
)
(134
)(f)
ending balance
$
3,098
(b)
$
4,222
(e)
$
7,320
$
2,204
$
2,319
$
4,523
lending-related commitments:
beginning balance
$
$
$
$
$
$
addition allowance resulting
from the merger, july1, 2004
net charge-offs
provision for lending-related commitments:
provision excluding accounting policy conformity
(111
)
(1
)
(112
)
(40
)
(39
)
accounting policy conformity
(227
)
(227
)
total provision for lending-related commitments
(338
)
(1
)
(339
)
(40
)
(39
)
other
(1
)
(1
)
(3
)
ending balance
$
$
$
(g)
$
$
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes $469million of asset-specific loss and approximately $2.6billion of formula-based loss.
included within the formula-based loss is $1.6billion related to a statistical calculation
and adjustments to the
statistical calculation of $990million.
(c)
includes $406million of charge-offs related to the sale of the $4billion manufactured home
loan portfolio in the fourth quarter of 2004.
(d)
consists of an increase of approximately $1.4billion as a result of the decertification of heritage
bank one sellers interest in credit card securitizations, partially offset by a reduction
of $254million to conform
provision methodologies.
(e)
includes $3.2billion and $1.0billion of consumer statistical and adjustments to statistical
components, respectively, at december31, 2004.
(f)
primarily represents the transfer of the allowance for accrued fees on reported credit card
loans.
(g)
includes $130million of asset-specific loss and $362million of formula-based loss. note:
the formula-based loss for lending-related commitments is based on statistical calculation.
there is no
adjustment to the statistical calculation for lending-related commitments.
overall: the allowance for credit losses increased by $3.0billion from december31,
2003, to december31, 2004, primarily driven by the merger. adjustments required to conform to the
combined firms allowance methodology, and alignment of accounting practices related to the
sellers interest in credit card securitizations, resulted in a net increase in the provision for
credit losses of $858million. see note 12 on pages 102-103 of this annual report.
loans: the allowance has two components: asset-specific and formula-based. as of december31, 2004,
management deemed the allowance to be appropriate. excluding loans held for sale, the allowance
represented 1.94% of loans at december31, 2004, compared with 2.33% at year-end 2003.
the wholesale component of the allowance was $3.1billion as of december31, 2004, an increase from
year-end 2003, primarily due to the merger. the wholesale allowance also reflected a reduction of
$103million in the provision as a result of conforming the combined firms allowance methodology.
the consumer component of the allowance was $4.2billion as of december31, 2004, an increase from
december31, 2003, primarily attributable to the merger and the decertification of bank ones
sellers retained interest in credit card securitizations. adjustments required to conform to the
combined firms allowance methodology included a reduction of $192million in the allowance for
loan losses within rfs. conforming the methodology within card services reduced the allowance for
loan losses by $62million.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
additionally, in card services, $128million in allowance for accrued fees and finance charges
was reclassified from the allowance for loan losses to loans.
at the time of the merger, bank ones sellers interest in credit card securitizations was in a
certificated or security form and recorded at fair value. subsequently, a decision was made to
decertificate these assets, which resulted in a reclassification of the sellers interest from
available-for-sale securities to loans, at fair value, with no allowance for credit losses.
generally, as the underlying credit card receivables represented by the sellers interest were paid
off, customers continued to use their credit cards and originate new receivables, which were then
recorded as loans at historical cost. as these new loans aged, it was necessary to establish an
allowance for credit losses consistent with the firms credit policies. during the second half of
2004, approximately $1.4billion of the allowance for loan losses was established through the provision
associated with newly originated receivables related to the sellers interest.
lending-related commitments: to provide for the risk of loss inherent in the firms process of
extending credit, management also computes an asset-specific component and a formula-based
component for wholesale lending-related commitments. these are computed using a methodology similar
to that used for the wholesale loan portfolio, modified for expected maturities and probabilities
of drawdown. this allowance, which is reported in other liabilities, was $492million at december
31, 2004, and reflected the impact of the merger, partially offset by a $227million benefit as a
result of conforming the combined firms allowance methodology. the allowance was $324million at
december31, 2003.
provision for credit losses
for a discussion of the reported provision for credit losses, see page 23 of this annual
report. the managed provision for credit losses, which reflects credit card securitizations,
increased primarily due to the merger.
for the year ended
provision for
december 31,(a)
provision for loan losses
lending-related commitments
total provision for credit losses
(in millions)
investment bank
$
(525
)
$
(135
)
$
(115
)
$
(46
)
$
(640
)
$
(181
)
commercial banking
(2
)
treasury & securities services
asset & wealth management
(12
)
(2
)
(1
)
(14
)
corporate
(110
)
(110
)
total wholesale
(605
)
(111
)
(40
)
(716
)
(15
)
retail financial services
(1
)
card services
1,953
1,034
1,953
1,034
total consumer
2,403
1,554
(1
)
2,402
1,555
accounting policy conformity(b)
1,085
(227
)
total
provision for credit losses
2,883
1,579
(339
)
(39
)
2,544
1,540
add: securitized credit losses
2,898
1,870
2,898
1,870
less: accounting policy conformity
(1,085
)
(858
)
total
managed provision for credit losses
$
4,696
$
3,449
$
(112
)
$
(39
)
$
4,584
$
3,410
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
the provision for
loan losses includes an increase of approximately $1.4billion as a result of the
decertification of heritage bank ones sellers interest in credit card securitizations,
partially offset by a reduction of
$357million to conform provision methodologies. the provision for lending-related
commitments reflects a reduction of $227million to conform provision methodologies in the
wholesale portfolio.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
market risk management
market risk represents the potential loss in value of portfolios and financial
instruments caused by adverse movements in market variables, such as interest and foreign exchange
rates, credit spreads, and equity and commodity prices.
market risk management
market risk management (mrm) is a function independent of the businesses that
identifies, measures, monitors, and controls market risk. it seeks to
facilitate efficient risk/return decisions and to reduce volatility in operating performance. it
strives to make the firms market risk profile transparent to senior management, the board of
directors and regulators.
the chart below depicts the mrm organizational structure and describes the responsibilities of the
groups within mrm.
there are also groups that report to the chief financial officer with some responsibility
for market risk-related activities. for example, within the finance area, the valuation control
functions are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of the valuations of positions that expose the
firm to market risk.
risk identification and classification
mrm works in partnership with the business segments to identify market risks throughout the
firm, and to refine and monitor market risk policies and procedures. all business segments are
responsible for comprehensive identification and verification of market risks within their units.
risk-taking businesses have middle office functions that act independently from trading personnel
and are responsible for verifying risk exposures that the business takes. in addition to providing
independent oversight for market risk arising from the business segments, mrm is also responsible
for identifying exposures which may not be large within individual business segments, but which may
be large for the firm in aggregate. weekly meetings are held between mrm and the heads of
risk-taking businesses, to discuss and decide on risk exposures in the context of the market
environment and client flows.
positions that expose the firm to market risk are classified into two categories: trading and
nontrading risk. trading risk includes positions that are held for trading purposes as a principal
or as part of a business whose main business strategy is to trade or make markets. unrealized gains
and losses in these positions are generally reported in trading revenue. nontrading risk includes
securities held for longer term investment, and securities and derivatives used to manage the
firms asset/liability exposures. in most cases, unrealized gains and losses in these positions are
accounted for at fair value, with the gains and losses reported in net income or other
comprehensive income.
trading risk
fixed income: fixed income risk (which includes credit spread risk) involves the potential
decline in net income or financial condition due to adverse changes in market interest rates, which
may result in changes to nii, securities valuations, and other interest-sensitive revenues and
expenses.
foreign exchange, equities, commodities and other: these risks involve the potential
decline in net income to the firm due to adverse changes in foreign exchange, equities or
commodities markets, whether due to proprietary positions taken by the firm, or due to a decrease
in the level of client activity. other risks include passive long-term investments in numerous
hedge funds that may have exposure to fixed income, foreign exchange, equity and commodity risk
within their portfolio risk structures.
nontrading risk
the execution of the firms core business strategies, the delivery of products and services to
its customers, and the discretionary positions the firm undertakes to risk-manage structural
exposures give rise to interest rate risk in the nontrading activities of the firm.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
this exposure can result from a variety of factors, including differences in the timing among the
maturity or re-pricing of assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet instruments. changes in the
level and shape of market interest rate curves may also create interest rate risk, since the
re-pricing characteristics of the firms assets do not necessarily match those of its liabilities.
the firm is also exposed to basis risk, which is the difference in re-pricing characteristics of
two floating rate indices, such as the prime rate and 3-month libor. in addition, some of the
firms products have embedded optionality that impact pricing and balance levels.
the firm manages interest rate exposure related to its assets and liabilities on a consolidated,
corporate-wide basis. business units transfer their interest rate risk to treasury through a
transfer-pricing system, which takes into account the elements of interest rate exposure that can
be risk managed in financial markets. these elements include asset and liability balances and
contractual rates of interest, contractual principal payment schedules, expected prepayment
experience, interest rate reset dates and maturities, rate indices used for re-pricing, and any
interest rate ceilings or floors for adjustable rate products. all transfer-pricing assumptions are
reviewed by treasury.
the firms mortgage banking activities also give rise to complex interest rate risks. the interest
rate exposure from the firms mortgage banking activities is a result of option and basis risks.
option risk arises primarily from prepayment options embedded in mortgages and changes in the
probability of newly-originated mortgage commitments actually closing. basis risk results from
different relative movements between mortgage rates and other interest rates. these risks are
managed through programs specific to the different mortgage banking activities. potential
impairment in the fair value of mortgage servicing rights (msrs) and increased amortization
levels of msrs are managed via a risk management program that attempts to offset changes in the
fair value of msrs with changes in the fair value of derivatives and investment securities. a
similar approach is used to manage the interest rate risk associated with the firms mortgage
origination business.
risk measurement
tools used to measure risk
because no single measure can reflect all aspects of market risk, the firm uses several
measures, both statistical and nonstatistical, including:
statistical risk measures
-
value-at-risk (var)
-
risk identification for large exposures (rifle)
nonstatistical risk measures
-
economic value stress tests
-
earnings-at-risk stress tests
-
other measures of position size and sensitivity to market moves
value-at-risk
jpmorgan chases statistical risk measure, var, gauges the potential loss from adverse market
moves in an ordinary market environment and provides a consistent cross-business measure of risk
profiles and levels of risk diversification. var is used to compare risks across businesses, to
monitor limits and to allocate economic capital to the business segments. var provides risk
transparency in a normal trading environment.
each business day the firm undertakes a comprehensive var calculation that includes both its
trading and its nontrading activities. var for nontrading activities measures the amount of
potential change in economic value; however, var for such activities is not a measure of reported
revenue since nontrading activities are generally not marked to market through earnings. jpmorgan
chases var calculation is highly granular, comprising more than 2.1million positions and 240,000
pricing series (e.g., securities prices, interest rates, foreign exchange rates). for a substantial
portion of its exposure, the firm has implemented full-revaluation var, which, management believes,
generates the most accurate results.
to calculate var, the firm uses historical simulation, which measures risk across instruments and
portfolios in a consistent, comparable way. this approach assumes that historical changes in market
values are representative of future changes. the simulation is based on data for the previous 12
months.
the firm calculates var using a one-day time horizon and a 99% confidence level. this means the
firm would expect to incur losses greater than that predicted by var estimates only once in every
100 trading days, or about 2.5 times a year.
all statistical models involve a degree of uncertainty, depending on the assumptions they employ.
the firm prefers historical simulation, because it involves fewer assumptions about the
distribution of portfolio losses than parameter-based methodologies. in addition, the firm
regularly assesses the quality of the market data, since their accuracy is critical to computing
var. nevertheless, because var is based on historical market data, it may not accurately reflect
future risk during environments in which market volatility is changing. in addition, the var
measure on any particular day may not be indicative of future risk levels, since positions and
market conditions may both change over time.
while var is a valuable tool for evaluating relative risks and aggregating risks across businesses,
it only measures the potential volatility of daily revenues. profitability and risk levels over
longer time periods  a fiscal quarter or a year  may be only loosely related to the average value
of var over those periods for several reasons. first, while var measures potential
fluctuations around average daily revenue, the average itself could reflect significant gains or
losses; for example, from client revenues that accompany risk-taking activities. second, large
trading revenues may result from positions taken over longer periods of time. for example, a
business may maintain an exposure to rising or falling interest rates over a period of weeks or
months. if the market exhibits a long-term trend over that time, the business could experience
large gains or losses, even though revenue volatility on each individual day may have been small.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
trading var
ib trading var by risk type and credit portfolio var(a)
2003(e)
as of or for the year ended
average
minimum
maximum
at
average
minimum
maximum
at
december 31, (in millions)(b)
var
var
var
december 31,
var
var
var
december 31,
by risk type:
fixed income
$
74.4
$
45.3
$
117.5
$
57.3
$
61.4
$
42.3
$
104.3
$
79.9
foreign exchange
17.3
10.2
32.8
28.4
16.8
11.0
30.2
23.5
equities
28.2
15.2
57.8
19.8
18.2
6.7
51.6
45.6
commodities and other
8.7
6.5
17.9
8.4
7.7
4.9
12.6
8.7
less: portfolio diversification
(43.6
)
nm
(d)
nm
(d)
(41.8
)
(39.4
)
nm
(d)
nm
(d)
(61.7
)
total trading var
$
85.0
$
51.6
$
125.2
$
72.1
$
64.7
$
39.8
$
116.3
$
96.0
credit portfolio var(c)
14.0
10.8
16.6
15.0
17.8
12.8
22.0
13.2
less: portfolio diversification
(8.5
)
nm
(d)
nm
(d)
(9.4
)
(13.2
)
nm
(d)
nm
(d)
(8.1
)
total trading and credit
portfolio var
$
90.5
$
55.3
$
131.6
$
77.7
$
69.3
$
44.8
$
119.8
$
101.1
(a)
includes all mark-to-market trading activities in the ib, plus available for sale
securities held for the ibs proprietary purposes. amounts exclude var related to the
firms private equity business.
for a discussion of private equity risk management, see page 76 of this annual report.
(b)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
includes var on derivative credit valuation adjustments, credit valuation adjustment hedges
and mark-to-market loan hedges which are all reported in trading revenue. this var does not
include the
accrual loan portfolio, which is not marked to market.
(d)
designated as nm because the minimum and maximum may occur on different days for different
risk components, and hence it is not meaningful to compute a portfolio diversification
effect.
in addition, jpmorgan chases average and period-end vars are less than the sum of the vars of
its market risk components, due to risk offsets resulting from portfolio diversification.
(e)
amounts have been revised to reflect the reclassification of hedge fund investments,
reclassification of treasury positions to portfolios outside the ib, and the inclusion of
available for sale securities
held for the ibs proprietary purposes.
the largest contributors to the ib trading var in 2004 was fixed income risk. before
portfolio diversification, fixed income risk accounted for roughly 58% of the average ib trading
portfolio var. the diversification effect, which on average reduced the daily average ib trading
portfolio var by $43.6million in 2004, reflects the fact that the largest losses for different
positions and risks do not typically occur at the same time. the risk of a portfolio of positions
is therefore usually less than the sum of the risks of the positions themselves. the degree of
diversification is determined both by the extent to which different market variables tend to move
together and by the extent to which different businesses have similar positions.
average ib trading and credit portfolio var during 2004 rose to $90.5million, compared with $69.3
million for the same period in 2003. period-end var decreased over the same period, to $77.7
million from $101.1million. the decrease was driven by a decline in fixed income and equities var,
primarily due to decreased risk positions and lower market volatility. in general, over the course
of a year, var exposures can vary significantly as trading positions change and market volatility
fluctuates.
var backtesting
to evaluate the soundness of its var model, the firm conducts daily backtesting of var against
actual financial results, based on daily market risk-related revenue. market risk-related revenue
is defined as the daily change in value of the mark-to-market trading portfolios plus any
trading-related net interest income, brokerage commissions, underwriting fees or other revenue. the
firms definition of market risk-related revenue is consistent with the frbs implementation of the
basel committees market risk capital rules. the histogram below illustrates the daily market
risk-related gains and losses for the ib trading businesses for the year ended december31, 2004.
the chart shows that the ib posted market risk-related gains on 224 out of 261days in this period,
with 12days exceeding $100million. the inset graph looks at those days on which the ib
experienced losses and depicts the amount by which var exceeded the actual loss on each of those
days. losses were sustained on 37days, with no loss greater than $50million, and with no loss
exceeding the var measure.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
the graph below depicts the number of days on which the ibs market risk-related gains and losses
fell within particular ranges. the inset graph to the right looks at those days on which the ib
experienced losses and depicts the amount by which var exceeded the
actual loss on each of those days.
daily ib market risk-related gains and losses
economic value stress testing
while var reflects the risk of loss due to unlikely events in normal markets, stress testing
captures the firms exposure to unlikely but plausible events in abnormal markets. stress testing
is equally important as var in measuring and controlling risk. stress testing enhances the
understanding of the firms risk profile and loss potential and is used for monitoring limits,
cross-business risk measurement and economic capital allocation.
economic-value stress tests measure the potential change in the value of the firms portfolios.
applying economic-value stress tests helps the firm understand how the economic value of its
balance sheet (i.e., not the amounts reported under u.s. gaap) would change under certain
scenarios. the firm conducts economic-value stress tests for both its trading and its nontrading
activities, using the same scenarios for both.
the firm stress tests its portfolios at least once a month using multiple scenarios. several
macroeconomic event-related scenarios are evaluated across the firm, with shocks to roughly 10,000
market prices specified for each scenario. additional scenarios focus on the risks predominant in
individual business segments, and include scenarios that focus on the potential for adverse moves
in complex portfolios.
scenarios are derived from either severe historical crises or forward assessment of developing
market trends. they are continually reviewed and updated to reflect changes in the firms risk
profile and economic events. stress-test results, trends and explanations are provided each month
to the firms executive management and to the lines of business to help them better measure and
manage risks to understand event risk-sensitive positions.
the firms stress-test methodology assumes that, during an actual stress event, no management
action would be taken to change the risk profile of portfolios. this captures the decreased
liquidity that often occurs with abnormal markets and results, in the firms view, in a
conservative stress-test result.
based on the firms stress scenarios, the stress test loss (pre-tax) in the ibs trading portfolio
ranged from $202million to $1.2billion, and $227million to $895million for the years ended
december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. (the 2004 results include six months of the combined
firms results and six months of heritage jpmorgan chase results. in addition, the 2003 amounts
have been revised to reflect the transfer of treasury positions from the ib to the corporate
business segment.)
it is important to note that var results cannot be directly correlated to stress-test loss results
for three reasons. first, stress-test losses are calculated at varying dates each month, while var
is performed daily and reported for the period-end date. second, var and stress tests are two
distinct risk measurements yielding very different loss potentials. thus, although the same trading
portfolios are used for both tests, var is based on a distribution of one-day historical losses
measured over the most recent one year; in contrast, stress testing subjects the portfolio to more
extreme, larger moves over a longer time horizon (e.g., 2-3weeks). third, as var and stress tests
are distinct risk measurements, the impact of portfolio diversification can vary greatly. for var,
markets can change in patterns over a one-year time horizon, moving from highly correlated to less
so; in stress testing, the focus is on a single event and the associated correlations in an extreme
market situation. as a result, while var over a given time horizon can be lowered by a
diversification benefit in the portfolio, this benefit would not necessarily manifest itself in
stress-test scenarios, which assume large, coherent moves across all markets.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
rifle
in addition to var, jpmorgan chase employs the risk identification for large exposures (rifle)
methodology as another statistical risk measure. the firm requires that all market risk-taking
businesses self-assess their risks to unusual and specific events. individuals who manage risk
positions, particularly complex positions, identify potential worst-case losses that could arise
from an unusual or specific event, such as a potential tax change, and estimate the probabilities
of such losses. through the firms rifle system, this information is then directed to the
appropriate level of management, thereby permitting the firm to identify further earnings
vulnerabilities not adequately covered by var and stress testing.
nonstatistical risk measures
nonstatistical risk measures other than stress testing include net open positions, basis point
values, option sensitivities, position concentrations and position turnover. these measures provide
additional information on an exposures size and the direction in which it is moving.
nonstatistical measures are used for monitoring limits, one-off approvals and tactical control.
earnings-at-risk stress testing
the var and stress-test measures described above illustrate the total economic sensitivity of
the firms balance sheet to changes in market variables. the effect of interest rate exposure on
reported net income is also critical. interest rate risk exposure in the firms core nontrading
business activities (i.e., asset/liability management positions) results from on- and off-balance
sheet positions. the firm conducts simulations of nii for its nontrading activities under a variety
of interest rate scenarios, which are consistent with the scenarios used for economic-value stress
testing. earnings-at-risk tests measure the potential change in the firms net interest income over
the next 12months. these tests highlight exposures to various rate-sensitive factors, such as the
rates themselves (e.g., the prime lending rate), pricing strategies on deposits, optionality and
changes in product mix. the tests included forecasted balance sheet changes, such as asset sales
and securitizations, as well as prepayment and reinvestment behavior.
jpmorgan chases 12-month pre-tax earnings sensitivity profiles as of december31, 2004, were
as follows:
immediate change in rates
(in millions)
+200bp
+100bp
-100bp
december31, 2004
$
(557
)
$
(164
)
$
(180
)
the firm is exposed to both rising and falling rates. the firms risk to rising rates is
largely the result of increased funding costs. in contrast, the exposure to falling rates is the
result of potential compression in deposit spreads, coupled with higher anticipated levels of loan
prepayments.
immediate changes in interest rates present a limited view of risk, and so a number of
alternative scenarios are also reviewed. these scenarios include the implied forward curve,
nonparallel rate shifts and severe interest rate shocks on selected key rates. these scenarios are
intended to provide a comprehensive view of jpmorgan chases earnings-at-risk over a wide range of
outcomes.
earnings-at-risk can also result from changes in the slope of the yield curve, because the firm has
the ability to lend at fixed rates and borrow at variable or short-term fixed rates. based on these
scenarios, the firms earnings would be negatively affected by a sudden and unanticipated increase
in short-term rates without a corresponding increase in long-term rates. conversely, higher
long-term rates are generally beneficial to earnings, particularly when the increase is not
accompanied by rising short-term rates.
risk monitoring and control
limits
market risk is primarily controlled through a series of limits. the sizes of the limits reflect
the firms risk appetite after extensive analysis of the market environment and business strategy.
the analysis examines factors such as market volatility, product liquidity, business track record,
and management experience and depth.
the firm maintains different levels of limits. corporate-level limits encompass var calculations
and stress-test loss advisories. similarly, business segment levels include limits based on var
calculations and nonstatistical measurements, and p&l loss advisories. businesses are responsible
for adhering to established limits, against which exposures are monitored and reported daily.
exceeded limits are reported immediately to senior management, and the affected business unit must
take appropriate action to reduce trading positions. if the business cannot do this within an
acceptable timeframe, senior management is consulted on the appropriate action.
mrm regularly reviews and updates risk limits, and the firms operating committee reviews and
approves risk limits at least twice a year. mrm further controls the firms exposure by
specifically designating approved financial instruments for each business unit.
qualitative review
mrm also performs periodic reviews of both businesses and products with exposure to market risk
in order to assess the ability of the businesses to control market risk. the businesses management
strategies, market conditions, product details and effectiveness of risk controls are reviewed.
specific recommendations for improvements are made to management.
model review
many of the firms financial instruments cannot be valued based on quoted market prices but are
instead valued using pricing models. such models are used for management of risk positions, such as
reporting risk against limits, as well as for valuation. a model review group, independent of the
lines of business units and mrm, reviews the models the firm uses, and assesses model
appropriateness and consistency across businesses. the model reviews consider a number of issues:
appropriateness of the model, assessing the extent to which it accurately reflects the
characteristics of the transaction and captures its significant risks; independence and reliability
of data sources; appropriateness and adequacy of numerical algorithms; and sensitivity to input
parameters or other assumptions which cannot be priced from the market.
reviews are conducted for new or changed models, as well as previously accepted models, and they
assess whether there have been any material changes to the accepted models; whether there have been
any changes in the product or market that may impact the models validity; and whether there are
theoretical or competitive developments that may require reassessment of the models adequacy. for
a summary of valuations based on models, see critical accounting estimates used by the firm on
pages77-79 of this annual report.
risk reporting
value-at-risk, nonstatistical exposures and dollar trading loss limit exceptions are reported
daily for each trading and nontrading business. market risk exposure trends, value-at-risk trends,
profit and loss changes, and portfolio concentrations are reported weekly to business management
and monthly to senior management. in addition, the results of comprehensive, monthly stress tests
are presented to business and senior management.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
operational risk management
operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed processes or
systems, human factors, or external events.
overview
operational risk is inherent in each of the firms businesses and support activities.
operational risk can manifest itself in various ways, including errors, business interruptions,
inappropriate behavior of employees and vendors that do not perform in accordance with outsourcing
arrangements. these events can potentially result in financial losses and other damage to the firm,
including reputational harm.
to monitor and control operational risk, the firm maintains a system of comprehensive policies and
a control framework designed to provide a sound and well-controlled operational environment. the
goal is to keep operational risk at appropriate levels, in light of the firms financial strength,
the characteristics of its businesses, the markets in which it operates, and the competitive and
regulatory environment to which it is subject. notwithstanding these control measures, the firm
incurs operational losses.
the firms approach to operational risk management is intended to mitigate such losses by
supplementing the traditional control-based approach to operational risk with risk measures, tools
and disciplines that are risk-specific, consistently applied and
utilized firmwide. key themes are
transparency of information, escalation of key issues and accountability for issue resolution.
risk identification and measurement
risk identification is the recognition of the operational risk events that management believes
may give rise to operational losses.
in 2004, jpmorgan chase
redesigned the underlying architecture of its firmwide self-assessment
process, and began implementing the process throughout the heritage bank one business units. the
goal of the self-assessment process is for each business to identify the key operational risks
specific to its environment and assess the degree to which it maintains appropriate controls.
action plans are developed for control issues identified, and businesses are held accountable for
tracking and resolving these issues on a timely basis.
all businesses were required to perform semiannual self-assessments in 2004, which were completed
by the businesses through the use of software applications developed by the firm. going forward,
the firm will utilize the self-assessment process as a dynamic risk management tool.
risk monitoring
the firm has a process for monitoring operational risk-event data, permitting analysis of
errors and losses as well as trends. such analysis, performed both at a line-of-business level and
by risk event type, enables identification of the causes associated with risk events faced by the
businesses. where available, the internal data can be supplemented with external data for
comparative analysis with industry patterns. the data reported will enable the firm to back-test
against self-assessment results.
risk reporting and analysis
operational risk management reports provide timely and accurate information to the lines of
business and senior management, including information about actual operational loss levels and
self-assessment results. the purpose of these reports is to enable management to maintain
operational risk at appropriate levels within each line of business, to escalate issues and to
provide consistent data aggregation across the firms business and support areas.
during 2004, the firm implemented phoenix, a new internally-designed operational risk
architecture model. phoenix integrates the individual components of the operational risk management
framework into a unified, web-based tool. when fully implemented, phoenix will enable the firm to
enhance its reporting and analysis of operational risk data, leading to improved risk management
and financial performance. phoenix will also facilitate the ability of businesses to leverage
existing processes to comply with risk management-related regulatory requirements thereby leading
to increased efficiencies in the firms management of operational risk.
for purposes of reporting and analysis, the firm categorizes operational risk events as follows:
client service and selection
business practices
fraud, theft and malice
execution, delivery and process management
employee disputes
disasters and public safety
technology and infrastructure failures
audit alignment
internal audit utilizes a risk-based program of audit coverage to provide an independent
assessment of the design and effectiveness of key controls over the firms operations, regulatory
compliance and reporting. internal audit partners with business management and members of the
control community in providing guidance on the operational risk framework, and reviews the
effectiveness and accuracy of the business self-assessment process as part of its business unit
audits.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
reputation and fiduciary risk management
a firms success depends not only on its prudent management of liquidity, credit,
market, operational and business risks, but equally on the
maintenance among many constituents
clients, investors, regulators, as well as the general public  of a reputation for business
practices of the highest quality.
attention to reputation has always been a key aspect of the firms practices, and maintenance of
reputation is the responsibility of everyone at the firm. jpmorgan chase bolsters this individual
responsibility in many ways: through the code of conduct, training, policies and oversight
functions that approve transactions. these oversight functions include a conflicts office, which
examines wholesale transactions with the potential to create conflicts of interest or role for the
firm.
policy review office
the firm has an additional structure to address certain transactions with clients, especially
complex derivatives and structured finance transactions, that have the potential to adversely affect its reputation.
this structure reinforces the firms procedures for examining
transactions in terms of appropriateness, ethical issues and reputational risk, and it intensifies
the firms scrutiny of the purpose and effect of its transactions from the clients point of view,
with the goal that these transactions not be used to mislead investors or others. the structure
operates at three levels: as part of every businesss transaction approval process; through review
by regional policy review committees; and through oversight by the policy review office.
primary responsibility for adherence to the policies and procedures designed to address reputation
risk lies with the business units conducting the transactions in question. the firms transaction
approval process requires review and sign-off from, among others, internal legal/compliance,
conflicts, tax and accounting groups. transactions involving an spe established by the firm receive
particular scrutiny to ensure that every such entity is properly approved, documented, monitored
and controlled.
business units are also required to submit to regional policy review committees proposed
transactions that may heighten reputation risk  particularly a
clients motivation and its intended financial disclosure of the transaction. the committees
approve, reject or require further clarification on or changes to the transactions. the members of
these committees are senior representatives of the business and support units in the region. the
committees may escalate transaction review to the policy review office.
the policy review office is the most senior approval level for client transactions involving
reputation risk issues. the mandate of the office is to opine on specific transactions brought by
the regional committees and consider changes in policies or practices relating to reputation risk.
the head of the office consults with the firms most senior executives on specific topics and
provides regular updates. aside from governance and guidance on specific transactions, the
objective of the policy review process is to reinforce a culture, through a case study approach,
that ensures that all employees, regardless of seniority, understand the basic principles of
reputation risk control and can recognize and address issues as they arise.
fiduciary risk management
the firm maintains risk management committees within each of its lines of business that include
in their mandate the oversight of legal, reputational and fiduciary-related risks in their
businesses that may produce significant losses or reputational damage. the fiduciary risk
management function works with the line-of-business risk committees to ensure that businesses
providing investment or risk management products or services perform at the appropriate standard
relative to their relationship with a client, whether it be fiduciary or non-fiduciary in nature.
of particular focus are the policies and practices that address a business responsibilities to a
client including client suitability determination, disclosure obligations, disclosure
communications and performance expectations with respect to the investment and risk management
products or services being provided by the firm. in this way, the line-of-business risk committees,
together with the fiduciary risk management function, provide oversight of the firms efforts to
monitor, measure and control the risks that may arise in the delivery of such products or services
to clients, as well as those stemming from the firms responsibilities undertaken on behalf of
employees.
private equity risk management
risk management
the firms private equity business employs processes for risk measurement and control of
private equity risk that are similar to those used for other businesses within the firm. the
processes are coordinated with the firms overall approach to market and concentration risk.
private equity risk is initially monitored through the use of industry and geographic limits.
additionally, to manage the pace of new investments, a ceiling on the amount of annual private
equity investment activity has been established. at december31, 2004, the carrying value of the
private equity portfolio was $7.5billion.
private equitys publicly-held securities create a significant exposure to general
declines in the equity markets. initially to gauge that risk, var and stress-test exposures are
calculated in the same way as they are for the firms trading
and nontrading portfolios. however, because var assumes that positions can be exited in a normal
market, jpmorgan chase believes that the var for publicly-held securities does not
necessarily represent the true value-at-risk for these holdings nor is it indicative of the loss
potential for these holdings, due to the fact that most of the positions are subject to sale
restrictions and, often, represent significant concentration of ownership. accordingly, private
equity management undertakes frequent reviews of its publicly-held securities investments
as part of a disciplined approach to sales and risk management issues. risk management programs are
limited but are considered when practical and as circumstances dictate. over time, the firm may
change the nature and type of private equity risk management programs it enters into.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
critical accounting estimates used by the firm
jpmorgan chases accounting policies and use of estimates are integral to understanding
its reported results. the firms most complex accounting estimates require managements judgment to
ascertain the valuation of assets and liabilities. the firm has established detailed policies and
control procedures intended to ensure that valuation methods, including any judgments made as part
of such methods, are well controlled, independently reviewed and applied consistently from period
to period. in addition, the policies and procedures are intended to ensure that the process for
changing methodologies occurs in an appropriate manner. the firm believes its estimates for
determining the valuation of its assets and liabilities are appropriate. the following is a brief
description of the firms critical accounting estimates involving significant valuation judgments.
allowance for credit losses
jpmorgan chases allowance for credit losses covers the wholesale and consumer loan portfolios as
well as the firms portfolio of wholesale lending-related commitments. the allowance for loan
losses is intended to adjust the value of the firms loan assets for probable credit losses as of
the balance sheet date. for a further discussion of the methodologies used in establishing the
firms allowance for credit losses, see note 12 on pages 102-103 of this annual report.
wholesale loans and lending-related commitments
the methodology for calculating both the allowance for loan losses and the allowance for lending-related commitments involves significant judgment.
first and foremost, it involves the early identification of credits that are deteriorating. second,
it involves management judgment to derive loss factors. third, it involves management judgment to
evaluate certain macroeconomic factors, underwriting standards, and other relevant internal and
external factors affecting the credit quality of the current portfolio and to refine loss
factors to better reflect these conditions.
the firm uses a risk rating system to determine the credit quality of its wholesale loans.
wholesale loans are reviewed for information affecting the obligors ability to fulfill its
obligations. in assessing the risk rating of a particular loan, among the factors considered
include the obligors debt capacity and financial flexibility, the level of the obligors earnings,
the amount and sources for repayment, the level and nature of contingencies, management strength,
and the industry and geography in which the obligor operates. these factors are based on an
evaluation of historical and current information, and involve subjective assessment and
interpretation. emphasizing one factor over another, or considering additional factors that may be
relevant in determining the risk rating of a particular loan, but which are not currently an
explicit part of the firms methodology, could impact the risk rating assigned by the firm to that
loan.
management applies its judgment to derive loss factors associated with each credit facility. these
loss factors are determined by facility structure, collateral and type of obligor. wherever
possible, the firm uses independent, verifiable data or the firms own historical loss experience
in its models for estimating these loss factors. many factors can affect managements estimates of
loss, including volatility of loss given default, probability of default and rating migrations.
judgment is applied to determine whether the loss given default should be calculated as an average
over the entire credit cycle or at a particular point in the credit cycle. the application of
different loss given default fac-
tors would change the amount of the allowance for credit losses determined appropriate by the firm.
similarly, there are judgments as to which external data on probability of default should be used,
and when they should be used. choosing data that are not reflective of the firms specific loan
portfolio characteristics could affect loss estimates.
management also applies its judgment to adjust the loss factors derived taking into consideration
model imprecision, external factors and economic events that have occurred but are not yet
reflected in the loss factors. the resultant adjustments to the statistical calculation of losses
on the performing portfolio are determined by creating estimated ranges using historical experience
of both loss given default and probability of default. factors related to concentrated and
deteriorating industries are also incorporated where relevant. the estimated ranges and the
determination of the appropriate point within the range are based upon managements view of
uncertainties that relate to current macroeconomic and political conditions, quality of
underwriting standards and other relevant internal and external factors affecting the
credit quality of the current portfolio. the adjustment to the statistical calculation for the
wholesale loan portfolio for the period ended december31, 2004, was $990million, the maximum
amount within the range, based on managements assessment of current economic conditions.
consumer loans
for scored loans (generally consumer lines of business), loss is primarily determined by applying
statistical loss factors and other risk indicators to pools of loans by asset type. these loss
estimates are sensitive to changes in delinquency status, credit bureau scores, the realizable
value of collateral, and other risk factors.
adjustments to the statistical calculation are accomplished in part by analyzing the historical
loss experience for each major product segment. management analyzes the range of credit loss
experienced for each major portfolio segment taking into account economic cycles, portfolio
seasoning, and underwriting criteria and then formulates a range that incorporates relevant risk
factors that impact overall credit performance. the recorded adjustment to the statistical
calculation for the period ended december31, 2004 was $1.0billion, based on managements
assessment of current economic conditions.
fair value of financial instruments
a portion of jpmorgan chases assets and liabilities are carried at fair value, including trading
assets and liabilities, afs securities and private equity investments. held-for-sale loans and
mortgage servicing rights (msrs) are carried at the lower of fair value or cost. at december31,
2004, approximately $417billion of the firms assets were recorded at fair value.
the fair value of a financial instrument is defined as the amount at which the instrument could be
exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation
sale. the majority of the firms assets reported at fair value are based on quoted market prices or
on internally developed models that utilize independently sourced market parameters, including
interest rate yield curves, option volatilities and currency rates.
the degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument
is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices or observable market parameters. for
financial instruments that are actively traded and have quoted market prices or parameters readily
available,
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
there is little to no subjectivity in determining fair value. when observable market
prices and parameters do not exist, management judgment is necessary to estimate fair value. the
valuation process takes into consideration factors such as liquidity and concentration concerns
and, for the derivatives portfolio, counterparty credit risk (see the discussion of cva on page 63
of this annual report). for example, there is often limited market data to rely on when estimating
the fair value of a large or aged position. similarly, judgment must be applied in estimating
prices for less readily observable external parameters. finally, other factors such as model
assumptions, market dislocations and unexpected correlations can affect estimates of fair value.
imprecision in estimating these factors can impact the amount of revenue or loss recorded for a
particular position.
trading and available-for-sale portfolios
substantially all of the firms securities held for trading and investment purposes (long
positions) and securities that the firm has sold to other parties but does not own (short
positions) are valued based on quoted market prices. however, certain securities are less actively
traded and, therefore, are not always able to be valued based on quoted market prices. the
determination of their fair value requires management judgment, as this determination may require
benchmarking to similar instruments or analyzing default and recovery rates. examples include
certain collateralized mortgage and debt obligations and high-yield debt securities.
as few derivative contracts are listed on an exchange, the majority of the firms derivative
positions are valued using internally developed models that use as their basis readily observable
market parameters  that is, parameters that are actively quoted and can be validated to external
sources, including industry-pricing services. certain derivatives, however, are valued based on
models with significant unobservable market parameters  that is, parameters that may be estimated
and are, therefore, subject to management judgment to substantiate the model valuation. these
instruments are normally either less actively traded or trade activity is one-way. examples include
long-dated interest rate or currency swaps, where swap rates may be unobservable for longer
maturities, and certain credit products, where correlation and recovery rates are unobservable. due
to the lack of observable market data, the firm defers the initial trading profit for these
financial instruments. the deferred profit is recognized in trading revenue on a systematic basis
and when observable market data becomes available. management judgment includes recording fair
value adjustments (i.e., reductions) to model valuations to account for parameter uncertainty when
valuing complex or less actively traded derivative transactions. the following table summarizes the
firms trading and available-for-sale portfolios by valuation methodology at december31, 2004:
trading assets
trading liabilities
securities
securities
afs
purchased(a)
derivatives(b)
sold(a)
derivatives(b)
securities
fair value based on:
quoted market prices
%
%
%
%
%
internal models with significant
observable market parameters
internal models with significant
unobservable market parameters
total
%
%
%
%
%
(a)
reflected as debt and equity instruments on the firms consolidated balance sheets.
(b)
based on gross mark-to-market valuations of the firms derivatives portfolio prior to netting
positions pursuant to fin 39, as cross-product netting is not relevant to an analysis based upon
valuation methodologies.
to ensure that the valuations are appropriate, the firm has various controls in
place. these include: an independent review and approval of valuation models; detailed review and
explanation for profit and loss analyzed daily and over time; decomposing the model valuations for
certain structured derivative instruments into their components and benchmarking valuations, where
possible, to similar products; and validating valuation estimates through actual cash settlement.
as markets and products develop and the pricing for certain derivative products becomes more
transparent, the firm refines its valuation methodologies. the valuation control group within the
finance area, a group independent of the risk-taking function, is responsible for reviewing the
accuracy of the valuations of positions taken within the investment bank.
for a discussion of market risk management, including the model review process, see market risk
management on pages 70-74 of this annual report. for further details regarding the firms valuation
methodologies, see note 29 on pages 121-124 of this annual report.
loans held-for-sale
the fair value of loans in the held-for-sale portfolio is generally based on observable market
prices of similar instruments, including bonds, credit derivatives and loans with similar
characteristics. if market prices are not available, fair value is based on the estimated cash
flows, adjusted for credit risk that is discounted using a rate appropriate for each maturity that
incorporates the effects of interest rate changes.
private equity investments
valuation of private investments held primarily by the private equity business within corporate
requires significant management judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, inherent lack
of liquidity and the long-term nature of such assets. private investments are initially valued
based on cost. the carrying values of private investments are adjusted from cost to reflect both
positive and negative changes evidenced by financing events with third-party capital providers. in
addition, these investments are subject to ongoing
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
impairment reviews by private equitys senior investment professionals. a variety of factors are
reviewed and monitored to assess impairment including, but not limited to, operating performance
and future expectations, industry valuations of comparable public companies, changes in market
outlook and the third-party financing environment over time. the valuation control group within the
finance area is responsible for reviewing the accuracy of the carrying values of private
investments held by private equity. for additional information about private equity investments,
see the private equity risk management discussion on page 76 and note 9 on pages 98-100 of this
annual report.
msrs and certain other retained interests in securitizations
msrs and certain other retained interests from securitization activities do not trade in an active, open market with readily
observable prices. for example, sales of msrs do occur, but the precise terms and conditions are
typically not readily available. accordingly, the firm estimates the fair value of msrs and certain
other retained interests in securitizations using a discounted future cash flow model. for msrs,
the model considers portfolio characteristics, contractually specified servicing fees and
prepayment assumptions, delinquency rates, late charges, other ancillary revenues, costs to service
and other economic factors. for other retained interests in securitizations (such as interest-only
strips), the model is generally based on projections of finance charges related to the securitized
assets, net credit losses, average life, and contractual interest paid to the third-party
investors. changes in the assumptions used may have a significant impact on the firms valuation of
retained interests. management believes that the fair values and related assumptions utilized in
the models are comparable to those used by other market participants. for a further discussion of
the most significant assumptions used to value retained interests in securitizations and msrs, as
well as the applicable stress tests for those assumptions, see notes 13 and 15 on pages 103-106 and
109-111, respectively, of this annual report.
goodwill impairment
under sfas 142, goodwill must be allocated to reporting units and tested for impairment. the
firm tests goodwill for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or circumstances,
such as adverse changes in the business climate, indicate that there may be justification for
conducting an interim test. impairment testing is performed at the reporting-unit level (which is
generally one level below the six major business segments identified in note 31 on pages 126-127 of
this annual report, plus private equity which is included in corporate). the first part of the test
is a comparison, at the reporting unit level, of the fair value of each reporting unit to its
carrying amount, including goodwill. if the fair value is less than the carrying value, then the
second part of the test is needed to measure the amount of potential goodwill impairment. the
implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is calculated and compared to the carrying amount
of goodwill recorded in the firms financial records. if the carrying value of reporting unit
goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of that goodwill, then the firm would recognize an
impairment loss in the amount of the difference, which would be recorded as a charge against net
income.
the fair values of the reporting units are determined using discounted cash flow models based on
each reporting units internal forecasts. in addition, analysis using market-based trading and
transaction multiples, where available, are used to assess the reasonableness of the valuations
derived from the discounted cash flow models.
goodwill was not impaired as of december31, 2004 or december31, 2003, nor was any goodwill
written off during the years ended december31, 2004, 2003 and
2002. see note 15 on page 109 of this annual report for additional information related to the nature and accounting for goodwill
and the carrying values of goodwill by major business segment.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements discussion and analysis
jpmorgan chase & co.
nonexchange-traded commodity contracts at fair value
in the normal course of business, jpmorgan chase trades nonexchange-traded commodity
contracts. to determine the fair value of these contracts, the firm uses various fair value
estimation techniques, which are primarily based on internal models with significant observable
market parameters. the firms nonexchange-traded commodity contracts are primarily energy-related
contracts. the following table summarizes the changes in fair value for nonexchange-traded
commodity contracts for the year ended december31, 2004:
for the year ended
december 31, 2004 (in millions)
asset position
liability position
net fair value of contracts
outstanding at january1, 2004
$
1,497
$
effect of legally enforceable master
netting agreements
gross fair value of contracts
outstanding at january1, 2004
2,331
1,670
contracts realized or otherwise settled
during the period
(5,486
)
(4,139
)
fair value of new contracts
1,856
1,569
changes in fair values attributable to
changes in valuation techniques
and assumptions
other changes in fair value
5,052
4,132
gross fair value of contracts
outstanding at december31, 2004
3,753
3,232
effect of legally enforceable master
netting agreements
(2,304
)
(2,233
)
net fair value of contracts
outstanding at december31, 2004
$
1,449
$
the following table indicates the schedule of maturities of nonexchange-traded commodity contracts
at december31, 2004:
at december 31, 2004 (in millions)
asset position
liability position
maturity less than 1year
$
1,999
$
1,874
maturity 1-3years
1,266
1,056
maturity 4-5years
maturity in excess of 5years
gross fair value of contracts
outstanding at december31, 2004
3,753
3,232
effects of legally enforceable master
netting agreements
(2,304
)
(2,233
)
net fair value of contracts
outstanding at december31, 2004
$
1,449
$
accounting and reporting developments
accounting for income taxes  repatriation of foreign earnings under the american jobs creation act of 2004
in december2004, the fasb issued fsp sfas 109-2, which provides accounting and disclosure guidance
for the foreign earnings repatriation provision within the american jobs creation act of 2004 (the
act). the act was signed into law on october22, 2004.
the act creates a temporary incentive for u.s. companies to repatriate accumulated foreign earnings
at a substantially reduced u.s. effective tax rate by providing a dividends received deduction on
the repatriation of certain foreign earnings to the u.s. taxpayer (the repatriation provision).
the new deduction is subject to a number of limitations and requirements.
clarification to key elements of the repatriation provision from congress or the u.s. treasury
department may affect an enterprises evaluation of the effect of the act on its plan for
repatriation or reinvestment of foreign earnings. the fsp provides a practical exception to the
sfas 109 requirement to reflect the effect of a new tax law in the period of enactment, because of
the lack of clarification to certain provisions within the act and the timing of the enactment.
thus, companies have additional time to assess the effect of the act on its plan for reinvestment
or repatriation of foreign earnings for purposes of applying sfas 109. a company
should apply the provisions of sfas 109 (i.e., reflect the tax impact in the financial statements)
in the period in which it makes the decision to repatriate or reinvest unremitted foreign earnings
in accordance with the act. decisions can be made in stages (e.g., by foreign country). the
repatriation provision is effective for either the 2004 or 2005 tax years for calendar year
taxpayers.
the range of possible amounts that may be considered for repatriation under this provision is
between zero and $1.9billion. the firm is currently assessing the impact of the repatriation
provision and, at this time, cannot reasonably estimate the related range of income tax effects of
such repatriation provision. accordingly, the firm has not reflected the tax effect of the
repatriation provision in income tax expense or income tax liabilities.
accounting for share-based payments
in december2004, the fasb issued sfas 123r, which revises sfas 123 and supersedes apb 25.
accounting and reporting under sfas 123r is generally similar to the sfas 123 approach. however,
sfas 123r requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock
options, to be recognized in the income statement based on their fair values. pro forma disclosure
is no longer an alternative.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
the firm has continued to account for stock options that were outstanding as of december31,
2002 under apb 25 using the intrinsic value method. therefore, compensation expense for some
previously granted awards that was not recognized under sfas 123 will be recognized under sfas
123r. had the firm adopted sfas 123r in prior periods, the impact would have approximated the
impact of sfas 123 as described in the disclosure of pro forma net income and earnings per share as
presented in note 7 on page 97 of this annual report. sfas 123r must be adopted no later than july
1, 2005. sfas 123r permits adoption using one of two methods  modified prospective or modified
retrospective. the firm is currently evaluating both the timing and method of adopting the new
standard.
impairment of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities
in september2004, the fasb issued fsp eitf 03-1-1, indefinitely delaying the measurement
provisions of eitf 03-1. the disclosure requirements of eitf 03-1 remain effective and are included
in note 9 on pages 98-100 of this annual report. eitf 03-1 addresses issues related to
other-than-temporary impairment for securities classified as either available-for-sale or
held-to-maturity under sfas 115 (including individual securities and investments in mutual funds)
and for investments accounted for under the cost method. a proposed fsp addressing these issues was
issued by the fasb and is expected to be finalized in 2005. the impact of eitf 03-1, if any, to the
firms investment portfolios will not be known until the final consensus is issued.
accounting for interest rate lock commitments (irlcs)
irlcs associated with mortgages to be held for sale represent commitments to extend credit at
specified interest rates. on march9, 2004, the securities and exchange commission issued sab no.
105, which summarizes the views of the securities and exchange commission staff regarding the
application of u.s. gaap to loan commitments accounted for as derivative instruments. sab 105
states that the value of the servicing asset should not be included in the estimate of fair value
of irlcs. sab 105 is applicable for all irlcs accounted for as derivatives and entered into on or
after april1, 2004.
prior to april1, 2004, jpmorgan chase recorded irlcs at estimated fair value. the fair value of
irlcs included an estimate of the value of the loan servicing right inherent in the underlying
loan, net of the estimated costs to close the loan. effective april1, 2004, and as a result of sab
105, the firm no longer assigns fair value to irlcs on the date they are entered into, with any
initial gain being recognized upon the sale of the resultant loan. also in connection with sab 105,
the firm records any changes in the value of the irlcs, excluding the servicing asset component,
due to changes in interest rates after they are locked. adopting sab 105 did not have a material
impact on the firms 2004 consolidated financial statements.
accounting for certain loans or debt securities acquired in a transfer
in december2003, the aicpa issued sop 03-3, which requires that loans purchased at a discount
due to poor credit quality be recorded at fair value and prohibits the recognition of a loss
accrual or valuation allowance at the time of purchase. sop 03-3 also limits the yield that may be
accreted to the excess of the undiscounted expected cash flows over the initial investment in the
loan. subsequent increases in expected cash flows are recognized prospectively through an
adjustment of yield over its remaining life and decreases in expected cash flows are recognized as
an impairment. for jpmorgan chase entities, sop 03-3 became effective for loans or debt securities
acquired after december31, 2004.
accounting for postretirement health care plans that provide prescription drug benefits
in december2003, the medicare prescription drug, improvement and modernization act of 2003
(the act) was enacted. in may2004, the fasb issued fsp sfas 106-2, which provides guidance on
accounting for the act. for additional information, see note 6 on page 92-95 of this annual report.
in early 2005, the federal government issued additional guidance about how to apply certain
provisions of the act, which may lead to future accounting adjustments. such adjustments, however,
are not expected to be material.
accounting for variable interest entities
in december2003, the fasb issued a revision to fin 46 to address various technical corrections
and implementation issues that had arisen since the issuance of fin 46. effective march31, 2004,
jpmorgan chase implemented fin 46r for all vies, excluding certain investments made by its private
equity business. implementation of fin 46r did not have a material effect on the firms
consolidated financial statements.
the application of fin 46r involved significant judgement and interpretations by management. the
firm is aware of differing interpretations being developed among accounting professionals and the
eitf with regard to analyzing derivatives under fin 46r. managements current interpretation is
that derivatives should be evaluated by focusing on an economic analysis of the rights and
obligations of a vies assets, liabilities, equity, and other contracts, while considering: the
entitys activities and design; the terms of the derivative contract and the role it has with
entity; and whether the derivative contract creates and/or absorbs variability of the vie. the firm
will continue to monitor developing interpretations.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
jpmorgan chase & co.
management of jpmorgan chase & co. is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate
internal control over financial reporting. as defined in rules 13a-15(f) or 15d-15(f) under the
securities exchange act of 1934, internal control over financial reporting is a process designed
by, or under the supervision of, the firms principal executive, principal operating and principal
financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by jpmorgan chases board
of directors, management and other personnel, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america.
jpmorgan chases internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures
that (1)pertain to the maintenance of records, that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the firms assets; (2)provide reasonable assurance
that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the
firm are being made only in accordance with authorizations of jpmorgan chases management and
directors; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the firms assets that could have a material effect
on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
management has completed an assessment of the effectiveness of the firms internal control over
financial reporting as of december31, 2004. in making the assessment, management used the
framework in internal control  integrated framework promulgated by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission, commonly referred to as the coso criteria.
based on the assessment performed, management concluded that as of december31, 2004, jpmorgan
chases internal control over financial reporting was effective based upon the coso criteria.
additionally, based on managements assessment, the firm determined that there were no material
weaknesses in its internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2004.
managements assessment of the effectiveness of the firms internal control over financial
reporting as of december31, 2004 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, jpmorgan chases
independent registered public accounting firm, who also audited the firms financial statements as
of and for the year ended december31, 2004, as stated in their report which is included herein.
william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer
james dimon
president and chief operating officer
michael j. cavanagh
executive vice president and chief financial officer
february22, 2005
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
jpmorgan chase & co.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp  300  madison avenue  new york, ny 10017
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and stockholders of jpmorgan chase & co.:
we have completed an integrated audit of jpmorgan chase & co.s 2004 consolidated financial
statements and of its internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2004 and audits
of its 2003 and 2002 consolidated financial statements in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states). our opinions, based on our audits, are
presented below.
consolidated financial statements
in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and the related consolidated
statements of income, changes in stockholders equity and cash flows present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of jpmorgan chase & co. and its subsidiaries (the
company) at december31, 2004 and 2003, and the results of their operations and their cash flows
for each of the three years in the period ended december31, 2004 in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the united states of america. these financial statements are the
responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements based on our audits. we conducted our audits of these statements in accordance
with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit of financial statements
includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
internal control over financial reporting
also, in our opinion, managements assessment, included in the accompanying managements report on
internal control over financial reporting, that the company maintained effective internal control
over financial reporting as of december31, 2004 based on criteria established in internal control
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission (coso), is fairly stated, in all material respects, based on those criteria.
furthermore, in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal
control over financial reporting as of december31, 2004, based on criteria established in internal
control  integrated framework issued by coso. the companys management is responsible for
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting. our responsibility is to express opinions on managements assessment and on the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. we
conducted our audit of internal control over financial reporting in accordance with the standards
of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. an audit of internal control over
financial reporting includes obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial
reporting, evaluating managements assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other procedures as we consider necessary in
the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinions.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a
companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company
are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company;
and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
february22, 2005
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
consolidated statements of income
jpmorgan chase & co.
year ended december 31, (in millions, except per share data)(a)
revenue
investment banking fees
$
3,537
$
2,890
$
2,763
trading revenue
3,612
4,427
2,675
lending & deposit related fees
2,672
1,727
1,674
asset management, administration and commissions
7,967
5,906
5,754
securities/private equity gains
1,874
1,479
mortgage fees and related income
1,004
credit card income
4,840
2,466
2,307
other income
noninterest revenue
26,336
20,419
17,436
interest income
30,595
24,044
25,936
interest expense
13,834
11,079
13,758
net interest income
16,761
12,965
12,178
total net revenue
43,097
33,384
29,614
provision for credit losses
2,544
1,540
4,331
noninterest expense
compensation expense
14,506
11,387
10,693
occupancy expense
2,084
1,912
1,606
technology and communications expense
3,702
2,844
2,554
professional & outside services
3,862
2,875
2,587
marketing
1,335
other expense
2,859
1,694
1,802
amortization of intangibles
total noninterest expense before merger costs and litigation reserve charge
29,294
21,716
20,254
merger costs
1,365
1,210
litigation reserve charge
3,700
1,300
total noninterest expense
34,359
21,816
22,764
income before income tax expense
6,194
10,028
2,519
income tax expense
1,728
3,309
net income
$
4,466
$
6,719
$
1,663
net income applicable to common stock
$
4,414
$
6,668
$
1,612
net income per common share
basic earnings per share
$
1.59
$
3.32
$
0.81
diluted earnings per share
1.55
3.24
0.80
average basic shares
2,780
2,009
1,984
average diluted shares
2,851
2,055
2,009
cash dividends per common share
$
1.36
$
1.36
$
1.36
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these statements.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
consolidated balance sheets
jpmorgan chase & co.
at december 31, (in millions, except share data)
(a)
assets
cash and due from banks
$
35,168
$
20,268
deposits with banks
21,680
10,175
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
101,354
76,868
securities borrowed
47,428
41,834
trading assets (including assets pledged of $77,266 at december31, 2004, and $81,312 at december31, 2003)
288,814
252,871
securities:
available-for-sale (including assets pledged of $26,881 at december31, 2004, and $31,639 at december31, 2003)
94,402
60,068
held-to-maturity (fair value: $117 at december31, 2004, and $186 at december31, 2003)
interests in purchased receivables
31,722
4,752
loans
402,114
214,766
allowance for loan losses
(7,320
)
(4,523
)
loans, net of allowance for loan losses
394,794
210,243
private equity investments
7,735
7,250
accrued interest and accounts receivable
21,409
12,356
premises and equipment
9,145
6,487
goodwill
43,203
8,511
other intangible assets:
mortgage servicing rights
5,080
4,781
purchased credit card relationships
3,878
1,014
all other intangibles
5,726
other assets
45,600
52,573
total assets
$
1,157,248
$
770,912
liabilities
deposits:
u.s. offices:
noninterest-bearing
$
129,257
$
73,154
interest-bearing
261,673
125,855
non-u.s. offices:
noninterest-bearing
6,931
6,311
interest-bearing
123,595
121,172
total deposits
521,456
326,492
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
127,787
113,466
commercial paper
12,605
14,284
other borrowed funds
9,039
8,925
trading liabilities
151,207
149,448
accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities (including the allowance for lending-related
commitments of $492 at december31, 2004, and $324 at december31, 2003)
75,722
45,066
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies
48,061
12,295
long-term debt
95,422
48,014
junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures held by trusts that issued guaranteed capital debt securities
10,296
6,768
total liabilities
1,051,595
724,758
commitments and contingencies (see note 25 of this annual report)
stockholders equity
preferred stock
1,009
common stock (authorized 9,000,000,000 shares and 4,500,000,000 shares
at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively; issued 3,584,747,502 shares and
2,044,436,509 shares at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively)
3,585
2,044
capital surplus
72,801
13,512
retained earnings
30,209
29,681
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
(208
)
(30
)
treasury stock, at cost (28,556,534 shares at december31, 2004, and 1,816,495 shares at december31, 2003)
(1,073
)
(62
)
total stockholders equity
105,653
46,154
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
1,157,248
$
770,912
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these statements.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
consolidated statements of changes in stockholders equity
jpmorgan chase & co.
year ended december 31, (in millions, except per share data)(a)
preferred stock
balance at beginning of year
$
1,009
$
1,009
$
1,009
redemption of preferred stock
(670
)
balance at end of year
1,009
1,009
common stock
balance at beginning of year
2,044
2,024
1,997
issuance of common stock
issuance of common stock for purchase accounting acquisitions
1,469
balance at end of year
3,585
2,044
2,024
capital surplus
balance at beginning of year
13,512
13,222
12,495
issuance of common stock and options for purchase accounting acquisitions
55,867
shares issued and commitments to issue common stock for employee stock-based
awards and related tax effects
3,422
balance at end of year
72,801
13,512
13,222
retained earnings
balance at beginning of year
29,681
25,851
26,993
net income
4,466
6,719
1,663
cash dividends declared:
preferred stock
(52
)
(51
)
(51
)
common stock ($1.36 per share each year)
(3,886
)
(2,838
)
(2,754
)
balance at end of year
30,209
29,681
25,851
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
balance at beginning of year
(30
)
1,227
(442
)
other comprehensive income (loss)
(178
)
(1,257
)
1,669
balance at end of year
(208
)
(30
)
1,227
treasury stock, at cost
balance at beginning of year
(62
)
(1,027
)
(953
)
purchase of treasury stock
(738
)
reissuance from treasury stock
1,082
share repurchases related to employee stock-based awards
(273
)
(117
)
(181
)
balance at end of year
(1,073
)
(62
)
(1,027
)
total stockholders equity
$
105,653
$
46,154
$
42,306
comprehensive income
net income
$
4,466
$
6,719
$
1,663
other comprehensive income (loss)
(178
)
(1,257
)
1,669
comprehensive income
$
4,288
$
5,462
$
3,332
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these statements.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
consolidated statements of cash flows
jpmorgan chase & co.
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
operating activities
net income
$
4,466
$
6,719
$
1,663
adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
provision for credit losses
2,544
1,540
4,331
depreciation and amortization
3,835
3,101
2,979
deferred tax (benefit)provision
(827
)
1,428
1,636
investment securities (gains)losses
(338
)
(1,446
)
(1,563
)
private equity unrealized (gains)losses
(766
)
(77
)
net change in:
trading assets
(48,703
)
(2,671
)
(58,183
)
securities borrowed
(4,816
)
(7,691
)
2,437
accrued interest and accounts receivable
(2,391
)
1,809
other assets
(17,588
)
(9,916
)
6,182
trading liabilities
29,764
15,769
25,402
accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities
13,277
5,973
(11,664
)
other operating adjustments
(262
)
net cash (used in) provided by operating activities
(21,805
)
14,601
(25,134
)
investing activities
net change in:
deposits with banks
(4,196
)
(1,233
)
3,801
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
(13,101
)
(11,059
)
(2,082
)
other change in loans
(136,851
)
(171,779
)
(98,695
)
held-to-maturity securities:
proceeds
purchases
(40
)
available-for-sale securities:
proceeds from maturities
45,197
10,548
5,094
proceeds from sales
134,534
315,738
219,385
purchases
(173,745
)
(301,854
)
(244,547
)
loans due to sales and securitizations
108,637
170,870
97,004
net cash received (used)in business acquisitions
13,839
(669
)
(72
)
all other investing activities, net
2,544
1,635
(3,277
)
net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
(23,076
)
12,418
(23,344
)
financing activities
net change in:
deposits
52,082
21,851
11,103
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
7,065
(56,017
)
41,038
commercial paper and other borrowed funds
(4,343
)
(4,675
)
proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt and capital debt securities
25,344
17,195
11,971
repayments of long-term debt and capital debt securities
(16,039
)
(8,316
)
(12,185
)
net issuance of stock and stock-based awards
1,213
redemption of preferred stock
(670
)
redemption of preferred stock of subsidiary
(550
)
treasury stock purchased
(738
)
cash dividends paid
(3,927
)
(2,865
)
(2,784
)
all other financing activities, net
(26
)
net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
59,596
(26,251
)
44,643
effect of exchange rate changes on cash and due from banks
net increase (decrease)in cash and due from banks
14,900
1,050
(3,382
)
cash and due from banks at the beginning of the year
20,268
19,218
22,600
cash and due from banks at the end of the year
$
35,168
$
20,268
$
19,218
cash interest paid
$
13,384
$
10,976
$
13,534
cash income taxes paid
$
1,477
$
1,337
$
1,253
note:
the fair values of noncash assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the merger with
bank one were $320.9billion and $277.0billion, respectively. approximately 1,469million shares
of common stock, valued at approximately $57.3billion, were issued in connection with the merger
with bank one.
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of these statements.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
note 1  basis of presentation
jpmorgan chase & co. (jpmorgan chase or the
firm), a financial holding company incorporated
under delaware law in 1968, is a leading global
financial services firm and one of the largest
banking institutions in the united states, with
operations in more than 50 countries. the firm is a
leader in investment banking, financial services
for consumers and businesses, financial transaction
processing, investment management, private banking
and private equity. for a discussion of the firms
business segment information, see note 31 on pages
126-127 of this annual report.
the accounting and financial reporting policies of
jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries conform to
accounting principles generally accepted in the
united states of america (u.s. gaap) and
prevailing industry practices. additionally, where
applicable, the policies conform to the accounting
and reporting guidelines prescribed by bank
regulatory authorities.
certain amounts in the prior periods have been
reclassified to conform to the current
presentation.
consolidation
the consolidated financial statements include
accounts of jpmorgan chase and other entities in
which the firm has a controlling financial
interest. all material intercompany balances and
transactions have been eliminated.
the usual condition for a controlling financial
interest is ownership of a majority of the voting
interests of an entity. however, a controlling
financial interest may also exist in entities,
such as special purpose entities (spes),
through arrangements that do not involve
controlling voting interests.
spes are an important part of the financial
markets, providing market liquidity by facilitating
investors access to specific portfolios of assets
and risks. they are, for example, critical to the
functioning of the mortgage- and asset-backed
securities and commercial paper markets. spes may
be organized as trusts, partnerships or
corporations and are typically set up for a single,
discrete purpose. spes are not typically operating
entities and usually have a limited life and no
employees. the basic spe structure involves a
company selling assets to the spe. the spe funds
the purchase of those assets by issuing securities
to investors. the legal documents that govern the
transaction describe how the cash earned on the
assets must be allocated to the spes investors and
other parties that have rights to those cash flows.
spes can be structured to be bankruptcy-remote,
thereby insulating investors from the impact of the
creditors of other entities, including the seller
of the assets.
there are two different accounting frameworks
applicable to spes; the qualifying spe (qspe)
framework under sfas 140; and the variable interest
entity (vie) framework under fin 46r. the
applicable framework depends on the nature of the
entity and the firms relation to that entity. the
qspe framework is applicable when an entity
transfers (sells)financial assets to an spe
meeting certain criteria as defined in sfas 140.
these criteria are designed to ensure that the
activities of the entity are essentially
predetermined in their entirety at the inception of
the vehicle and that the transferor of the
financial assets cannot exercise control over the
entity and the assets therein. entities meeting
these criteria are not consolidated by the
transferor or other counterparty, as long as the
entity does not have the unilateral ability to
liquidate or to cause it to no longer meet the qspe
criteria. the firm primarily follows the
qspe model for securitizations of its residential
and commercial mortgages, credit card loans and
automobile loans. for further details, see note 13
on pages 103-106 of this annual report.
when the spe does not meet the qspe criteria,
consolidation is assessed pursuant to fin 46r.
under fin 46r, a vie is defined as an entity that:
(1)lacks enough equity investment at risk to
permit the entity to finance its activities without
additional subordinated financial support from
other parties, (2)has equity owners that lack the
right to make significant decisions affecting the
entitys operations, and/or (3)has equity owners
that do not have an obligation to absorb or the
right to receive the entitys losses or returns.
fin 46r requires a variable interest holder (i.e.,
a counterparty to a vie) to consolidate the vie if
that party will absorb a majority of the expected
losses of the vie, receive a majority of the
residual returns of the vie, or both. this party is
considered the primary beneficiary of the entity.
the determination of whether the firm meets the
criteria to be considered the primary beneficiary
of a vie requires an evaluation of all transactions
(such as investments, liquidity commitments,
derivatives and fee arrangements) with the entity
and an expected loss calculation when necessary.
for further details, see note 14 on pages 106-109
of this annual report.
prior to the firms adoption of fin 46 on july1,
2003, the decision of whether or not to consolidate
depended on the applicable accounting principles
for non-qspes, including a determination regarding
the nature and amount of investment made by third
parties in the spe. consideration was given to,
among other factors, whether a third party had made
a substantive equity investment in the spe; which
party had voting rights, if any; who made decisions
about the assets in the spe; and who was at risk of
loss. the spe was consolidated if jpmorgan chase
retained or acquired control over the risks and
rewards of the assets in the spe.
financial assets are derecognized when they meet
the accounting sale criteria. those criteria are:
(1)the assets are legally isolated from the firms
creditors; (2)the entity can pledge or exchange
the financial assets or, if the entity is a qspe,
its investors can pledge or exchange their
interests; and (3)the firm does not maintain
effective control via an agreement to repurchase
the assets before their maturity or have the
ability to unilaterally cause the holder to return
the assets. all significant transactions and
retained interests between the firm, qspes and
nonconsolidated vies are reflected on jpmorgan
chases consolidated balance sheets or in the notes
to consolidated financial statements.
investments in companies that are considered to be
voting-interest entities under fin 46r, in which
the firm has significant influence over operating
and financing decisions (generally defined as
owning a voting or economic interest of 20% to 50%)
are accounted for in accordance with the equity
method of accounting. these investments are
generally included in other assets, and the firms
share of income or loss is included in other
income. for a discussion of private equity
investments, see note 9 on pages 98-100 of this annual
report.
assets held for clients in an agency or
fiduciary capacity by the firm are not assets of
jpmorgan chase and are not included in the
consolidated balance sheets.
use of estimates in the preparation of consolidated financial statements
the preparation of consolidated financial
statements requires management to make estimates
and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of
assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses
and disclosures of contingent assets and
liabilities. actual results could be different from
these estimates.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in foreign
currencies are translated into u.s. dollars using
applicable rates of exchange. jpmorgan chase
translates revenues and expenses using exchange
rates at the transaction date.
gains and losses relating to translating functional
currency financial statements for u.s. reporting
are included in other comprehensive income (loss)
within stockholders equity. gains and losses
relating to nonfunctional currency transactions,
including non-u.s. operations where the functional
currency is the u.s. dollar and operations in
highly inflationary environments, are reported in
the consolidated statements of income.
statements of cash flows
for jpmorgan chases consolidated statements of
cash flows, cash and cash equivalents are defined
as those amounts included in cash and due from
banks.
significant accounting policies
the following table identifies jpmorgan chases
significant accounting policies and the note and
page where a detailed description of each policy
can be found:
trading activities
note 3
page 90
other noninterest revenue
note 4
page 91
pension and other postretirement employee
benefit plans
note 6
page 92
employee stock-based incentives
note 7
page 95
securities and private equity investments
note 9
page 98
securities financing activities
note 10
page 100
loans
note 11
page 101
allowance for credit losses
note 12
page 102
loan securitizations
note 13
page 103
variable interest entities
note 14
page 106
goodwill and other intangible assets
note 15
page 109
premises and equipment
note 16
page 111
income taxes
note 22
page 115
derivative instruments and hedging activities
note 26
page 118
off-balance sheet lending-related financial
instruments and guarantees
note 27
page 119
fair value of financial instruments
note 29
page 121
note 2  business changes and developments
merger with bank one corporation
bank one corporation merged with and into jpmorgan
chase (the merger) on july1, 2004. as a result
of the merger, each outstanding share of common
stock of bank one was converted in a
stock-for-stock exchange into 1.32 shares of common
stock of jpmorgan chase; cash payments for
fractional shares were approximately $3.1million.
jpmorgan chase stockholders kept their shares,
which remained outstanding and unchanged as shares
of jpmorgan chase following the merger. key
objectives of the merger were to provide the firm
with a more balanced business mix and greater
geographic diversification. the merger was
accounted for using the purchase method of
accounting, which requires that the assets and
liabilities of bank one be fair valued as of july
1, 2004. the purchase price to complete the merger
was $58.5billion.
the purchase price of the merger has been allocated
to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed
using their fair values at the merger date. the
computation of the purchase price and the
allocation of the purchase price to the net assets
of bank one  based on their respective fair values
as of july1, 2004  and the resulting goodwill are
presented below. the allocation of the purchase
price may be modified through june30, 2005, as
more information is obtained about the fair value
of assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
(in millions, except per share amounts)
july 1, 2004
purchase price
bank one common stock exchanged
1,113
exchange ratio
1.32
jpmorgan chase common stock issued
1,469
average purchase price per
jpmorgan chase common share(a)
$
39.02
$
57,336
fair value of employee stock awards and
direct acquisition costs
1,210
total purchase price
$
58,546
net assets acquired:
bank one stockholders equity
$
24,156
bank one goodwill and other intangible assets
(2,754
)
subtotal
21,402
adjustments to reflect assets
acquired at fair value:
loans and leases
(2,261
)
private equity investments
(75
)
identified intangibles
8,665
pension plan assets
(778
)
premises and equipment
(427
)
other assets
(262
)
amounts to reflect liabilities
assumed at fair value:
deposits
(373
)
deferred income taxes
postretirement plan liabilities
(49
)
other liabilities
(975
)
long-term debt
(1,234
)
24,400
goodwill resulting from merger
$
34,146
(a)
the value of the firms common stock
exchanged with bank one shareholders was based on
the average closing prices of the firms common
stock for the two days prior to, and the two days
following, the announcement of the merger on
january14, 2004.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
unaudited condensed statement of net assets acquired
the following unaudited condensed statement of
net assets acquired reflects the fair value of
bank one net assets as of july1, 2004.
(in millions) july 1, 2004
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
14,669
securities
70,512
interests in purchased receivables
30,184
loans, net of allowance
129,650
goodwill and other intangible assets
42,811
all other assets
47,731
total assets
$
335,557
liabilities
deposits
$
164,848
short-term borrowings
9,811
all other liabilities
61,472
long-term debt
40,880
total liabilities
277,011
net assets acquired
$
58,546
acquired, identifiable intangible assets
components of the fair value of acquired,
identifiable intangible assets as of july1, 2004
were as follows:
weighted average
useful life
(in millions)
fair value
life (in years)
(in years)
core deposit intangibles
$
3,650
5.1
up to 10
purchased credit card relationships
3,340
4.6
up to 10
other credit card-related intangibles
4.6
up to 10
other customer relationship intangibles
4.6-10.5
up to 20
subtotal
8,155
5.1
up to 20
indefinite-lived asset management
intangibles
na
na
total
$
8,665
5.1
unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information
the following unaudited pro forma condensed
combined financial information presents the results
of operations of the firm had the merger taken
place at january1, 2003.
year ended december 31, (in millions)
noninterest revenue
$
31,175
$
28,966
net interest income
21,366
21,715
total net revenue
52,541
50,681
provision for credit losses
2,727
3,570
noninterest expense
40,504
33,136
income before income tax expense
9,310
13,975
net income
$
6,544
$
9,330
net income per common share:
basic
$
1.85
$
2.66
diluted
1.81
2.61
average common shares outstanding:
basic
3,510
3,495
diluted
3,593
3,553
other acquisitions
during 2004, jpmorgan chase purchased the
electronic financial services (efs) business
from citigroup and acquired a majority interest
in hedge fund manager highbridge capital
management (highbridge).
note 3  trading activities
trading assets include debt and equity
securities held for trading purposes that jpmorgan
chase owns (long positions). trading liabilities
include debt and equity securities that the firm
has sold to other parties but does not own (short
positions). the firm is obligated to purchase
securities at a future date to cover the short
positions. included in trading assets and trading
liabilities are the reported receivables
(unrealized gains) and payables (unrealized losses)
related to derivatives. these amounts include the
effect of master netting agreements as permitted
under fin 39. effective january1, 2004, the firm
elected to report the fair value of derivative
assets and liabilities net of cash received and
paid, respectively, under legally enforceable
master netting agreements. at december31, 2004,
the amount of cash received and paid was
approximately $32.2billion and $22.0billion,
respectively. trading positions are carried at fair
value on the consolidated balance sheets.
trading revenue
year ended december 31,(a) (in millions)
fixed income and other(b)
$
2,976
$
4,046
$
2,527
equities(c)
credit portfolio(d)
(161
)
(383
)
(183
)
total
$
3,612
$
4,427
$
2,675
(a)
2004 results include six months of the
combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect
the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes bonds and commercial paper and various
types of interest rate derivatives as well as
foreign exchange and commodities.
(c)
includes equity
securities and equity
derivatives.
(d)
includes credit
derivatives.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
trading assets and liabilities
the following table presents the fair value
of trading assets and trading liabilities for
the dates indicated:
december 31, (in millions)
2003(a)
trading assets
debt and equity instruments:
u.s. government, federal agencies/corporations
obligations and municipal securities
$
43,866
$
44,678
certificates of deposit, bankers acceptances
and commercial paper
7,341
5,765
debt securities issued by non-u.s. governments
50,699
36,243
corporate securities and other
120,926
82,434
total debt and equity instruments
222,832
169,120
derivative receivables:
interest rate
45,892
60,176
foreign exchange
7,939
9,760
equity
6,120
8,863
credit derivatives
2,945
3,025
commodity
3,086
1,927
total derivative receivables
65,982
83,751
total trading assets
$
288,814
$
252,871
trading liabilities
debt and equity instruments(b)
$
87,942
$
78,222
derivative payables:
interest rate
41,075
49,189
foreign exchange
8,969
10,129
equity
9,096
8,203
credit derivatives
2,499
2,672
commodity
1,626
1,033
total derivative payables
63,265
71,226
total trading liabilities
$
151,207
$
149,448
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
primarily represents securities sold, not yet purchased.
average trading assets and liabilities were as follows for the periods indicated:
year ended december 31,(a) (in millions)
trading
assets  debt and
equity instruments
$
200,467
$
154,597
$
149,173
trading
assets  derivative receivables
59,521
85,628
73,641
trading
liabilities  debt and
equity instruments(b)
$
82,204
$
72,877
$
64,725
trading
liabilities  derivative payables
52,761
67,783
57,607
(a)
2004 results include six months of the
combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect
the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
primarily represents securities sold, not yet purchased.
note 4  other noninterest revenue
investment banking fees
this revenue category includes advisory and equity
and debt underwriting fees. advisory fees are
recognized as revenue when related services are
performed. underwriting fees are recognized as
revenue when the firm has rendered all services to
the issuer and is entitled to collect the fee from
the issuer, as long as there are no other
contingencies associated with the fee (e.g., not
contingent on the customer obtaining financing).
underwriting fees are net of syndicate expenses. in
addition, the firm recognizes credit arrangement
and syndication fees as revenue after satisfying
certain retention, timing and yield criteria.
the following table presents the components of investment banking fees:
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
underwriting:
equity
$
$
$
debt
1,859
1,549
1,543
total underwriting
2,639
2,248
2,007
advisory
total
$
3,537
$
2,890
$
2,763
(a)
2004 results include six months of the
combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect
the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
lending & deposit related fees
this revenue category includes fees from loan
commitments, standby letters of credit, financial
guarantees, deposit services in lieu of
compensating balances, cash management-related
activities or transactions, deposit accounts, and
other loan servicing activities. these fees are
recognized over the period in which the related
service is provided.
asset management, administration and commissions
this revenue category includes fees from investment
management and related services, custody and
institutional trust services, brokerage services,
insurance premiums and commissions and other
products. these fees are recognized over the period
in which the related service is provided.
mortgage fees and related income
this revenue category includes fees and income
derived from mortgage origination, sales and
servicing; and includes the effect of risk
management activities associated with the mortgage
pipeline, warehouse and the mortgage servicing rights
(msrs) asset (excluding
gains and losses on the sale of available-for-sale
(afs) securities). origination fees and gains or
losses on loan sales are recognized in income upon
sale. mortgage servicing fees are recognized over
the period the related service is provided, net of
amortization. valuation changes in the mortgage
pipeline, warehouse, msr asset and corresponding
risk management instruments are generally adjusted
through earnings as these changes occur. net
interest income and securities gains and losses on
afs securities used in mortgage-related risk
management activities are not included in mortgage
fees and related income. for a further discussion
of msrs, see note 15 on pages 109-111 of this
annual report.
credit card income
this revenue category includes interchange income
(i.e., transaction-processing fees) from credit and
debit cards, annual fees, and servicing fees earned
in connection with securitization activities. also
included in this category are volume-related
payments to partners and rewards expense. fee
revenues are recognized as earned, except for
annual fees, which are recognized over a 12-month
period.
credit card revenue sharing agreements
the firm has contractual agreements with numerous
affinity organizations and co-brand partners, which
grant to the firm exclusive rights to market to
their members or customers. these organizations and
partners provide to the firm their endorsement of
the credit card programs, mailing lists, and may
also conduct marketing activities, and provide
awards under the various credit card programs. the
terms of these agreements generally range from 3 to
10years. the economic incentives the firm pays to
the endorsing organizations and partners typically
include payments based on new accounts, activation,
charge volumes, and the cost of their marketing
activities and awards.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
the firm recognizes the portion of its payments
based on new accounts to the affinity organizations
and co-brand partners as deferred loan origination
costs. the firm defers these costs and amortizes
them over 12months. the firm expenses payments
based on marketing efforts performed by the
endorsing organization or partner to activate a new
account after the account has been originated as
incurred. payments based on charge volumes and
considered by the firm as revenue sharing with the
affinity organizations and co-brand partners, are deducted from credit card income as the related
revenue is earned.
note 5  interest income and interest expense
details of interest income and interest expense were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
interest income
loans
$
16,771
$
11,812
$
12,709
securities
3,377
3,542
3,367
trading assets
7,527
6,592
6,798
federal funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements
1,627
1,497
2,078
securities borrowed
deposits with banks
interests in purchased receivables
total interest income
30,595
24,044
25,936
interest expense
interest-bearing deposits
4,600
3,604
5,253
short-term and other liabilities
6,290
5,871
7,038
long-term debt
2,466
1,498
1,467
beneficial interests issued by
consolidated vies
total interest expense
13,834
11,079
13,758
net interest income
16,761
12,965
12,178
provision for credit losses
2,544
1,540
4,331
net interest income after provision
for credit losses
$
14,217
$
11,425
$
7,847
(a)
2004 results include six months of the
combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect
the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
note 6  pension and other postretirement employee benefit plans
new u.s.-based postretirement plans were
approved in 2004 and the prior plans of jpmorgan
chase and bank one were merged as of december31,
2004.
the firms defined benefit pension plans are
accounted for in accordance with sfas 87 and
sfas 88. its postretirement medical and life
insurance plans are accounted for in accordance
with sfas 106.
the firm uses a measurement date of december31 for
its pension and other postretirement employee
benefit plans. the fair value of plan assets is
used to determine the expected return on plan
assets for its u.s. and non-u.s. defined benefit
pension plans. for the u.s. postretirement benefit
plan, the market-related value, which recognizes
changes in fair value over a five-year period, is
used to determine the expected return
on plan assets. unrecognized net actuarial gains
and losses are amortized over the average remaining
service period of active plan participants, if
required.
in december2003, the medicare prescription drug,
improvement and modernization act of 2003 (the
act) was enacted. the act established a
prescription drug benefit under medicare (medicare
partd) and a federal subsidy to sponsors of
retiree health care benefit plans that provide a
benefit that is at least actuarially equivalent to
medicare partd. the firm has determined that
benefits provided to certain participants will be
at least actuarially equivalent to medicare partd
and has reflected the estimated effects of the
subsidy in its financial statements and disclosures
retroactive to the beginning of 2004 (july1, 2004
for bank one plans) in accordance with fsp sfas
106-2.
defined benefit pension plans
the firm has a qualified noncontributory u.s.
defined benefit pension plan that provides benefits
to substantially all u.s. employees. the u.s. plan
employs a cash balance formula, in the form of
salary and interest credits, to determine the
benefits to be provided at retirement, based on
eligible compensation and years of service.
employees begin to accrue plan benefits after
completing one year of service, and benefits vest
after five years of service. the firm also offers
benefits through defined benefit pension plans to
qualifying employees in certain non-u.s. locations
based on eligible compensation and years of
service.
it is the firms policy to fund its pension plans
in amounts sufficient to meet the requirements
under applicable employee benefit and local tax
laws. in 2004, the firm made a cash contribution to
its u.s. defined benefit pension plan of $1.1
billion on april1, funding the plan to the maximum
allowable amount under applicable tax law.
additionally, the firm made cash contributions
totaling $40million to fully fund the accumulated
benefit obligations of certain non-u.s. defined
benefit pension plans as of december31, 2004.
based on the current funded status of the u.s. and
non-u.s. pension plans, the firm does not expect to
make significant contributions in 2005.
postretirement medical and life insurance
jpmorgan chase offers postretirement medical and
life insurance benefits to certain retirees and
qualifying u.s. employees. these benefits vary
with length of service and date of hire and
provide for limits on the firms share of covered
medical benefits. the medical benefits are
contributory, while the life insurance benefits
are noncontributory. postretirement medical
benefits are also offered to qualifying u.k.
employees.
jpmorgan chases u.s. postretirement benefit
obligation is partially funded with
corporate-owned life insurance (coli) purchased
on the lives of eligible employees and retirees.
while the firm owns the coli policies, coli
proceeds (death benefits, withdrawals and other
distributions) may be used only to reimburse the
firm for its net postretirement benefit claim
payments and related administrative expenses. the
u.k. postretirement benefit plan is unfunded.
the following tables present the funded status and
amounts reported on the consolidated balance
sheets, the accumulated benefit obligation and the
components of net periodic benefit costs reported
in the consolidated statements of income for the
firms u.s. and non-u.s. defined benefit pension
and postretirement benefit plans.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
defined benefit pension plans
u.s.
non-u.s.
postretirement benefit plans(d)
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)(c)
(b)
change in benefit obligation
benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
(4,633
)
$
(4,241
)
$
(1,659
)
$
(1,329
)
$
(1,252
)
$
(1,126
)
merger with bank one
(2,497
)
na
(25
)
na
(216
)
na
benefits earned during the year
(251
)
(180
)
(17
)
(16
)
(15
)
(15
)
interest cost on benefit obligations
(348
)
(262
)
(87
)
(74
)
(81
)
(73
)
plan amendments
(89
)
(1
)
employee contributions
(1
)
(36
)
(11
)
actuarial gain (loss)
(511
)
(262
)
(99
)
(125
)
(163
)
(134
)
benefits paid
curtailments
(8
)
(2
)
special termination benefits
(12
)
(1
)
(2
)
foreign exchange impact and other
(134
)
(167
)
(3
)
(4
)
benefit obligation at end of year
$
(7,594
)
$
(4,633
)
$
(1,969
)
$
(1,659
)
$
(1,577
)
$
(1,252
)
change in plan assets
fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
4,866
$
4,114
$
1,603
$
1,281
$
1,149
$
1,020
merger with bank one
3,280
na
na
na
actual return on plan assets
firm contributions
1,100
benefits paid
(555
)
(386
)
(64
)
(43
)
(31
)
(27
)
settlement payments
(12
)
foreign exchange impact and other
fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
9,637
(e)
$
4,866
(e)
$
1,889
$
1,603
$
1,302
$
1,149
reconciliation of funded status
funded status
$
2,043
$
$
(80
)
$
(56
)
$
(275
)
$
(103
)
unrecognized amounts:
net transition asset
(1
)
(1
)
prior service cost
(23
)
net actuarial (gain)loss
prepaid benefit cost reported in other assets
$
3,087
$
1,290
$
(f)
$
(f)
$
$
accumulated benefit obligation
$
(7,167
)
$
(4,312
)
$
(1,931
)
$
(1,626
)
na
na
(a)
effective july1, 2004, the firm assumed the obligations of heritage bank ones pension
and other postretirement plans. these plans were similar to those of jpmorgan chase and were merged
into the firms plans effective december31, 2004.
(b)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
the effect of the medicare prescription drug, improvement and modernization act of 2003
resulted in a $35million reduction in the accumulated other postretirement benefit obligation.
(d)
includes postretirement benefit obligation of $43million and $36million and postretirement
benefit liability (included in accrued expenses) of $57million and $54million at december31,
2004 and 2003, respectively, for the uk plan, which is unfunded.
(e)
at december31, 2004 and 2003, approximately $358million and $315million, respectively, of
u.s. plan assets relate to surplus assets of group annuity contracts.
(f)
at december31, 2004 and 2003, accrued expenses related to non-u.s. defined benefit pension
plans that jpmorgan chase elected not to pre-fund fully totaled $124million and $99million,
respectively.
defined benefit pension plans
u.s.
non-u.s.
postretirement benefit plans
for the year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
components of net periodic benefit costs
benefits earned during the period
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest cost on benefit obligations
expected return on plan assets
(556
)
(322
)
(358
)
(90
)
(83
)
(76
)
(86
)
(92
)
(98
)
amortization of unrecognized amounts:
prior service cost
net actuarial (gain)loss
(10
)
curtailment (gain)loss
(3
)
(8
)
settlement (gain)loss
(1
)
(2
)
special termination benefits
net periodic benefit costs reported in
compensation expense
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(b)
$
(1
)
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
the effect of the medicare prescription drug, improvement and modernization act of 2003 resulted in
a $5million reduction in the firms net periodic benefit costs.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
jpmorgan chase has a number of other defined
benefit pension plans (i.e., u.s. plans not subject
to title iv of the employee retirement income
security act). the most significant of these plans
is the excess retirement plan, pursuant to which
certain employees earn service credits on
compensation amounts above the maximum stipulated
by law. this plan is a nonqualified,
noncontributory u.s. pension plan with an unfunded
liability at december31, 2004 and 2003, in the
amount of $292million and $178million,
respectively. compensation expense related to the
firms other defined benefit pension plans totaled
$28million in 2004, $19million in 2003 and $15
million in 2002.
plan assumptions
jpmorgan chases expected long-term rate of return
for u.s. pension and other postretirement plan
assets is a blended average of its investment
advisors projected long-term (10years or more)
returns for the various asset classes, weighted by
the portfolio allocation. asset-class returns are
developed using a forward-looking building-block
approach and are not based strictly on historical
returns. equity returns are generally developed as
the sum of inflation, expected real earnings growth
and expected long-term dividend yield. bond returns
are generally developed as the sum of inflation,
real bond yields and risk spreads (as appropriate),
adjusted for the expected effect on returns from
changing yields. other asset-class returns are
derived from their relationship to the equity and
bond markets.
in the united kingdom, which represents the most
significant of the non-u.s. pension plans,
procedures similar to those in the united states
are used to develop the expected long-term rate of
return on pension plan assets, taking into
consideration local market conditions and the
specific allocation of plan assets. the expected
long-term rate of return on u.k. plan assets is an
average of projected long-term returns for each
asset class, selected by reference to the yield on
long-term u.k. government bonds and aa-rated
long-term corporate bonds, plus an equity risk
premium above the risk-free rate.
the discount rate used in determining the benefit
obligation under the u.s. pension and other
postretirement employee benefit plans is selected
by reference to the year-end moodys corporate aa
rate, as well as other high-quality indices with
similar duration to that of the respective plans
benefit obligations. the discount rate for the u.k.
postretirement plans is selected by reference to
the year-end iboxx  corporate aa 15-year-plus bond
rate.
the following tables present the weighted-average
annualized actuarial assumptions for the projected
and accumulated benefit obligations, and the
components of net periodic benefit costs for the
firms u.s. and non-u.s. defined benefit pension
and postretirement benefit plans, as of year-end.
u.s.
non-u.s.
for the year ended december 31,
weighted-average assumptions used to determine
benefit obligations
discount rate
5.75
%
6.00
%
2.00-5.30
%
2.00-5.40
%
rate of compensation increase
4.50
4.50
1.75-3.75
1.75-3.75
u.s.
non-u.s.
for the year ended december 31,
weighted-average assumptions used to determine net
periodic benefit costs
discount rate
6.00
%
6.50
%
7.25
%
2.00-5.75
%
1.50-5.60
%
2.50-6.00
%
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets:
pension
7.50-7.75
8.00
9.25
3.00-6.50
2.70-6.50
3.25-7.25
postretirement benefit
4.75-7.00
8.00
9.00
na
na
na
rate of compensation increase
4.25-4.50
4.50
4.50
1.75-3.75
1.25-3.00
2.00-4.00
the following tables present jpmorgan chases
assumed weighted-average medical benefits cost
trend rate, which is used to measure the expected
cost of benefits at year-end, and the effect of a
one-percentage-point change in the assumed medical
benefits cost trend rate.
december 31,
(a)
(a)
health care cost trend rate assumed
for next year
%
%
%
rate to which cost trend rate is assumed
to decline (ultimate trend rate)
year that rate reaches ultimate trend rate
(in millions)
1-percentage-
1-percentage-
for the year ended december 31,2004
point increase
point decrease
effect on total service and interest costs
$
$
(4
)
effect on postretirement benefit obligation
(62
)
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
at december31, 2004, the firm reduced the
discount rate used to determine its u.s. benefit
obligations to 5.75%. the firm also reduced the
2005 expected long-term rate of return on its u.s.
pension plan assets to 7.50%. the expected
long-term rate of return on the firms coli
postretirement plan assets remained at 7%; however,
with the merger of bank ones other postretirement
plan assets, the firms overall expected long-term
rate of return on u.s. postretirement plan assets
decreased to 6.80% to reflect a weighted average
expected rate of return for the merged plan. the
changes as of december31, 2004, to the discount
rate and the expected long-term rate of return on
plan assets is expected to increase 2005 u.s.
pension and other postretirement benefit expenses
by approximately $41million. the impact of any
changes to the discount rate and the expected
long-term rate of return on plan assets on non-u.s.
pension and other postretirement benefit expenses
is not expected to be material.
jpmorgan chases u.s. pension and other
postretirement benefit expenses are most sensitive
to the expected long-term rate of return on plan
assets. with all other assumptions held constant, a
25-basis point decline in the expected long-term
rate of return on u.s. plan assets would result in
an increase of approximately $25million in 2005
u.s. pension and other postretirement benefit
expenses. additionally, a 25-basis point decline in
the discount rate for the u.s. plans would result
in an increase in 2005 u.s. pension and other
postretirement benefit expenses of approximately
$16million and an increase in the related
projected benefit obligations of approximately $215
million.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
investment strategy and asset allocation
the investment policy for the firms postretirement
employee benefit plan assets is to optimize the
risk-return relationship as appropriate to the
respective plans needs and goals, using a global
portfolio of various asset classes diversified by
market segment, economic sector and issuer.
specifically, the goal is to optimize the asset mix
for future benefit obligations, while managing
various risk factors and each plans investment
return objectives. for example, long-duration fixed
income securities are included in the u.s.
qualified pension plans asset allocation, in
recognition of its long-duration obligations. plan
assets are managed by a combination of internal and
external investment managers and, on a quarterly
basis, are rebalanced to target, to the extent
economically practical.
the firms u.s. pension plan assets are held in
various trusts and are invested in well diversified
portfolios of equity (including u.s. large and
small capitalization and international equities),
fixed income (including corporate and
government
bonds), treasury inflation-indexed and high-yield
securities, cash equivalents and other securities.
non-u.s. pension plan assets are similarly invested
in well-diversified portfolios of equity, fixed
income and other securities. assets of the firms
coli policies, which are used to fund partially the
u.s. postretirement benefit plan, are held in
separate accounts with an insurance company and are
invested in equity and fixed income index funds. in
addition, tax-exempt municipal debt securities,
held in a trust, are used to fund the u.s.
postretirement benefit plan. assets used to fund
the firms u.s. and non-u.s. defined benefit
pension plans include $53million of jpmorgan chase
common stock in addition to jpmorgan chase common
stock held in connection with investments in
third-party stock-index funds.
the following table presents the weighted-average
asset allocation at december31 for the years
indicated, and the respective target allocation by
asset category, for the firms u.s. and non-u.s.
defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit
plans.
defined benefit pension plans
u.s.
non-u.s.(a)
postretirement benefit plans(b)
target
% of plan assets
target
% of plan assets
target
% of plan assets
december 31,
allocation
(c)
allocation
(c)
allocation
(c)
asset class
debt securities
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
equity securities
real estate
other
total
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
(a)
represents the u.k. defined benefit pension
plan only, as plans outside the u.k. are not
significant.
(b)
represents the u.s. postretirement benefit
plan only, as the u.k. plan is unfunded.
(c)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
estimated future benefit payments
the following table presents benefit payments
expected to be paid, which include the effect of
expected future service for the years indicated.
the postretirement medical and life insurance
payments are net of expected retiree
contributions and the estimated medicare partd
subsidy.
non-
u.s. and u.k.
year ended december 31,
u.s. pension
u.s. pension
postretirement
(in millions)
benefits
benefits
benefits
$
$
$
years 2010-2014
3,352
defined contribution plans
jpmorgan chase offers several defined contribution
plans in the u.s. and in certain non-u.s.
locations. the most significant of these is the
jpmorgan chase 401(k) savings plan, covering
substantially all u.s. employees. this plan allows
employees to make pre-tax contributions to
tax-deferred investment portfolios. the firm
matches eligible employee contributions up to a
certain percentage of benefits eligible
compensation per pay period, subject to plan and
legal limits. employees begin to receive matching
contributions after completing a specified service
requirement and are immediately vested in such
company contributions. the firms defined
contribution plans are administered in accordance
with applicable local laws and regulations.
compensation expense related to these plans totaled
$317million in 2004, $240million in 2003 and $251
million in 2002.
note 7  employee stock-based incentives
effective january1, 2003, jpmorgan chase
adopted sfas 123 using the prospective transition
method. sfas 123 requires all stock-based
compensation awards, including stock options and
stock-settled stock appreciation rights (sars),
to be accounted for at fair value. stock options
that were outstanding as of december31, 2002
continue to be accounted for under apb 25 using the
intrinsic value method. under this method, no
expense is recognized for stock options or sars
granted at the stock price on grant date, since
such options have no intrinsic value. the firm
currently uses the black-scholes valuation model to
estimate the fair value of stock options and sars.
compensation expense for restricted stock and
restricted stock units (rsus) is measured based
on the number of shares granted and the stock price
at the grant date. compensation expense is
recognized in earnings over the required service
period.
in connection with the merger, jpmorgan chase
converted all outstanding bank one employee
stock-based awards at the merger date, and those
awards became exercisable for or based upon
jpmorgan chase common stock. the number of awards
converted, and the exercise prices of those awards,
was adjusted to take into account the merger
exchange ratio of 1.32.
on december16, 2004, the fasb issued sfas 123r,
which revises sfas 123 and supersedes apb 25.
accounting and reporting under sfas 123r is
generally similar to the sfas 123 approach except
that sfas 123r requires all share-based payments to
employees, including grants of stock options and
sars, to be recognized in the income statement
based on their fair values. sfas 123r must be
adopted no later than july1, 2005. sfas 123r
permits adoption using one of two methods
modified prospective or modified retrospective. the
firm is currently evaluating both the timing and
method of adopting the new standard.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
key employee stock-based awards
jpmorgan chase grants long-term stock-based
incentive awards to certain key employees under two
plans (the lti plans): the 1996 long-term
incentive plan (the 1996 plan), as amended and
approved by shareholders in may2000, provides for
grants of stock options, sars, restricted stock and
rsu awards, and the stock option plan, a
nonshareholder-approved plan, provides for grants
of stock options and sars. in 2004, 14.5million
sars
settled only in shares and 2.2million nonqualified
stock options were granted under the 1996 plan.
under the lti plans, stock options and sars are
granted with an exercise price equal to jpmorgan
chases common stock price on the grant date.
generally, options and sars cannot be exercised
until at least one year after the grant date and
become exercisable over various periods as
determined at the time of the grant. these awards
generally expire 10years after the grant date.
the following table presents a summary of jpmorgan chases option and sar activity under the lti
plans during the last three years:
year ended december 31,(a)
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
(in thousands)
options/sars
exercise price
options
exercise price
options
exercise price
outstanding, january 1
294,026
$
39.88
298,731
$
40.84
272,304
$
41.23
granted
16,667
39.79
26,751
22.15
53,230
36.41
bank one conversion, july 1
111,287
29.63
na
na
na
na
exercised
(27,763
)
25.33
(14,574
)
17.47
(9,285
)
16.85
canceled
(17,887
)
46.68
(16,882
)
47.57
(17,518
)
45.59
outstanding, december 31
376,330
$
37.59
294,026
$
39.88
298,731
$
40.84
exercisable, december 31
246,945
$
36.82
176,163
$
37.88
144,421
$
34.91
(a)
2004 includes six months of awards for the combined firm and six months of awards for
heritage jpmorgan chase. all other periods reflect the awards for heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the following table details the distribution of options and sars outstanding under the lti
plans at december31, 2004:
options/sars outstanding
options/sars exercisable
(in thousands)
weighted-average
weighted-average remaining
weighted-average
range of exercise prices
outstanding
exercise price
contractual life (in years)
exercisable
exercise price
$3.41-$20.00
9,715
$
17.67
0.9
9,707
$
17.66
$20.01-$35.00
131,767
26.99
6.1
77,537
27.02
$35.01-$50.00
144,521
40.05
5.7
123,585
40.23
$50.01-$65.58
90,327
51.27
5.8
36,116
51.34
total
376,330
$
37.59
5.8
246,945
$
36.82
the following table presents a summary of
jpmorgan chases restricted stock and rsu activity
under the 1996 plan during the last three years:
(in thousands)
number of restricted stock/rsus
year ended december 31,(a)
outstanding, january 1
85,527
55,886
48,336
granted
32,514
44,552
24,624
bank one conversion
15,116
na
na
lapsed(b)
(43,349
)
(12,545
)
(15,203
)
forfeited
(4,709
)
(2,366
)
(1,871
)
outstanding, december 31
85,099
85,527
55,886
(a)
2004 results include six months of
awards for the combined firm and six months of
awards for heritage jpmorgan chase. all other
periods reflect the awards for heritage jpmorgan
chase only.
(b)
lapsed awards represent both restricted stock
for which restrictions have lapsed and rsus that
have been converted into common stock.
restricted stock and rsus are granted by
jpmorgan chase under the 1996 plan at no cost to
the recipient. these awards are subject to
forfeiture until certain restrictions have lapsed,
including continued employment for a specified
period. the recipient of a share of restricted
stock is entitled to voting rights and dividends
on the common stock. an rsu entitles the recipient
to receive a share of common stock after the
applicable restrictions lapse; the
recipient is entitled to receive cash payments
equivalent to any dividends paid on the underlying
common stock during the period the rsu is
outstanding.
the vesting of certain awards issued prior to 2002
is conditioned upon certain service requirements
being met and jpmorgan chases common stock
reaching and sustaining target prices within a
five-year performance period. during 2002, it was
determined that it was no longer probable that the
target stock prices related to forfeitable awards
granted in 1999, 2000, and 2001 would be achieved
within their respective performance periods, and
accordingly, previously accrued expenses were
reversed. the target stock prices for these awards
range from $73.33 to $85.00. forfeitures of the
1999 awards in 2004 equaled 1.2million shares; and
1.2million shares of the 2000 award were forfeited
in january2005. the 2001 awards will be forfeited
in january2006 if their stock price targets are
not achieved.
broad-based employee stock options
in january2004, jpmorgan chase granted a total of
6.3million options and sars to all eligible
full-time (75 options each) and part-time (38
options each) employees under the value sharing
plan, a nonshareholder-approved plan. the exercise
price is equal to jpmorgan chases common stock
price on the grant date. the options become
exercisable over various periods and generally
expire 10years after the grant date.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
the following table presents a summary of jpmorgan chases broad-based employee stock option
plan and sar activity during the past three years:
year ended december 31,(a)
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
number of
weighted-average
(in thousands)
options/sars
exercise price
options
exercise price
options
exercise price
outstanding, january 1
117,822
$
39.11
113,155
$
40.62
87,393
$
41.86
granted
6,321
39.96
12,846
21.87
32,550
36.85
exercised
(5,960
)
15.26
(2,007
)
13.67
(674
)
15.01
canceled
(5,999
)
39.18
(6,172
)
37.80
(6,114
)
41.14
outstanding, december 31
112,184
$
40.42
117,822
$
39.11
113,155
$
40.62
exercisable, december 31
30,082
$
36.33
36,396
$
32.88
38,864
$
31.95
(a)
all awards are for heritage jpmorgan chase employees only.
the following table details the distribution of broad-based employee stock options and sars
outstanding at december31, 2004:
options/sars outstanding
options/sars exercisable
(in thousands)
weighted-average
weighted-average remaining
weighted-average
range of exercise prices
outstanding
exercise price
contractual life (in years)
exercisable
exercise price
$20.01-$35.00
17,750
$
24.72
5.6
7,319
$
28.79
$35.01-$50.00
73,298
41.11
5.6
22,763
38.76
$50.01-$51.22
21,136
51.22
6.1
total(a)
112,184
$
40.42
5.7
30,082
$
36.33
(a)
all awards are for heritage jpmorgan chase employees only.
comparison of the fair and intrinsic value measurement methods
pre-tax employee stock-based compensation expense
related to these plans totaled $1.3billion in 2004,
$919million in 2003 and $590million in 2002. in
response to the fact that the adoption of sfas 123
eliminated the difference in the expense impact of
issuing options and restricted stock, the firm
changed its incentive compensation policies upon the
adoption of sfas 123 to permit employees to elect to
receive incentive awards in the form of options,
restricted stock or a combination of both. the $266
million impact of the adoption of sfas 123 in 2003
is comprised of (i) $86million representing the
value of stock options granted during 2003 and (ii)
$180million representing the value of restricted
stock granted during 2003 that would have been
issuable solely in the form of stock options prior
to the adoption of sfas 123.
the following table presents net income (after-tax)
and basic and diluted earnings per share as
reported, and as if all outstanding awards were
accounted for at fair value:
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions, except per share data)
net income as reported
$
4,466
$
6,719
$
1,663
add:
employee stock-based
compensation expense
originally included in
reported net income
deduct:
employee stock-based
compensation expense
determined under the fair
value method for all awards
(960
)
(863
)
(1,232
)
pro forma net income
$
4,284
$
6,407
$
earnings per share:
basic:
as reported
$
1.59
$
3.32
$
0.81
pro forma
1.52
3.16
0.37
diluted:
as reported
$
1.55
$
3.24
$
0.80
pro forma
1.48
3.09
0.37
(a)
2004 results include six months of the
combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect
the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the following table presents jpmorgan chases
weighted-average grant-date fair values for the
employee stock-based compensation awards granted,
and the assumptions used to value stock options and
sars under a black-scholes valuation model:
year ended december 31,(a)
weighted-average grant-date fair value
stock options:
key employee
$
13.04
$
5.60
$
11.57
broad-based employee
10.71
4.98
13.01
converted bank one options
14.05
na
na
restricted stock and rsus
(all payable solely in stock)
39.58
22.03
36.28
weighted-average annualized
stock option valuation assumptions
risk-free interest rate
3.44
%
3.19
%
4.61
%
expected dividend yield(b)
3.59
5.99
3.72
expected common stock price volatility
assumed weighted-average expected
life of stock options (in years)
key employee
6.8
6.8
6.8
broad-based employee
3.8
3.8
6.8
(a)
2004 results include six months of the
combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect
the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
based primarily on historical data at the grant dates.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
note 8  noninterest expense
merger costs
costs associated with the bank one merger in 2004, and costs associated with various programs
announced prior to january1, 2002 and incurred as of december31, 2002, were reflected in the
merger costs caption of the consolidated statements of income. a summary of such costs, by expense
category, is shown in the following table for 2004, 2003 and 2002.
year ended december 31, (a) (in millions)
expense
category
compensation
$
$
$
occupancy
technology and communications and other
total(b)
$
1,365
$
$
1,210
(a)
2004 results
include six months of the combined firm's results and six months of
heritage jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the
results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
with the exception of occupancy-related write-offs, all of the costs in the table require the
expenditure of cash.
the table below shows the change in the liability balance related to the costs associated with
the bank one merger.
year ended december 31, (a) (in millions)
liability balance, beginning of period
$
$
recorded as merger costs
1,365
recorded as goodwill
1,028
liability utilized
(1,441
)
total
$
$
(a)
2004 activity
includes six months of the combined firm's activity and six months of
heritage jpmorgan chase activity, while 2003 activity includes heritage jpmorgan chase
only.
note 9  securities and private equity investments
securities are classified as afs, held-to-maturity (htm) or trading. trading securities are
discussed in note 3 on pages 90-91. securities are classified as afs when, in managements
judgment, they may be sold in response to or in anticipation of changes in market conditions, or as
part of the firms management of its structural interest rate risk. afs securities are carried at
fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. unrealized gains and losses after sfas 133 valuation
adjustments are reported as net increases or decreases to accumulated other comprehensive income
(loss). the specific identification method is used to determine realized gains and losses on afs
securities, which are included in securities /private equity gains on the consolidated
statements of income. securities that the firm has the positive intent and ability to hold to
maturity are classified as htm and are carried at amortized cost on the consolidated balance
sheets.
the following table presents realized gains and losses from afs securities and private equity gains
(losses):
year ended december 31,(a)
(in millions)
realized gains
$
$
2,123
$
1,904
realized losses
(238
)
(677
)
(341
)
net realized securities gains
1,446
1,563
private equity gains (losses)
1,536
(746
)
total securities/private
equity gains
$
1,874
$
1,479
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the amortized cost and estimated fair value of afs and held-to-maturity securities were
as follows for the dates indicated:
2003(a)
gross
gross
gross
gross
amortized
unrealized
unrealized
fair
amortized
unrealized
unrealized
fair
december 31, (in millions)
cost
gains
losses
value
cost
gains
losses
value
available-for-sale securities
u.s. government and federal agencies/
corporations obligations:
mortgage-backed securities
$
46,577
$
$
$
46,141
$
32,248
$
$
$
31,932
collateralized mortgage obligations
1,825
1,828
u.s. treasuries
13,621
13,406
11,511
11,356
agency obligations
1,423
1,432
obligations of state and political subdivisions
2,748
2,866
2,841
2,960
debt securities issued by non-u.s. governments
7,901
7,922
7,232
7,238
corporate debt securities
7,007
7,116
equity securities
5,810
5,835
1,393
1,406
other, primarily asset-backed securities(b)
9,052
9,002
2,448
2,407
total available-for-sale securities
$
94,821
$
$
$
94,402
$
60,422
$
$
$
60,068
held-to-maturity securities(c)
total held-to-maturity securities
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes collateralized mortgage obligations of private issuers, which generally have
underlying collateral consisting of obligations of u.s. government and federal agencies and
corporations.
(c)
consists primarily of mortgage-backed securities.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
the following table presents the fair value and unrealized losses for afs securities by aging
category:
securities with unrealized losses
less than 12 months
12 months or more
total
gross
gross
total
gross
fair
unrealized
fair
unrealized
fair
unrealized
december 31, 2004 (in millions)
value
losses
value
losses
value
losses
available-for-sale securities
u.s. government and federal agencies/corporations obligations:
mortgage-backed securities
$
33,806
$
$
11,884
$
$
45,690
$
collateralized mortgage obligations
u.s. treasuries
10,186
11,126
agency obligations
1,303
1,306
obligations of state and political subdivisions
debt securities issued by non-u.s. governments
3,395
4,019
corporate debt securities
1,103
1,228
equity securities
1,804
1,827
other, primarily asset-backed securities
1,896
2,217
total securities with unrealized losses
$
54,449
$
$
14,018
$
$
68,467
$
impairment is evaluated considering numerous factors, and their relative significance varies
case to case. factors considered include the length of time and extent to which the market value
has been less than cost; the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer; and the
intent and ability to retain the security in order to allow for an anticipated recovery in market
value. if, based on the analysis, it is determined that the impairment is other-than-temporary, the
security is written down to fair value, and a loss is recognized through earnings.
included in the $989million of gross unrealized losses on afs securities at december31, 2004, was
$457million of unrealized losses that have existed for a period greater than 12months. these
securities are predominately rated aaa and the unrealized losses are due to overall increases in
market interest rates and not due to underlying credit concerns of the issuers. substantially all
of the securities with unrealized losses aged greater than 12months have a market value at
december31, 2004, that is within 3% of their amortized cost basis.
the firm believes that all aged unrealized losses, as described above, are expected to be recovered
within a reasonable time through a typical interest rate cycle. accordingly, the firm has concluded
that none of the securities in its investment portfolios are other-than-temporarily impaired at
december31, 2004.
in calculating the effective yield for mortgage-backed securities (mbs) and collateralized
mortgage obligations (cmo), jpmorgan chase includes the effect of principal prepayments.
management regularly performs simulation testing to determine the impact that market conditions
would have on its mbs and cmo portfolios. mbss and cmos that management believes have prepayment
risk are included in the afs portfolio and are reported at fair value.
the following table presents the amortized cost, estimated fair value and average yield at
december31, 2004, of jpmorgan chases afs and htm securities by contractual maturity:
available-for-sale securities
held-to-maturity securities
maturity schedule of securities
amortized
fair
average
amortized
fair
average
december 31, 2004 (in millions)
cost
value
yield(a)
cost
value
yield(a)
due in one year or less
$
8,641
$
8,644
2.44
%
$
$
%
due after one year through five years
19,640
19,600
3.18
due after five years through 10years
9,270
9,278
3.77
6.96
due after 10years(b)
57,270
56,880
4.48
6.88
total securities
$
94,821
$
94,402
3.95
%
$
$
6.89
%
(a)
the average yield is based on amortized cost balances at year-end. yields are
derived by dividing interest income by total amortized cost. taxable-equivalent yields are used
where applicable.
(b)
includes securities with no stated maturity. substantially all of jpmorgan chases mbss
and cmos are due in 10years or more based on contractual maturity. the estimated
duration, which reflects
anticipated future prepayments based on a consensus of dealers in the market, is
approximately four years for mbss and cmos.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
private equity investments are primarily held by the private equity business within corporate
(which includes jpmorgan partners, reported as a stand-alone business segment prior to the merger,
and bank ones one equity partners). the private equity business invests in buyouts, growth equity
and venture opportunities in the normal course of business. these investments are accounted for
under investment company guidelines. accordingly, these investments, irrespective of the percentage
of equity ownership interest held by private equity, are carried on the consolidated balance sheets
at fair value. realized and unrealized gains and losses arising from changes in value are reported
in securities/private equity gains in the consolidated statements of income in the period that the
gains or losses occur.
private investments are initially valued based on cost. the carrying values of private investments
are adjusted from cost to reflect both positive and negative changes evidenced by financing events
with third-party capital providers. in addition, these investments are subject to ongoing
impairment reviews by private equitys senior investment professionals. a variety of factors are
reviewed and monitored to assess impairment  including, but not limited to, operating performance
and future expectations, comparable industry valuations of public companies, changes in market
outlook and changes in the third-party financing environment. the valuation control group within
the finance area is responsible for reviewing the accuracy of the carrying values of private
investments held by private equity.
private equity also holds publicly-held equity investments, generally obtained through the initial
public offering of private equity investments. these investments are marked to market at the quoted
public value. to determine the carrying values of these investments, private equity incorporates
the use of discounts to take into account the fact that it cannot
immediately realize or risk manage the
quoted public values as a result of regulatory, corporate and/or contractual sales restrictions
imposed on these holdings.
the following table presents the carrying value and cost of the private equity investment portfolio
for the dates indicated:
2003(a)
carrying
carrying
december 31, (in millions)
value
cost
value
cost
total private
equity investments
$
7,735
$
9,103
$
7,250
$
9,147
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
note 10  securities financing activities
jpmorgan chase enters into resale agreements, repurchase agreements, securities borrowed
transactions and securities loaned transactions primarily to finance the firms inventory
positions, acquire securities to cover short positions and settle other securities obligations. the
firm also enters into these transactions to accommodate customers needs.
securities purchased under resale agreements (resale agreements) and securities sold under
repurchase agreements (repurchase agreements) are generally treated as collateralized financing
transactions and are carried on the consolidated balance sheets at the amounts the securities will
be subsequently sold or repurchased, plus accrued interest. where appropriate, resale and
repurchase agreements with the same counterparty are reported on a net basis in accordance with fin
41. jpmorgan chase takes possession of securities purchased under resale agreements. on a daily
basis, jpmorgan chase monitors the market value of the underlying collateral received from its
counterparties, consisting primarily of u.s. and non-u.s. government and agency securities, and
requests additional collateral from its counterparties when necessary.
transactions similar to financing activities that do not meet the sfas 140 definition of a
repurchase agreement are accounted for as buys and sells rather than financing transactions.
these transactions are accounted for as a purchase (sale)of the underlying securities with a
forward obligation to sell (purchase)the securities. the forward purchase (sale)obligation, a
derivative, is recorded on the consolidated balance sheets at its fair value, with changes in fair
value recorded in trading revenue. notional amounts of transactions accounted for as purchases
under sfas 140 were $6billion at december31, 2004, and $15billion at december31, 2003,
respectively. notional amounts of transactions accounted for as sales under sfas 140 were $20
billion and $8billion at december31, 2004, and december31, 2003, respectively. based on the
short-term duration of these contracts, the unrealized gain or loss is insignificant.
securities borrowed and securities lent are recorded at the amount of cash collateral advanced or
received. securities borrowed consist primarily of government and equity securities. jpmorgan chase
monitors the market value of the securities borrowed and lent on a daily basis and calls for
additional collateral when appropriate. fees received or paid are recorded in interest income or
interest expense.
december 31, (in millions)
2003(a)
securities purchased under resale agreements
$
94,076
$
62,801
securities borrowed
47,428
41,834
securities sold under repurchase agreements
$
105,912
$
103,610
securities loaned
6,435
4,260
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
jpmorgan chase pledges certain financial
instruments it owns to collateralize repurchase
agreements and other securities financings.
pledged securities that can be sold or
repledged by the secured party are identified
as financial instruments owned (pledged to
various parties) on the consolidated balance
sheets.
at december31, 2004, the firm had received
securities as collateral that can be repledged,
delivered or otherwise used with a fair value
of approximately $252billion. this collateral
was generally obtained under resale or
securities borrowing agreements. of these
securities, approximately $238billion were
repledged, delivered or otherwise used,
generally as collateral under repurchase
agreements, securities lending agreements or to
cover short sales.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
note 11  loans
loans are reported at the principal amount outstanding, net of the allowance for loan losses,
unearned income and any net deferred loan fees. loans held for sale are carried at the lower of
cost or fair value, with valuation changes recorded in noninterest revenue. loans are classified as
trading where positions are bought and sold to make profits from short-term movements in price.
loans held for trading purposes are included in trading assets and are carried at fair value, with
the gains and losses included in trading revenue. interest income is recognized using the interest
method, or on a basis approximating a level rate of return over the term of the loan.
nonaccrual loans are those on which the accrual of interest is discontinued. loans (other than
certain consumer loans discussed below) are placed on nonaccrual status immediately if, in the
opinion of management, full payment of principal or interest is in doubt, or when principal or
interest is 90days or more past due and collateral, if any, is insufficient to cover principal and
interest. interest accrued but not collected at the date a loan is placed on nonaccrual status is
reversed against interest income. in addition, the amortization of net deferred loan fees is
suspended. interest income on nonaccrual loans is recognized only to the extent it is received in
cash. however, where there is doubt regarding the ultimate collectibility of loan principal, all
cash thereafter received is applied to reduce the carrying value of the loan. loans are restored to
accrual status only when interest and principal payments are brought current and future payments
are reasonably assured.
consumer loans are generally charged to the allowance for loan losses upon reaching specified
stages of delinquency, in accordance with the federal financial institutions examination council
(ffiec) policy. for example, credit card loans are charged off by the end of the month in which
the account becomes 180days past due or within 60days from receiving notification of the filing
of bankruptcy, whichever is earlier. residential mortgage products are generally charged off to net
realizable value at 180days past due. other consumer products are generally charged off (to net
realizable value if collateralized) at 120days past due. accrued interest on residential mortgage
products, auto & education financings and certain other consumer loans are accounted for in
accordance with the nonaccrual loan policy discussed above. interest and fees related to credit
card loans continue to accrue until the loan is charged-off or paid. accrued interest on all other
loans is generally reversed against interest income when the consumer loan is charged off. a
collateralized loan is considered an in-substance foreclosure and is reclassified to assets
acquired in loan satisfactions, within other assets, only when jpmorgan chase has taken physical
possession of the collateral. this is regardless of whether formal foreclosure proceedings have
taken place.
the composition of the loan portfolio at each of the dates indicated was as follows:
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
u.s. wholesale loans:
commercial and industrial
$
60,223
$
30,748
real estate
13,038
2,775
financial institutions
14,060
8,346
lease financing receivables
4,043
other
8,504
1,850
total u.s. wholesale loans
99,868
44,325
non-u.s. wholesale loans:
commercial and industrial
25,115
22,916
real estate
1,747
1,819
financial institutions
7,269
6,269
lease financing receivables
1,068
total non-u.s. wholesale loans
35,199
31,094
total wholesale loans:(b)
commercial and industrial
85,338
53,664
real estate(c)
14,785
4,594
financial institutions
21,329
14,615
lease financing receivables
5,111
other
8,504
1,850
total wholesale loans
135,067
75,419
total consumer loans:(d)
consumer real estate
home finance  home equity & other
67,837
24,179
home finance  mortgage
56,816
50,381
total home finance
124,653
74,560
auto & education finance
62,712
43,157
consumer & small business and other
15,107
4,204
credit card receivables(e)
64,575
17,426
total consumer loans
267,047
139,347
total loans(f)(g)(h)
$
402,114
$
214,766
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes investment bank, commercial banking, treasury & securities services and asset &
wealth management.
(c)
represents credits extended for real estate-related purposes to borrowers who are primarily
in the real estate development or investment businesses and for which the primary repayment is from the sale, lease, management, operations or refinancing of the property.
(d)
includes retail financial services and card services.
(e)
includes billed finance charges and fees net of an allowance for uncollectible amounts.
(f)
loans are presented net of unearned income of $4.1billion and $1.3billion at december
31, 2004, and december31, 2003, respectively.
(g)
includes loans held for sale (principally mortgage-related loans) of $25.7billion at
december31, 2004, and $20.8billion at december31, 2003.
(h)
amounts are presented gross of the allowance for loan losses.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
the following table reflects information about the firms loans held for sale, principally
mortgage-related:
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
net gains on sales of loans held for sale
$
$
$
lower of cost or market adjustments
(36
)
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
impaired loans
jpmorgan chase accounts for and discloses nonaccrual loans as impaired loans and recognizes
their interest income as discussed previously for nonaccrual loans. the firm excludes from impaired
loans its small-balance, homogeneous consumer loans; loans carried at fair value or the lower of
cost or fair value; debt securities; and leases.
the table below sets forth information about jpmorgan chases impaired loans. the firm primarily
uses the discounted cash flow method for valuing impaired loans:
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
impaired loans with an allowance
$
1,496
$
1,597
impaired
loans without an
allowance(b)
total impaired loans
$
1,780
$
2,003
allowance for impaired loans under sfas 114(c)
$
$
average balance of impaired loans during the year
1,883
2,969
interest income recognized on impaired
loans during the year
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
when the discounted cash flows, collateral value or market price equals or exceeds the
carrying value of the loan, then the loan does not require an allowance under sfas 114.
(c)
the allowance for impaired loans under sfas 114 is included in jpmorgan chases
allowance for loan losses.
note 12  allowance for credit losses
jpmorgan chases allowance for loan losses covers the wholesale (primarily risk-rated) and
consumer (primarily scored) loan portfolios and represents managements estimate of probable credit
losses inherent in the firms loan portfolio. management also computes an allowance for wholesale
lending-related commitments using a methodology similar to that used for the wholesale loans.
as a result of the merger, management modified its methodology for determining the provision for
credit losses for the combined firm. the effect of conforming methodologies in 2004 was a decrease
in the consumer allowance of $254million and a decrease in the wholesale allowance (including both
funded loans and lending-related commitments) of $330million. in addition, the bank one sellers
interest in credit card securitizations was decertificated; this resulted in an increase to the
provision for loan losses of approximately $1.4billion (pre-tax) in 2004.
the allowance for loan losses consists of two components: asset-specific loss and formula-based
loss. within the formula-based loss is a statistical calculation and an adjustment to the
statistical calculation.
the asset-specific loss component relates to provisions for losses on loans considered impaired and
measured pursuant to sfas 114. an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or
collateral value or observable market price) of the loan are lower than the carrying value of that
loan. to compute the asset-specific loss component of the allowance larger impaired loans are
evaluated individually, and smaller impaired loans are evaluated as a pool using historical loss
experience for the respective class of assets.
the formula-based loss component covers performing wholesale and consumer loans and is the product
of a statistical calculation, as well as adjustments to such calculation. these adjustments take
into consideration model imprecision, external factors and economic events that have
occurred but are not yet reflected in the factors used to derive the statistical calculation.
the statistical calculation is the product of probability of default and loss given default. for
risk-rated loans (generally loans originated by the wholesale lines of business), these factors are
differentiated by risk rating and maturity. for scored loans (generally loans originated by the
consumer lines of business), loss is primarily determined by applying statistical loss factors and
other risk indicators to pools of loans by asset type. adjustments to the statistical calculation
for the risk-rated portfolios are determined by creating estimated ranges using historical
experience of both loss given default and probability of default. factors related to concentrated
and deteriorating industries are also incorporated into the calculation where relevant. adjustments
to the statistical calculation for the scored loan portfolios are accomplished in part by analyzing
the historical loss experience for each major product segment. the estimated ranges and the
determination of the appropriate point within the range are based upon managements view of
uncertainties that relate to current macroeconomic and political conditions, quality of
underwriting standards, and other relevant internal and external factors affecting the credit
quality of the portfolio.
the allowance for lending-related commitments represents managements estimate of probable credit
losses inherent in the firms process of extending credit. management establishes an asset-specific
allowance for lending-related commitments that are considered impaired and computes a formula-based
allowance for performing wholesale lending-related commitments. these are computed using a
methodology similar to that used for the wholesale loan portfolio, modified for expected maturities
and probabilities of drawdown.
at least quarterly, the
allowance for credit losses is reviewed by the chief risk officer and
the deputy chief risk officer of the firm and is discussed with a risk
subgroup of the operating committee, relative to the risk profile of the firms credit portfolio and current economic conditions. as of
december31, 2004, jpmorgan chase deemed the allowance for credit losses to be appropriate (i.e.,
sufficient to absorb losses that are inherent in the portfolio, including those not yet
identifiable).
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
jpmorgan chase maintains an allowance for credit losses as follows:
reported in:
allowance for
credit losses on:
balance sheet
income statement
loans
allowance for loan losses
provision for credit losses
lending-related commitments
other liabilities
provision for credit losses
the table below summarizes the changes in the allowance for loan losses:
december 31,(a) (in millions)
allowance for loan losses at january 1
$
4,523
$
5,350
addition resulting from the merger, july1, 2004
3,123
gross charge-offs(b)
(3,805
)
(2,818
)
gross recoveries
net charge-offs
(3,099
)
(2,272
)
provision for loan losses:
provision excluding
accounting policy conformity
1,798
1,579
accounting policy conformity(c)
1,085
total provision for loan losses
2,883
1,579
other(d)
(110
)
(134
)
allowance for loan losses at december31(e)
$
7,320
$
4,523
(a)
2004 activity includes six months of the
combined firms activity and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase activity, while 2003 activity
includes heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes
$406million related to the manufactured home loan
portfolio in the fourth quarter of 2004.
(c)
represents an
increase of approximately $1.4billion as a
result of the decertification of heritage bank
ones sellers interest in credit card
securitizations, partially offset by a reduction
of $357million to conform provision
methodologies.
(d)
primarily represents the transfer of the
allowance for accrued interest and fees on
reported credit card loans.
(e)
2004 includes $469million of asset-specific loss and
$6.8billion of formula-based loss.
included within the formula-based loss is $4.8
billion related to statistical calculation and
an adjustment to the statistical calculation of
$2.0billion.
the table below summarizes the changes in the
allowance for lending-related commitments:
december 31,(a) (in millions)
allowance for lending-related commitments
at january 1
$
$
addition resulting from the merger, july1, 2004
provision for lending-related commitments:
provision excluding
accounting policy conformity
(112
)
(39
)
accounting policy conformity(b)
(227
)
total provision for lending-related commitments
(339
)
(39
)
other
(1
)
allowance for lending-related commitments
at december31(c)
$
$
(a)
2004 activity includes six months of the
combined firms activity and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase activity, while 2003 activity
includes heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
represents a reduction of $227million to conform
provision methodologies in the wholesale portfolio.
(c)
2004 includes $130million of asset-specific loss and $362million of formula-based loss.
note: the formula-based loss for lending-related
commitments is based on statistical calculation.
there is no adjustment to the statistical
calculation for lending-related commitments.
note 13  loan securitizations
jpmorgan chase securitizes, sells and services various consumer loans, such as consumer real
estate, credit card and automobile loans, as well as certain wholesale loans (primarily real
estate) originated by the investment bank. in addition, the investment bank purchases, packages and
securitizes commercial and consumer loans. all ib activity is collectively referred to as wholesale
activities below. interests in the sold and securitized loans may be retained as described below.
the firm records a loan securitization as a sale when the transferred loans are legally isolated
from the firms creditors and the accounting criteria for a sale are met. gains or losses recorded
on loan securitizations depend, in part, on the carrying amount of the loans sold and are allocated
between the loans sold and the retained interests, based on their relative fair values at the date
of sale. since quoted market prices are generally not available, the firm usually estimates the
fair value of these retained interests by determining the present value of future expected cash
flows using modeling techniques. such models incorporate managements best estimates of key
variables, such as expected credit losses, prepayment speeds and the discount rates appropriate for
the risks involved. gains on securitizations are reported in noninterest revenue. retained
interests that are subject to prepayment risk, such that jpmorgan chase may not recover
substantially all of its investment, are recorded at fair value; subsequent adjustments are
reflected in other comprehensive income or in earnings, if the fair value of the retained interest
has declined below its carrying amount and such decline has been determined to be
other-than-temporary.
jpmorgan chase-sponsored securitizations utilize spes as part of the securitization process. these
spes are structured to meet the definition of a qspe (as discussed in note 1 on page 88 of this
annual report); accordingly, the assets and liabilities of securitization-related qspes are not
reflected in the firms consolidated balance sheets (except for retained interests, as described
below) but are included on the balance sheet of the qspe purchasing the assets. assets held by
securitization-related spes as of december31, 2004 and 2003, were as follows:
december 31, (in billions)
(a)
credit card receivables
$
106.3
$
42.6
residential mortgage receivables
19.1
21.1
wholesale activities
44.8
33.8
automobile loans
4.9
6.5
total
$
175.1
$
104.0
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
interests in the securitized loans are generally retained by the firm in the form of senior or
subordinated interest-only strips, subordinated tranches, escrow accounts and servicing rights, and
they are primarily recorded in other assets. in addition, credit card securitization trusts require
the firm to maintain a minimum undivided interest in the trusts, representing the firms interests
in the receivables transferred to the trust that have not been securitized. these interests are not
represented by security certificates. the firms undivided interests are carried at historical cost
and are classified in loans.
jpmorgan chase retains servicing responsibilities for all residential mortgage, credit card and
automobile loan securitizations and for certain wholesale activity securitizations it sponsors, and
receives annual servicing fees based
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
on the securitized loan balance plus certain
ancillary fees. the firm also retains the right
to service the residential mortgage loans it
sells in connection with mortgage-backed
securities transactions with the government
national mortgage association (gnma), federal
national mortgage association (fnma) and
federal home loan mortgage corporation (freddie
mac). for a discussion of mortgage servicing
rights, see note 15 on pages 109111 of this
annual report.
the following table summarizes new securitization
transactions that were completed during 2004 and
2003, the resulting gains arising from such
securitizations, certain cash flows received from
such securitizations, and the key economic
assumptions used in measuring the retained
interests, as of the dates of such sales:
year ended december 31,(a)
wholesale
wholesale
(in millions)
mortgage
credit card
automobile
activities(d)
mortgage
credit card
automobile
activities
principal securitized
$
6,529
$
8,850
$
1,600
$
8,756
$
13,270
$
8,823
$
4,510
$
5,386
pre-tax gains (losses)
(3
)
cash flow information:
proceeds from securitizations
$
6,608
$
8,850
$
1,597
$
8,430
$
13,540
$
8,823
$
4,503
$
5,493
servicing fees collected
other cash flows received
proceeds from collections reinvested
in revolving securitizations
110,697
58,199
key assumptions (rates per annum):
prepayment rate(b)
23.837.6
%
15.516.7
%
1.5
%
17.050.0
%
10.136.2
%
8.116.5
%
1.51.6
%
50.0
%
cpr
ppr
abs
cpr
ppr
abs
weighted-average life (in years)
1.93.0
0.50.6
1.8
2.04.0
2.04.6
0.61.0
1.71.8
1.35.2
expected credit losses
1.02.3
%
5.55.8
%
0.6
%
0.03.0
%(c)
0.02.5
%(c)
5.58.0
%
0.50.6
%
0.0
%(c)
discount rate
15.030.0
%
12.0
%
4.1
%
0.65.0
%
13.030.0
%
12.0
%
3.94.5
%
1.05.0
%
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
cpr: constant prepayment rate; abs: absolute prepayment speed; ppr: principal payment rate.
(c)
expected credit losses for prime residential mortgage and certain wholesale securitizations are
minimal and are incorporated into other assumptions.
(d)
wholesale activities consist of wholesale loans (primarily real estate) originated by the
investment bank as well as $1.8billion of consumer loans purchased from the market, packaged and
securitized by the investment bank.
in addition to securitization transactions,
the firm sold residential mortgage loans totaling
$65.7billion and $123.2billion during 2004 and
2003, respectively, primarily as gnma, fnma and
freddie mac mortgage-backed securities; these
sales resulted in pre-tax gains of $58.1million
and $564.3million, respectively.
at both december31, 2004 and 2003, the firm had,
with respect to its credit card master trusts,
$35.2billion and $7.3billion, respectively,
related to its undivided interest, and $2.1billion
and $1.1billion, respectively, related to its
subordinated interest in accrued interest and fees
on the securitized receivables, net of an allowance
for uncollectible amounts. credit card
securitization trusts require the firm to maintain
a minimum undivided interest of 4% to 7% of the
principal receivables in the trusts. the firm
maintained an average undivided interest in its
principal receivables in the trusts of
approximately 23% and 17% for 2004 and 2003,
respectively.
the firm also maintains escrow accounts up to
predetermined limits for some of its credit card
and automobile securitizations, in the unlikely
event of deficiencies in cash flows owed to
investors. the amounts available in such escrow
accounts are recorded in other assets and, as of
december31, 2004, amounted to $395million and
$132million for credit card and
automobile securitizations, respectively; as of
december31, 2003, these amounts were $456million
and $137million for credit card and automobile
securitizations, respectively.
the table below summarizes other retained
securitization interests, which are primarily
subordinated or residual interests and are carried
at fair value on the firms consolidated balance
sheets:
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
residential mortgage(b)
$
$
credit card(b)
automobile(b)
wholesale activities
total
$
1,035
$
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
pre-tax unrealized gains (losses)recorded in
stockholders equity that relate to retained
securitization interests totaled $118million and
$155million for residential mortgage; $(3) million
and $11million for credit cards; and $11million
and $6million for automobile at december31, 2004
and 2003, respectively.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
the table below outlines the key economic assumptions used to determine the fair value of the
remaining retained interests at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively; and the sensitivities to
those fair values to immediate 10% and 20% adverse changes in those assumptions:
december 31, 2004 (in millions)
mortgage
credit card
automobile
wholesale activities
weighted-average life (in years)
0.83.4
0.51.0
1.3
0.24.0
prepayment rate
15.137.1
% cpr
8.316.7
%ppr
1.4
% abs
0.050.0
%(b)
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(5
)
$
(34
)
$
(6
)
$
(1
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(8
)
(69
)
(13
)
(1
)
loss assumption
0.05.0%
(c)
5.78.4
%
0.7
%
0.03.0
%(c)
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(17
)
$
(144
)
$
(4
)
$
impact of 20% adverse change
(34
)
(280
)
(8
)
discount rate
13.030.0%
(d)
4.912.0
%
5.5
%
1.022.9
%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(9
)
$
(2
)
$
(1
)
$
impact of 20% adverse change
(18
)
(4
)
(2
)
december 31, 2003 (in millions)(a)
mortgage
credit card
automobile
wholesale activities
weighted-average life (in years)
1.42.7
0.41.3
1.5
0.65.9
prepayment rate
29.031.7
% cpr
8.115.1
%ppr
1.5
% abs
0.050.0
%(b)
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(17
)
$
(7
)
$
(10
)
$
(1
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(31
)
(13
)
(19
)
(2
)
loss assumption
0.04.0
%(c)
5.58.0
%
0.6
%
0.0
%(c)
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(28
)
$
(21
)
$
(6
)
$
impact of 20% adverse change
(57
)
(41
)
(12
)
discount rate
13.030.0
%(d)
8.312.0
%
4.4
%
5.020.9
%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(14
)
$
(1
)
$
(1
)
$
(1
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(27
)
(3
)
(2
)
(2
)
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
prepayment risk on certain wholesale retained interests are minimal and are incorporated into
other assumptions.
(c)
expected credit losses for prime residential mortgage and certain wholesale securitizations are
minimal and are incorporated into other assumptions.
(d)
the firm sells certain residual interests from sub-prime mortgage securitizations via net
interest margin (nim) securitizations and retains residuals interests in these nim transactions,
which are valued using a 30% discount rate.
the sensitivity analysis in the preceding
table is hypothetical. changes in fair value based
on a 10% or 20% variation in assumptions generally
cannot be extrapolated easily, because the
relationship of the change in the assumptions to
the change in fair value may not be linear. also,
in this table, the effect that a change in a
particular assumption may have on the fair value
is
calculated without changing any other
assumption. in reality, changes in one factor may
result in changes in another assumption, which
might counteract or magnify the sensitivities.
expected static-pool net credit losses include
actual incurred losses plus projected net credit
losses, divided by the original balance of the
outstandings comprising the securitization pool.
the table below displays the expected static-pool net credit losses for 2004, 2003 and 2002, based
on securitizations occurring in that year:
loans securitized in:(a)
2003(b)
2002(b)
mortgage
automobile
mortgage
automobile
mortgage
automobile
december31, 2004
0.03.3
%
1.1
%
0.02.1
%
0.9
%
0.02.4
%
0.8
%
december31, 2003
na
na
0.03.6
0.9
0.02.8
0.8
december31, 2002
na
na
na
na
0.13.7
0.9
(a)
static-pool losses not applicable to
credit card securitizations, due to their revolving
structure.
(b)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
the table below presents information about delinquencies, net credit losses and components of
reported and securitized financial assets at december31, 2004 and 2003:
nonaccrual and 90 days or
net loan charge-offs(b)
total loans
more past due
year ended
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
(a)
home finance
$
124,653
$
74,560
$
$
$
$
auto & education finance
62,712
43,157
consumer & small business and other
15,107
4,204
credit card receivables
64,575
17,426
1,006
1,923
1,126
total consumer loans
267,047
139,347
2,167
2,913
1,507
total wholesale loans
135,067
75,419
1,582
2,046
total loans reported
402,114
214,766
3,749
2,899
3,099
2,272
securitized loans:
residential mortgage(c)
11,533
15,564
automobile
4,763
6,315
credit card
70,795
34,856
1,337
2,898
1,870
total consumer loans securitized
87,091
56,735
1,809
1,486
3,072
2,086
securitized wholesale activities
1,401
2,108
total loans securitized(d)
88,492
58,843
1,809
1,495
3,072
2,086
total loans reported and securitized(e)
$
490,606
$
273,609
$
5,558
$
4,394
$
6,171
$
4,358
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
includes $10.3billion and $13.6billion of outstanding principal balances on securitized sub-prime
14 family residential mortgage loans as of december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
(d)
total
assets held in securitization-related spes were $175.1billion and $104.0billion at december31,
2004 and 2003, respectively. the $88.5billion and $58.8billion of loans securitized at december
31, 2004 and 2003, respectively, excludes: $50.8billion and $37.1billion of securitized loans, in
which the firms only continuing involvement is the servicing of the assets; $35.2billion and $7.3
billion of sellers interests in credit card master trusts; and $0.6billion and $0.8billion of
escrow accounts and other assets, respectively.
(e)
represents both loans on the consolidated balance sheets and loans that have been securitized,
but excludes loans for which the firms only continuing involvement is servicing of the assets.
note 14  variable interest entities
refer to note 1 on page 88 of this annual
report for a further description of jpmorgan
chases policies regarding consolidation of
variable interest entities.
jpmorgan chases principal involvement with vies
occurs in the following business segments:
investment bank: utilizes vies to assist
clients in accessing the financial markets in a
cost-efficient manner, by providing the structural
flexibility to meet their needs pertaining to
price, yield and desired risk. there are two broad
categories of transactions involving vies in the
ib: (1)multi-seller conduits and (2)client
intermediation; both are discussed below. the ib
also securitizes loans through qspes which are not
considered vies, to create asset-backed
securities, as further discussed in note 13 on
pages 103106 of this annual report.
asset & wealth management: provides investment
management services to a limited number of the
firms mutual funds deemed vies. awm earns a fixed
fee based on assets managed; the fee varies with
each funds investment objective and is
competitively priced. for the limited number of
funds that qualify as vies, the firms interest is
not considered significant under fin 46r.
treasury & securities services: provides
trustee and custodial services to a number of
vies. these services are similar to those provided
to non-vies.
tss earns market-based fees for services
provided. such relationships are not considered
significant interests under fin 46r.
commercial banking: utilizes vies as part of its middle markets business.
this involvement includes: (1)structuring and
administering independent, member-owned finance
entities for companies with dedicated
distribution systems, where the firm may
also provide some liquidity, letters of credit
and/or derivative instruments; and (2)synthetic
lease transactions, in which the firm provides
financing to a spe; in turn, the spe purchases
assets, which are then leased by the spe to the
firms customer. the cb earns market-based fees
for providing such services. these activities do
not involve the firm holding a significant
interest in vies.
the firms private equity business, now included
in corporate, is involved with entities that may be
deemed vies. private equity activities are
accounted for in accordance with the investment
company audit guide (audit guide). the fasb
deferred adoption of fin 46r for non-registered
investment companies that apply the audit guide
until the proposed statement of position on the
clarification of the scope of the audit guide is
finalized. the firm continues to apply this
deferral provision; had fin
46r been applied to vies subject to this deferral,
the impact would have had an insignificant impact
on the firms consolidated financial statements as
of december31, 2004.
as noted above, there are two broad categories of
transactions involving vies with which the ib is
involved: multi-seller conduits and client
intermediation. these are discussed more fully
below.
multi-seller conduits
the firm is an active participant in the
asset-backed securities business, where it helps
meet customers financing needs by providing access
to the commercial paper markets through vies known
as multi-seller conduits. these entities are
separate bankruptcy-remote corporations in the
business of purchasing interests in, and making
loans secured by, receivable pools and other
financial assets pursuant to agreements with
customers. the entities fund their purchases and
loans through the issuance of highly-rated
commercial paper. the primary source of repayment
of the commercial paper is the cash flow from the
pools of assets.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
jpmorgan chase serves as the administrator and
provides contingent liquidity support and limited
credit enhancement for several multi-seller
conduits. the commercial paper issued by the
conduits is backed by sufficient collateral, credit
enhancements and commitments to provide liquidity
to support receiving at least a liquidity rating of
a-1, p-1 and, in certain cases, f1.
as a means of ensuring timely repayment of the
commercial paper, each asset pool financed by the
conduits has a minimum 100% deal-specific liquidity
facility associated with it. in the unlikely event
an asset pool is removed from the conduit, the
administrator can draw on the liquidity facility to
repay the maturing commercial paper. the liquidity
facilities are typically in the form of asset
purchase agreements and are generally structured
such that the bank liquidity is provided by
purchasing, or lending against, a pool of
non-defaulted, performing assets. deal-specific
liquidity is the primary source of liquidity
support for the conduits.
program-wide liquidity in the form of revolving
and short-term lending commitments is provided by
the firm to these vehicles in the event of
short-term disruptions in the commercial paper
market.
deal-specific credit enhancement that supports the
commercial paper issued by the conduits is
generally structured to cover a multiple of
historical losses expected on the pool of assets
and is primarily provided by customers (i.e.,
sellers) or other third parties. the deal-specific
credit enhancement is typically in the form of
over-collateralization provided by the seller but
may also include any combination of the following:
recourse to the seller or originator, cash
collateral accounts, letters of credit, excess
spread, retention of subordinated interests or
third-party guarantees. in certain instances, the
firm provides limited credit enhancement in the
form of standby letters of credit.
the following table summarizes the firms involvement with firm-administered multi-seller conduits:
consolidated
nonconsolidated
total
december 31, (in billions)
(c)
(b)
(c)
(b)(c)
(c)
(b)(c)
total commercial paper issued
by conduits
$
35.8
$
6.3
$
9.3
$
5.4
$
45.1
$
11.7
commitments
asset-purchase agreements
$
47.2
$
9.3
$
16.3
$
8.7
$
63.5
$
18.0
program-wide liquidity commitments
4.0
1.6
2.0
1.0
6.0
2.6
limited credit enhancements
1.4
0.9
1.2
1.0
2.6
1.9
maximum exposure to loss(a)
48.2
9.7
16.9
9.0
65.1
18.7
(a)
the firms maximum exposure to loss is limited to the amount of drawn commitments (i.e.,
sellers assets held by the multi-seller conduits for which the firm provides liquidity support) of
$42.2billion and $11.7billion at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively,
plus contractual but undrawn commitments of $22.9billion and $7.0billion at december31, 2004 and
2003, respectively. since the firm provides credit enhancement and liquidity to these multi-seller
conduits, the maximum exposure is not adjusted to exclude exposure absorbed by third-party
liquidity providers.
(b)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
in december2003 and february2004, two multi-seller conduits were restructured, with each
conduit issuing preferred securities acquired by an independent third-party investor; the investor
absorbs the majority of the expected losses of the conduit. in determining the primary beneficiary
of the restructured conduits, the firm leveraged an existing rating agency model  an independent
market standard  to estimate the size of the expected losses, and considered the relative rights
and obligations of each of the variable interest holders.
the firm views its credit exposure to
multi-seller conduit transactions as limited. this
is because, for the most part, the firm is not
required to fund under the liquidity facilities if
the assets in the vie are in default. additionally,
the firms obligations under the letters of credit
are secondary to the risk of first loss provided by
the customer or other third parties  for example,
by the overcollateralization of the vie with the
assets sold to it or notes subordinated to the
firms liquidity facilities.
additionally, the firm is involved with a
structured investment vehicle (siv) that funds a
diversified portfolio of highly rated assets by
issuing commercial paper, medium-term notes and
capital. the assets and liabilities of this siv
were approximately $7.1billion and are included in
the firms consolidated balance sheet at december
31, 2004.
client intermediation
as a financial intermediary, the firm is involved
in structuring vie transactions to meet investor
and client needs. the firm intermediates various
types of risks (including fixed income, equity and
credit), typically using derivative instruments as
further discussed below. in certain circumstances,
the firm also provides liquidity and other support
to the vies to facilitate the transaction. the
firms current exposure to nonconsolidated vies is
reflected in its consolidated balance sheets or in
the notes to consolidated financial statements. the
risks
inherent in derivative instruments or liquidity
commitments are managed similarly to other credit,
market and liquidity risks to which the firm is
exposed. the firm intermediates principally with
the following types of vies: structured wholesale
loan vehicles, credit-linked note vehicles,
municipal bond vehicles and other
client-intermediation vehicles, as discussed below.
following this discussion is a table summarizing
the total assets held by these vehicles at december
31, 2004 and 2003.
the firm has created structured wholesale loan
vehicles managed by third parties, in which loans
are purchased from third parties or through the
firms syndication and trading functions and funded
by issuing commercial paper. the amount of the
commercial paper issued by these vehicles totaled
$3.4billion and $5.3billion as of december31,
2004 and 2003, respectively. investors provide
collateral and have a first risk of loss up to the
amount of collateral pledged. the firm retains a
second-risk-of-loss position and does not absorb a
majority of the expected losses of the vehicles.
documentation includes provisions intended, subject
to certain conditions, to enable jpmorgan chase to
terminate the transactions related to a particular
loan vehicle if the value of the relevant portfolio
declines below a specified level. the firm also
provides liquidity support to these vies.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
the firm structures credit-linked notes in
which the vie purchases highly-rated assets (such
as asset-backed securities) and enters into a
credit derivative contract with the firm to obtain
exposure to a referenced credit not held by the
vie. credit-linked notes are issued by the vie to
transfer the risk of the referenced credit to the
investors in the vie. clients and investors often
prefer a vie structure, since the credit-linked
notes generally carry a higher credit rating than
they would if issued directly by jpmorgan chase.
the firm is involved with municipal bond vehicles
for the purpose of creating a series of secondary
market trusts that allow tax-exempt investors to
finance their investments at short-term tax-exempt
rates. the vie purchases fixed-rate, longer-term
highly rated municipal bonds by issuing puttable
floating-rate certificates and inverse
floating-rate certificates; the investors in the
inverse floating-rate certificates are exposed to
the residual losses of the vie (the residual
interests). for vehicles in which the firm owns
the residual interests, the firm consolidates the
vie. in vehicles where third-party investors own
the residual interests, the firms exposure is
limited because of the high credit quality of the
underlying municipal bonds, the unwind triggers
based on the market value of the underlying
collateral and the residual interests held by third
parties. the firm often serves as remarketing agent
for the vie and provides liquidity to support the
remarketing.
additionally, jpmorgan chase structures, on
behalf of clients, other client intermediation
vehicles in which the firm transfers the risks
and returns of the assets held by the vie,
typically debt and equity instruments, to clients
through derivative contracts.
assets held by certain client intermediationrelated vies at december31, 2004
and 2003, were as follows:
december 31, (in billions)
(e)
structured wholesale loan vehicles(a)
$
3.4
$
5.3
credit-linked note vehicles(b)
17.8
17.7
municipal bond vehicles(c)
7.5
5.5
other client intermediation vehicles(d)
4.0
5.8
(a)
jpmorgan chase was committed to provide
liquidity to these vies of up to $5.2billion and
$8.0billion at december31, 2004 and 2003,
respectively, of which $3.8billion at december31,
2004, and $6.3billion at december31, 2003, was in
the form of asset purchase agreements. the firms
maximum exposure to loss to these vehicles at
december31, 2004 and 2003, was $3.2billion and
$5.5billion, respectively, which reflects the
netting of collateral and other program limits.
(b)
the fair value of the firms derivative
contracts with credit-linked note vehicles was not
material at december31, 2004. assets of $2.3
billion and $2.1billion reported in the table
above were recorded on the firms consolidated
balance sheets at december31, 2004 and 2003,
respectively, due to contractual relationships held
by the firm that relate to collateral held by the
vie.
(c)
total amounts consolidated due to the firm
owning residual interests were $2.6billion at
december31, 2004 and $2.5billion at december31,
2003, and are reported in the table.
total liquidity commitments were $3.1billion
and $1.8billion at december31, 2004 and 2003,
respectively. the firms maximum credit exposure
to all municipal bond vehicles was $5.7billion
and $4.3billion at december31, 2004 and 2003,
respectively.
(d)
the firms net exposure arising from
these intermediations is not significant.
(e)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
finally, the firm may enter into transactions
with vies structured by other parties. these
transactions can include, for example, acting as a
derivative counterparty, liquidity provider,
investor, underwriter, placement agent, trustee or
custodian. these transactions are conducted at
arms length, and individual credit decisions are
based upon the analysis of the specific vie, taking
into consideration the quality of the underlying
assets. jpmorgan chase records and reports these
positions similarly to any other third-party
transaction. these
activities do not cause jpmorgan chase to absorb a
majority of the expected losses of the vies or to
receive a majority of the residual returns of the
vie, and they are not considered significant for
disclosure purposes.
consolidated vie assets
the following table summarizes the firms total
consolidated vie assets, by classification on the
consolidated balance sheets, as of december31,
2004 and 2003:
december 31, (in billions)
(c)
consolidated vie assets(a)
investment securities
$
10.6
$
3.8
trading assets(b)
4.7
2.7
loans
3.4
1.1
interests in purchased receivables
31.6
4.7
other assets
0.4
0.1
total consolidated assets
$
50.7
$
12.4
(a)
the firm also holds $3.4billion and $3.0
billion of assets, at december31, 2004 and
december31, 2003, respectively, primarily as a
sellers interest, in certain consumer
securitizations in a segregated entity, as part of
a two-step securitization transaction. this
interest is included in the securitization
activities disclosed in note 13 on pages 103106 of
this annual report.
(b)
includes the fair value
of securities and
derivatives.
(c)
heritage
jpmorgan chase only.
interests in purchased receivables include
interests in receivables purchased by
firm-administered conduits, which have been
consolidated in accordance with fin 46r. interests
in purchased receivables are carried at cost and
are reviewed to determine whether an
other-than-temporary impairment exists. based on
the current level of credit protection specified
in each transaction, primarily through
overcollateralization,
the firm determined that no other-than-temporary
impairment existed at december31, 2004.
the interest-bearing beneficial interest
liabilities issued by consolidated vies are
classified in the line item titled beneficial
interests issued by consolidated variable interest
entities on the consolidated balance sheets. the
holders of these beneficial interests do not have
recourse to the general credit of jpmorgan chase.
see note 17 on page 112 of this annual report for
the maturity profile of fin 46 long-term beneficial
interests.
fin 46 transition
effective february1, 2003, jpmorgan chase
implemented fin 46 for vies created or modified
after january31, 2003, in which the firm has an
interest. effective july1, 2003, the firm
implemented fin 46 for all vies originated prior to
february1, 2003, excluding certain investments
made by its private equity business, as discussed
above. the effect of adoption was an incremental
increase in the firms assets and liabilities of
approximately $17billion at july1, 2003. as a
result of its adoption of fin 46, the firm also
deconsolidated certain vehicles, primarily the
wholly-owned delaware statutory business trusts
further discussed in note 17 on pages 112113 of
this annual report.
upon adoption of fin 46, the assets, liabilities
and noncontrolling interests of vies were generally
measured at the amounts at which such interests
would have been carried had fin 46 been effective
when the firm first met the conditions to be
considered the primary beneficiary. the difference
between the net amount added to the balance sheet
and the amount of any previously recognized
interest in the newly consolidated entity was
recognized as a cumulative effect of an accounting
change at july1, 2003, which resulted in a $2
million (after-tax) reduction to the firms
consolidated earnings. the firm also recorded a $34
million (after-tax) reduction in other
comprehensive income, related to afs securities and
derivative cash flow hedges; these were related to
entities measured at the amount at which such
interests would have been carried had fin 46 been
effective when the firm first met the conditions
of being the primary beneficiary.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
fin 46r transition
in december2003, the fasb issued a revision to fin 46 (fin 46r) to address various technical
corrections and implementation issues that had arisen since the issuance of fin 46. effective march
31, 2004, jpmorgan chase implemented fin 46r for all vies, excluding certain investments made by
its private equity business, as previously discussed. implementation of fin 46r did not have a
significant effect on the firms consolidated financial statements.
the application of fin 46r involved significant judgments and interpretations by management. the
firm is aware of differing interpretations being developed among accounting professionals and the
eitf with regard to analyzing derivatives under fin 46r. managements current interpretation is
that derivatives should be evaluated by focusing on an economic analysis of the rights and
obligations of a vies assets, liabilities, equity and other contracts, while considering the
entitys activities and design; the terms of the derivative contract and the role it has with the
entity; and whether the derivative contract creates and/or absorbs variability of the vie. the firm
will continue to monitor developing interpretations.
note 15  goodwill
and other intangible assets
effective january1, 2002, the firm adopted sfas 142, reclassifying certain intangible assets
from goodwill to other intangible assets. there was no impairment of goodwill upon adoption of sfas
142.
goodwill is not amortized but instead tested for impairment at the reporting-unit segment (which is
generally one level below the six major reportable business segments as described in note 31 on
pages 126-127 of this annual report; plus private equity, which is included in corporate). goodwill
is tested annually (during the fourth quarter) or more often if events or circumstances, such as
adverse changes in the business climate, indicate there may be impairment. intangible assets
determined to have indefinite lives are not amortized but instead are tested for impairment at
least annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset
might be impaired. the impairment test compares the fair value of the indefinite lived intangible
asset to its carrying amount. other acquired intangible assets determined to have finite lives,
such as core deposits and credit card relationships, are amortized over their estimated useful
lives in a manner that best reflects the economic benefits of the intangible asset. in addition,
impairment testing is performed periodically on these amortizing intangible assets.
goodwill and other intangible assets consist of the following:
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
goodwill
$
43,203
$
8,511
mortgage servicing rights
5,080
4,781
purchased credit card relationships
3,878
1,014
all other intangibles:
other credit card-related intangibles
$
$
core deposit intangibles
3,328
all other intangibles
2,126
total other intangible assets
$
5,726
$
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
goodwill
as of december31, 2004, goodwill increased by $34.7billion compared with december31, 2003,
principally in connection with the merger, but also due to the acquisitions of efs and a
majority stake in highbridge. goodwill was not
impaired at december31, 2004 or 2003, nor was any goodwill written off during the years ended
december31, 2004, 2003 or 2002.
under sfas 142, goodwill must be allocated to reporting units and tested for impairment. goodwill
attributed to the business segments was as follows:
goodwill resulting
dec. 31,
dec. 31,
from the merger,
(in millions)
(a)
july 1, 2004
investment bank
$
3,309
$
2,084
$
1,233
retail financial services
15,022
14,559
card services
12,781
12,765
commercial banking
2,650
2,592
treasury & securities services
2,044
1,390
asset & wealth management
7,020
4,153
2,536
corporate (private equity)
total goodwill
$
43,203
$
8,511
$
34,146
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
mortgage servicing rights
jpmorgan chase recognizes as intangible assets mortgage servicing rights, which represent
the right to perform specified residential mortgage servicing activities for others. msrs are
either purchased from third parties or retained upon sale or securitization of mortgage loans.
servicing activities include collecting principal, interest, and escrow payments from borrowers;
making tax and insurance payments on behalf of the borrowers; monitoring delinquencies and
executing foreclosure proceedings; and accounting for and remitting principal and interest payments
to the investors of the mortgage-backed securities.
the amount capitalized as msrs represents the amount paid to third parties to acquire msrs or is
based on fair value, if retained upon the sale or securitization of mortgage loans. the firm
estimates the fair value of msrs using a discounted future cash flow model. the model considers
portfolio characteristics, contractually specified servicing fees, prepayment assumptions,
delinquency rates, late charges, other ancillary revenues, costs to service and other economic
factors. the firm compares its fair value estimates and assumptions to observable market data where
available and to recent market activity and actual portfolio experience. management believes that
the assumptions used to estimate fair values are supportable and reasonable.
the firm accounts for its msrs at the lower of cost or market, in accordance with sfas 140. msrs
are amortized as a reduction of the actual servicing income received in proportion to, and over the
period of the estimated future net servicing income stream of, the underlying mortgage loans. for
purposes of evaluating and measuring impairment of msrs, the firm stratifies its portfolio on the
basis of the predominant risk characteristics, which are loan type and interest rate. any
indicated impairment is recognized as a reduction in revenue through a valuation allowance, to the
extent that the carrying value of an individual stratum exceeds its estimated fair value.
the firm evaluates other-than-temporary impairment by reviewing changes in mortgage and other
market interest rates over historical periods and then determines an interest rate scenario to
estimate the amounts of the msrs gross carrying value and the related valuation allowance that
could be expected to be recovered in the foreseeable future. any gross carrying value and related
valuation allowance amount that are not expected to be recovered in the foreseeable future, based
upon the interest rate scenario, are considered to be other-than-temporary.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
the carrying value of msrs is sensitive to changes in interest rates, including their effect on
prepayment speeds. jpmorgan chase uses a combination of derivatives, afs securities and trading
instruments to manage changes in the fair value of msrs. the intent is to offset any changes in the
fair value of msrs with changes in the fair value of the related risk management instrument. msrs
decrease in value when interest rates decline. conversely, securities (such as mortgage-backed
securities), principal-only certificates and derivatives (when the firm receives fixed-rate
interest payments) decrease in value when interest rates increase. the firm offsets the interest
rate risk of its msrs by designating certain derivatives (e.g., a combination of swaps, swaptions
and floors that produces an interest rate profile opposite to the designated risk of the hedged
msrs) as fair value hedges of specified msrs under sfas 133. sfas 133 hedge accounting allows the
carrying value of the hedged msrs to be adjusted through earnings in the same period that the
change in value of the hedging derivatives is recognized through earnings. both of these valuation
adjustments are recorded in mortgage fees and related income.
when applying sfas 133, the loans underlying the msrs being hedged are stratified into specific
sfas 133 asset groupings that possess similar interest rate and prepayment risk exposures. the
documented hedge period for the firm is daily. daily adjustments are performed to incorporate new
or terminated derivative contracts and to modify the amount of the corresponding similar asset
grouping that is being hedged. the firm has designated changes in the benchmark interest rate
(libor)as the hedged risk. in designating the benchmark interest rate, the firm considers the
impact that the change in the benchmark rate has on the prepayment speed estimates in determining
the fair value of the msrs. the firm performs both prospective and retrospective hedge
effectiveness evaluations, using a regression analysis, to determine whether the hedge relationship
is expected to be highly effective. hedge effectiveness is assessed by comparing the change in
value of the msrs, as a result of changes in benchmark interest rates, to the change in the value
of the designated derivatives. for a further discussion on derivative instruments and hedging
activities, see note 26 on pages 118-119 of this annual report.
securities (both afs and trading) are also used to manage the risk exposure of msrs. because these
securities do not qualify as hedges under sfas 133, they are accounted for under sfas 115, with
realized gains and losses and unrealized gains and losses on trading securities recognized in
earnings in securities/private equity gains, interest income on the afs securities is recognized in
earnings in net interest income, and unrealized gains and losses on afs securities are reported in
other comprehensive income. finally, certain non-hedge derivatives, which have not been designated
by management in sfas 133 hedge relationships, are used to manage the economic risk exposure of
msrs and are recorded in mortgage fees and related income.
the following table summarizes msr activity and related amortization for the dates indicated. it
also includes the key assumptions and the sensitivity of the fair value of msrs at december31,
2004, to immediate 10% and 20% adverse changes in each of those assumptions.
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
balance at january 1
$
6,159
$
4,864
$
7,749
additions
1,757
3,201
2,071
bank one merger
na
na
sales
(3
)
other-than-temporary impairment
(149
)
(283
)
amortization
(1,297
)
(1,397
)
(1,367
)
sfas 133 hedge valuation adjustments
(446
)
(226
)
(3,589
)
balance at december 31
6,111
6,159
4,864
less: valuation allowance
1,031
1,378
1,634
balance at december31, after
valuation allowance
$
5,080
$
4,781
$
3,230
estimated fair value at december 31
$
5,124
$
4,781
$
3,230
weighted-average prepayment
speed assumption (cpr)
17.29
%
17.67
%
28.50
%
weighted-average discount rate
7.93
%
7.31
%
7.70
%
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
cpr: constant prepayment rate
weighted-average prepayment speed assumption (cpr)
17.29
%
impact on fair value with 10% adverse change
(295
)
impact on fair value with 20% adverse change
(558
)
weighted-average discount rate
7.93
%
impact on fair value with 10% adverse change
(128
)
impact on fair value with 20% adverse change
(249
)
cpr: constant prepayment rate.
the sensitivity analysis in the preceding table is hypothetical and should be used with
caution. as the figures indicate, changes in fair value based on a 10% and 20% variation in
assumptions generally cannot be easily extrapolated because the relationship of the change in the
assumptions to the change in fair value may not be linear. also, in this table, the effect that a
change in a particular assumption may have on the fair value is calculated without changing any
other assumption. in reality, changes in one factor may result in changes in another, which might
magnify or counteract the sensitivities.
the valuation allowance represents the extent to which the carrying value of msrs exceeds its
estimated fair value for its applicable sfas 140 strata. changes in the valuation allowance are the
result of the recognition of impairment or the recovery of previously recognized impairment
charges, due to changes in market conditions during the period. the changes in the valuation
allowance for msrs were as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
balance at january 1
$
1,378
$
1,634
$
1,170
other-than-temporary impairment
(149
)
(283
)
sfas 140 impairment (recovery)adjustment
(198
)
balance at december 31
$
1,031
$
1,378
$
1,634
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results
and six months of heritage jpmorgan chase results, while 2003 results include heritage jpmorgan chase only.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
during 2004 and 2003, the firm recorded an other-than-temporary impairment of its msrs of $149
million and $283million, respectively, which permanently reduced the gross carrying value of the
msrs and the related valuation allowance. the permanent reduction precludes subsequent reversals.
this write-down had no impact on the results of operations or financial condition of the firm.
all other intangible assets
for 2004, all other intangible assets increased by approximately $7.9billion, principally as a
result of the merger. this increase is net of amortization and includes $510million of
indefinite lived intangibles related to asset management advisory contracts. indefinite-lived
intangibles are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment at least annually. the
remainder of the firms other acquired intangible assets are subject to amortization.
the components of credit card relationships, core deposits and other intangible assets were as follows:
2003(b)
net
net
gross
accumulated
carrying
gross
accumulated
carrying
december 31, (in millions)
amount
amortization
value
amount
amortization
value
purchased credit card relationships
$
5,225
$
1,347
$
3,878
$
1,885
$
$
1,014
other credit card-related intangibles
core deposit intangibles
3,797
3,328
all other intangibles
2,528
(a)
2,126
amortization expense (in millions)(c)
purchased credit card relationships
$
$
$
other credit card-related intangibles
core deposit intangibles
all other intangibles
total amortization expense
$
$
$
(a)
includes $16million of amortization expense related to servicing assets on
securitized automobile loans, which is recorded in asset management, administration and
commissions, for 2004.
(b)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
future amortization expense
the following table presents estimated amortization expenses related to credit card
relationships, core deposits and all other intangible assets at december31, 2004:
other credit
(in millions)
purchased credit
card-related
core deposit
all other
year ended december 31,
card relationships
intangibles
intangibles
intangible assets
total
$
$
$
$
$
1,533
1,398
1,180
note 16  premises
and equipment
premises and equipment, including leasehold improvements, are carried at cost less accumulated
depreciation and amortization. jpmorgan chase computes depreciation using the straight-line method
over the estimated useful life of an asset. for leasehold improvements, the firm uses the
straight-line method computed over the lesser of the remaining term of the leased facility or 10
years.
jpmorgan chase capitalizes certain costs associated with the acquisition or development of
internal-use software under sop 98-1. once the software is ready for its intended use, these costs
are amortized on a straight-line basis over the softwares expected useful life.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
note 17  long-term
debt
jpmorgan chase issues long-term debt denominated in various currencies, although
predominantly u.s. dollars, with both fixed and variable interest rates. the following table is
a summary of long-term debt (net of unamortized original issue debt discount and sfas 133
valuation adjustments):
by remaining contractual maturity at december 31, 2004
under
after
(in millions)
1 year
1-5 years
5 years
total
total(g)
parent company
senior debt:(a)
fixed rate
$
2,864
$
20,029
$
2,670
$
25,563
$
15,044
variable rate
6,221
8,295
15,128
10,696
interest rates(b)
1.22-7.63
%
0.20-6.88
%
1.12-5.00
%
0.20-7.63
%
0.96-7.50
%
subordinated debt:
fixed rate
$
1,419
$
7,536
$
13,100
$
22,055
$
14,382
variable rate
2,331
2,686
interest rates(b)
4.78-7.13
%
5.75-9.88
%
1.92-10.00
%
1.92-10.00
%
4.78-8.25
%
subtotal
$
10,813
$
35,906
$
18,713
$
65,432
$
40,635
subsidiaries
senior debt:(a)
fixed rate
$
$
4,133
$
1,833
$
6,249
$
2,829
variable rate
4,234
13,547
4,316
22,097
3,842
interest rates(b)
2.13-10.45
%
1.71-11.74
%
2.19-13.00
%
1.71-13.00
%
1.13-13.00
%
subordinated debt:
fixed rate
$
$
$
$
1,644
$
variable rate
interest rates(b)
6.00-7.00
%
6.13-6.70
%
8.25
%
6.00-8.25
%
6.13-7.00
%
subtotal
$
5,020
$
18,511
$
6,459
$
29,990
$
7,379
total long-term debt
$
15,833
$
54,417
$
25,172
$
95,422
(d)(e)(f)
$
48,014
fin 46r long-term beneficial interests:(c)
fixed rate
$
$
$
$
$
variable rate
3,072
1,976
5,618
2,076
interest rates(b)
2.02-2.84
%
0.54-7.35
%
2.25-12.79
%
0.54-12.79
%
1.12-10.00
%
total fin 46r long-term beneficial interests
$
3,072
$
$
2,410
$
6,393
$
2,429
(a)
included are various equity-linked or other indexed instruments. embedded derivatives
separated from hybrid securities in accordance with sfas 133 are reported at fair value and
shown net with the host contract on the balance sheet. changes in fair value of separated derivatives are
recorded in trading revenue.
(b)
the interest rates shown are the range of contractual rates in effect at year-end, including
non-u.s. dollar fixed and variable-rate issuances, which excludes the effects of related
derivative instruments. the use of these derivative instruments modifies the firms exposure to the contractual
interest rates disclosed in the table above. including the effects of derivatives, the range of
modified rates in effect at december31, 2004, for total long-term debt was 0.14% to 11.74%, versus the
contractual range of 0.20% to 13.00% presented in the table above.
(c)
included on the consolidated balance sheets in beneficial interests issued by consolidated
variable interest entities.
(d)
at december31, 2004, long-term debt aggregating $23.3billion was redeemable at the option
of jpmorgan chase, in whole or in part, prior to maturity, based on the terms specified in the respective notes.
(e)
the aggregate principal amount of debt that matures in each of the five years subsequent to
2004 is $15.8billion in 2005, $15.4billion in 2006, $15.5billion in 2007, $11.6billion in
2008 and $11.9billion in 2009.
(f)
includes $1.5billion of outstanding zero-coupon notes at december31, 2004. the aggregate
principal amount of these notes at their respective maturities is $4.6billion.
(g)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the weighted-average contractual interest rate for total long-term debt was 4.50%
and 4.71% as of december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. in order to modify exposure to interest
rate and currency exchange rate movements, jpmorgan chase utilizes derivative instruments,
primarily interest rate and cross-currency interest rate swaps, in conjunction with some of its
debt issues. the use of these instruments modifies the firms interest expense on the associated
debt. the modified weighted-average interest rate for total long-term debt, including the effects
of related derivative instruments, was 3.97% and 2.79% as of december31, 2004 and 2003,
respectively.
jpmorgan chase has guaranteed certain debt of its subsidiaries, including both long-term debt and
structured notes sold as part of the firms trading activities. these guarantees rank on a parity
with all of the firms other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. guaranteed liabilities
totaled $320million and $509million at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures held by trusts that issued guaranteed capital
debt securities
at december31, 2004, the firm had 22 wholly-owned delaware statutory business trusts (issuer
trusts) that issued guaranteed preferred beneficial interests in the firms junior subordinated
deferrable interest debentures.
as a result of the adoption of fin 46, jpmorgan chase deconsolidated all the issuer trusts.
accordingly, the junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures issued by the firm to the
issuer trusts, totaling $10.3billion and $6.8billion at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively,
were reflected in the firms consolidated balance sheets in the liabilities section under the
caption junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures held by trusts that issued guaranteed
capital debt securities. jpmorgan chase records interest expenses on the corresponding junior
subordinated debentures in its consolidated statements of income. the firm also records the common
capital securities issued by the issuer trusts in other assets in its consolidated balance sheets
at december31, 2004 and 2003.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
the debentures issued to the issuer trusts by the firm, less the capital securities of the
issuer trusts, qualify as tier 1 capital. the following is a summary of the outstanding capital
securities, net of discount, issued by each trust and
the junior subordinated deferrable interest debenture issued by jpmorgan chase to each trust as of
december31, 2004:
amount
principal
stated maturity
of capital
amount of
of capital
securities
debenture,
securities
earliest
interest rate of
interest
issued
held
issue
and
redemption
capital securities
payment/
december 31, 2004 (in millions)
by trust(a)
by trust(b)
date
debentures
date
and debentures
distribution dates
bank one capital ii
$
$
8.50
%
quarterly
bank one capital iii
any time
8.75
%
semiannually
bank one capital iv
libor + 1.50%
quarterly
bank one capital v
8.00
%
quarterly
bank one capital vi
7.20
%
quarterly
chase capital i
7.67
%
semiannually
chase capital ii
libor + 0.50%
quarterly
chase capital iii
libor + 0.55%
quarterly
chase capital vi
any time
libor + 0.625%
quarterly
chase capital viii
8.25
%
quarterly
first chicago nbd capital i
libor + 0.55%
quarterly
first chicago nbd
institutional capital a
7.95
%
semiannually
first chicago nbd
institutional capital b
7.75
%
semiannually
first usa capital trust i
9.33
%
semiannually
jpm capital trust i
7.54
%
semiannually
jpm capital trust ii
7.95
%
semiannually
j.p. morgan chase capital ix
7.50
%
quarterly
j.p. morgan chase capital x
1,000
1,046
7.00
%
quarterly
j.p. morgan chase capital xi
1,075
1,022
5.88
%
quarterly
j.p. morgan chase capital xii
6.25
%
quarterly
j.p. morgan chase capital xiii
libor + 0.95%
quarterly
jpmorgan chase capital xiv
6.20
%
quarterly
total
$
9,823
$
10,296
(a)
represents the amount of capital securities issued to the public by each trust, net of
unamortized discount.
(b)
represents the principal amount of jpmorgan chase debentures held as assets by each
trust, net of unamortized discount amounts. the principal amount of debentures held by
the trusts includes the impact of hedging and purchase accounting fair value adjustments that are recorded on
the firms financial statements.
note 18  preferred
stock
jpmorgan chase is authorized to issue 200million shares of preferred stock,
in one or more series, with a par value of $1 per share. outstanding preferred
stock at december31, 2004 and 2003, was 4million and 18million shares,
respectively. on december31, 2004, jpmorgan chase redeemed a total of 14
million shares of its seriesa, l and n variable cumulative preferred stocks.
dividends on shares of each outstanding series of preferred stock are payable quarterly. all of the preferred stock outstanding takes precedence over
jpmorgan chases common stock for the payment of dividends and the distribution of assets in the event of a liquidation or dissolution of the firm.
the following is a summary of jpmorgan chases preferred stock outstanding:
stated value and
rate in effect at
(in millions, except
redemption
shares
outstanding at december 31,
earliest
december 31,
per share amounts and rates)
price per share(a)
redemption date
fixed/adjustable rate, noncumulative
$
50.00
4.00
4.00
$
$
see note(c)
5.46%
(d)
6.63% seriesh cumulative(b)
500.00
0.28
0.28
3/31/2006
6.63
adjustable rate, seriesa cumulative
100.00
2.42
adjustable rate, seriesl cumulative
100.00
2.00
adjustable rate, seriesn cumulative
25.00
9.10
total preferred stock
4.28
17.80
$
$
1,009
(a)
redemption price includes amount shown in the table plus any accrued but unpaid
dividends.
(b)
represented by depositary shares.
(c)
the shares are redeemable at any time with not less than 30 nor more than 60days notice.
(d)
the fixed/adjustable rate preferred stock remained fixed at 4.96% through june30, 2003;
thereafter, the minimum and maximum rates are 5.46% and 11.46%, respectively.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
note 19  common stock
at december31, 2004, jpmorgan chase was authorized to issue 9.0billion shares of common
stock, with a $1 par value per share. in connection with the merger, the shareholders approved an
increase in the amount of authorized shares of 4.5billion from the 4.5billion that had been
authorized as of december31, 2003. common shares issued (newly issued or distributed from
treasury) by jpmorgan chase during 2004, 2003 and 2002 were as follows:
december 31, (in millions)
2003(a)
2002(a)
issued  balance at january 1
2,044.4
2,023.6
1,996.9
newly issued:
employee benefits and
compensation plans
69.0
20.9
25.9
employee stock purchase plans
3.1
0.7
0.8
purchase accounting acquisitions
and other
1,469.4
total newly issued
1,541.5
21.6
26.7
cancelled shares
(1.1
)
(0.8
)
total issued  balance at december 31
3,584.8
2,044.4
2,023.6
treasury  balance at january 1
(1.8
)
(24.9
)
(23.5
)
purchase of treasury stock
(19.3
)
share repurchases related to employee
stock-based awards(b)
(7.5
)
(3.0
)
(3.9
)
issued from treasury:
employee benefits and
compensation plans
25.8
2.1
employee stock purchase plans
0.3
0.4
total issued from treasury
26.1
2.5
total treasury  balance at december 31
(28.6
)
(1.8
)
(24.9
)
outstanding
3,556.2
2,042.6
1,998.7
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
participants in the 1996 long-term incentive plan and stock option plan have shares
with-held to cover income taxes. the shares withheld amounted to 5.7million, 2.3million and
2.9million for 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
during 2004, the firm repurchased 19.3million shares of common stock under a stock repurchase
program which was approved by the board of directors on july20, 2004. the firm did not repurchase
shares of its common stock during 2003 or 2002 under the prior stock repurchase program.
as of december31, 2004, approximately 531million unissued shares of common stock were reserved
for issuance under various employee incentive, option and stock-purchase plans.
note 20  earnings per share
sfas 128 requires the presentation of basic and diluted earnings per share (eps) in the
income statement. basic eps is computed by dividing net income applicable to common stock by the
weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for the period. diluted eps is computed using
the same method as basic eps but, in the denominator, the number of common shares reflect, in
addition to outstanding shares, the potential dilution that could occur if convertible securities
or other contracts to issue common stock were converted or exercised into common stock. net income
available for common stock is the same for basic eps and diluted eps, as jpmorgan chase had no
convertible securities, and therefore, no adjustments to net income available for common stock were
necessary. the following table presents the calculation of basic and diluted eps for 2004, 2003 and
2002:
year ended december 31,
(in millions, except per share amounts)(a)
basic earnings per share
net income
$
4,466
$
6,719
$
1,663
less: preferred stock dividends
net income applicable to
common stock
$
4,414
$
6,668
$
1,612
weighted-average basic
shares outstanding
2,779.9
2,008.6
1,984.3
net income per share
$
1.59
$
3.32
$
0.81
diluted earnings per share
net income applicable to
common stock
$
4,414
$
6,668
$
1,612
weighted-average basic
shares outstanding
2,779.9
2,008.6
1,984.3
add: broad-based options
5.4
4.1
2.8
key employee options
65.3
42.4
22.0
weighted-average diluted
shares outstanding
2,850.6
2,055.1
2,009.1
net income per share(b)
$
1.55
$
3.24
$
0.80
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of
heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
options issued under employee benefit plans to purchase 300million, 335million and 362
million shares of common stock were outstanding for the years ended 2004, 2003 and
2002, respectively, but were not included in the computation of diluted eps because the
options exercise prices were greater than the average market price of the common shares.
note 21  accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
accumulated other comprehensive income includes the after-tax change in unrealized gains and
losses on afs securities, cash flow hedging activities and foreign currency translation adjustments
(including the impact of related derivatives).
accumulated
year ended
unrealized
cash
other
december 31,(a)
gains (losses)
translation
flow
comprehensive
(in millions)
on afs securities(b)
adjustments
hedges
income (loss)
balance at
december31, 2001
$
(135
)
$
(2
)
$
(305
)
$
(442
)
net change
(4
)
1,669
balance at
december31, 2002
(6
)
1,227
net change
(712
)
(545
)
(1,257
)
balance at
december31, 2003
(6
)
(43
)
(30
)
net change
(80)
(c)
(2)
(d)
(96
)
(178
)
balance at
december31, 2004
$
(61
)
$
(8)
(e)
$
(139
)
$
(208
)
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
represents the after-tax difference between the fair value and amortized cost of the afs
securities portfolio and retained interests in securitizations recorded in other assets.
(c)
the net change during 2004 is primarily due to increasing rates and recognition of
unrealized gains through securities sales.
(d)
includes $280million of after-tax gains (losses)on foreign currency translation from operations for which the functional currency is other than the u.s. dollar, offset by $(282) million
of after-tax gains (losses)on hedges.
(e)
includes after-tax gains and losses on foreign currency translation, including related hedge
results from operations, for which the functional currency is other than the u.s. dollar.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
the following table presents the after-tax changes in net unrealized holdings gains (losses)
and the reclassification adjustments in unrealized gains and losses on afs securities and cash flow
hedges. reclassification adjustments include amounts recognized in net income during the current
year that had been previously recorded in other comprehensive income.
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
unrealized gains (losses)on afs securities:
net unrealized holdings gains (losses)
arising during the period, net of taxes(b)
$
$
$
1,090
reclassification adjustment for gains
included in income, net of taxes(c)
(121
)
(861
)
(224
)
net change
$
(80
)
$
(712
)
$
cash flow hedges:
net unrealized holdings gains (losses)
arising during the period, net of taxes(d)
$
$
$
reclassification adjustment for (gains)losses
included in income, net of taxes(e)
(130
)
(631
)
net change
$
(96
)
$
(545
)
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
net of tax expense of $27million for 2004, $92million for 2003 and $758
million for 2002.
(c)
net of tax expense of $79million for 2004, $528million for 2003 and $156million for
2002.
(d)
net of tax expense of $23million for 2004, $60million for 2003 and $461million for 2002.
(e)
net of tax expense of $86million for 2004 and $438million for 2003, and net of tax benefit of $100million for 2002.
note 22  income taxes
jpmorgan chase and its eligible subsidiaries file a consolidated u.s. federal income tax
return. jpmorgan chase uses the asset-and-liability method required by sfas 109 to provide income
taxes on all transactions recorded in the consolidated financial statements. this requires that
income taxes reflect the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the
carrying amounts of assets or liabilities for book and tax purposes. accordingly, a deferred tax
liability or asset for each temporary difference is determined based on the tax rates that the firm
expects to be in effect when the underlying items of income and expense are realized. jpmorgan
chases expense for income taxes includes the current and deferred portions of that expense. a
valuation allowance is established to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount the firm expects to
realize.
due to the inherent complexities arising from the nature of the firms businesses, and from
conducting business and being taxed in a substantial number of jurisdictions, significant judgments
and estimates are required to be made. thus, the firms final tax-related assets and liabilities
may ultimately be different.
deferred income tax expense (benefit)results from differences between assets and liabilities
measured for financial reporting and for income-tax return purposes. the significant components of
deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected in the following table:
december 31, (in millions)
2003(a)
deferred tax assets
allowance for other than loan losses
$
3,711
$
1,152
allowance for loan losses
2,739
1,410
employee benefits
2,677
2,245
non-u.s. operations
gross deferred tax assets
$
9,870
$
5,548
deferred tax liabilities
leasing transactions
$
4,266
$
3,703
depreciation and amortization
3,558
1,037
fee income
1,162
non-u.s. operations
1,144
fair value adjustments
other, net
gross deferred tax liabilities
$
10,664
$
6,420
valuation allowance
$
$
net deferred tax liability
$
(944
)
$
(1,072
)
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
a valuation allowance has been recorded in accordance with sfas 109, primarily relating to
deferred tax assets associated with non-u.s. operations.
the components of income tax expense included in the consolidated statements of income were as
follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
current income tax expense (benefit)
u.s. federal
$
1,695
$
$
(1,334
)
non-u.s.
u.s. state and local
total current expense (benefit)
2,555
1,881
(780
)
deferred income tax (benefit)expense
u.s. federal
(382
)
1,341
1,630
non-u.s.
(322
)
(352
)
u.s. state and local
(123
)
total deferred (benefit)expense
(827
)
1,428
1,636
total income tax expense
$
1,728
$
3,309
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
the preceding table does not reflect the tax effects of unrealized gains and losses on afs
securities, sfas 133 hedge transactions and certain tax benefits associated with the firms
employee stock plans. the tax effect of these items is recorded directly in stockholders equity.
stockholders equity increased by $190million and $898million in 2004 and 2003, respectively, and
decreased by $1.1billion in 2002 as a result of these tax effects.
u.s. federal income taxes have not been provided on the undistributed earnings of certain non-u.s.
subsidiaries, to the extent that such earnings have been reinvested abroad for an indefinite period
of time. for 2004, such earnings approximated $369million on a pre-tax basis. at december31,
2004, the cumulative amount of undistributed earnings in these subsidiaries approximated $2.6
billion. it is not practicable at this time to determine the income tax liability that would result
upon repatriation of these earnings.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
on october22, 2004, the american jobs creation act of 2004 (the act) was signed into
law. the act creates a temporary incentive for u.s. companies to repatriate accumulated foreign
earnings at a substantially reduced u.s. effective tax rate by providing a dividends received
deduction on the repatriation of certain foreign earnings to the u.s. taxpayer (the repatriation
provision). the new deduction is subject to a number of limitations and requirements and is
effective for either the 2004 or 2005 tax years for calendar year taxpayers. the range of
possible amounts that may be considered for repatriation under this provision is between zero and
$1.9billion. the firm is currently assessing the impact of the repatriation provision and, at
this time, cannot reasonably estimate the related range of income tax effects of such repatriation
provision. accordingly, the firm has not reflected the tax effect of the repatriation provision in
income tax expense or income tax liabilities.
the tax expense applicable to securities gains and losses for the years 2004, 2003 and 2002 was
$126million, $477million and $531million, respectively.
a reconciliation of the applicable statutory u.s. income tax rate to the effective tax rate for the
past three years is shown in the following table:
year ended december 31,(a)
statutory u.s. federal tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
increase (decrease)in tax rate resulting from:
u.s. state and local income taxes, net of
federal income tax benefit
0.6
(b)
2.1
11.6
tax-exempt income
(4.1
)
(2.4
)
(6.2
)
non-u.s. subsidiary earnings
(1.3
)
(0.7
)
(2.2
)
business tax credits
(4.1
)
(0.9
)
(3.5
)
other, net
1.8
(0.1
)
(0.7
)
effective tax rate
27.9
%
33.0
%
34.0
%
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
the decrease in 2004 is attributable to changes in the proportion of income subject to
different state and local taxes.
the following table presents the u.s. and non-u.s. components of income before income tax
expense:
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
u.s.
$
3,817
$
7,333
$1,834
non-u.s.(b)
2,377
2,695
income before income tax expense
$
6,194
$
10,028
$2,519
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months
of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
for purposes of this table, non-u.s. income is defined as income generated from operations
located outside the united states.
note 23  restrictions on cash and intercompany funds transfers
the federal reserve board requires depository institutions to maintain cash reserves with a
federal reserve bank. the average amount of reserve balances deposited by the firms bank
subsidiaries with various federal reserve banks was approximately $3.8billion in 2004 and $2.6billion in 2003.
restrictions imposed by federal law prohibit jpmorgan chase and certain other affiliates from
borrowing from banking subsidiaries unless the loans are secured in specified amounts. such secured
loans to the firm or to other affiliates are generally limited to 10% of the banking subsidiarys
total capital, as determined by the risk-based capital guidelines; the aggregate amount of all such
loans is limited to 20% of the banking subsidiarys total capital.
the principal sources of jpmorgan chases income (on a parent company-only basis) are dividends and
interest from jpmorgan chase bank and the other banking and nonbanking subsidiaries of jpmorgan
chase. in addition to dividend restrictions set forth in statutes and regulations, the frb, the office of the comptroller of the currency (occ) and the federal
deposit insurance corporation (fdic) have authority under the financial institutions supervisory
act to prohibit or to limit the payment of dividends by the banking organizations they supervise,
including jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries that are banks or bank holding companies, if, in the
banking regulators opinion, payment of a dividend would constitute an unsafe or unsound practice
in light of the financial condition of the banking organization.
at january1, 2005 and 2004, jpmorgan chases bank subsidiaries could pay, in the aggregate, $6.2
billion and $4.4billion, respectively, in dividends to their respective bank holding companies
without prior approval of their relevant banking regulators. dividend capacity in 2005 will be
supplemented by the banks earnings during the year.
in compliance with rules and regulations established by u.s. and non-u.s. regulators, as of
december31, 2004 and 2003, cash in the amount of $4.3billion and $3.5billion, respectively, and
securities with a fair value of $3.6billion and $3.1billion, respectively, were
segregated in special bank accounts for the benefit of securities and futures brokerage customers.
note 24  capital
there are two categories of risk-based capital: tier 1 capital and tier 2 capital. tier 1
capital includes common stockholders equity, qualifying preferred stock and minority interest less
goodwill and other adjustments. tier 2 capital consists of preferred stock not qualifying as tier
1, subordinated long-term debt and other instruments qualifying as tier 2, and the aggregate allowance for
credit losses up to a certain percentage of risk-weighted assets. total regulatory capital is
subject to deductions for investments in certain subsidiaries. under the risk-based capital
guidelines of the frb, jpmorgan chase is required to maintain minimum ratios of tier 1 and total
(tier 1 plus tier 2) capital to risk-weighted assets, as well as minimum leverage ratios (which are
defined as tier 1 capital to average adjusted on-balance sheet assets). failure to meet these
minimum requirements could cause the frb to take action. bank subsidiaries also are subject to
these capital requirements by their respective primary regulators. as of december31, 2004 and
2003, jpmorgan chase and its primary banking subsidiaries met all capital requirements to which
each was subject.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
the following table presents the risk-based capital ratios for jpmorgan chase and its
significant banking subsidiaries at december31, 2004 and 2003:
tier 1
total
risk-weighted
adjusted
tier 1
total
tier 1
(in millions, except ratios)
capital
capital
assets(b)
average assets(c)
capital ratio
capital ratio
leverage ratio
december31, 2004
jpmorgan chase & co.(a)
$
68,621
$
96,807
$
791,373
$
1,102,456
8.7
%
12.2
%
6.2
%
jpmorgan chase bank, n.a.
55,489
78,478
670,295
922,877
8.3
11.7
6.0
chase bank usa, n.a.
8,726
11,186
86,955
71,797
10.0
12.9
12.2
december31, 2003(d)
jpmorgan chase & co.(a)
$
43,167
$
59,816
$
507,456
$
765,910
8.5
%
11.8
%
5.6
%
jpmorgan chase bank
34,972
45,290
434,218
628,076
8.1
10.4
5.6
chase manhattan bank usa, n.a.
4,950
6,939
48,030
34,565
10.3
14.4
14.3
well-capitalized ratios(e)
6.0
%
10.0
%
5.0
%(f)
minimum capital ratios(e)
4.0
8.0
3.0
(a)
asset and capital amounts for jpmorgan chases banking subsidiaries reflect
intercompany transactions, whereas the respective amounts for jpmorgan chase reflect the
elimination
of intercompany transactions.
(b)
includes off-balance sheet risk-weighted assets in the amounts of $250.3billion, $229.6
billion and $15.5billion, respectively, at december31, 2004, and $174.2billion, $152.1
billion
and $13.3billion, respectively, at december31, 2003.
(c)
average adjusted
assets for purposes of calculating the leverage ratio include total
average assets adjusted for unrealized gains/losses on securities,
less deductions for disallowed goodwill and other intangible assets,
investments in subsidiaries and the total adjusted carrying value of
nonfinancial equity investments that are subject to deductions from
tier1 capital.
(d)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(e)
as defined by the regulations issued by the frb, fdic and occ.
(f)
represents requirements for bank subsidiaries pursuant to regulations issued under the
federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act. there is no tier 1 leverage component
in
the definition of a well-capitalized bank holding company.
the following table shows the components of the firms tier 1 and total capital:
december 31, (in millions)
2003(a)
tier 1 capital
total stockholders equity
$
105,653
$
46,154
effect of net unrealized losses on afs
securities and cash flow hedging activities
adjusted stockholders equity
105,853
46,178
minority interest(b)
11,050
6,882
less: goodwill
43,203
8,511
investments in certain subsidiaries
nonqualifying intangible assets
4,709
1,116
tier 1 capital
$
68,621
$
43,167
tier 2 capital
long-term debt and other instruments
qualifying as tier 2
$
20,690
$
12,128
qualifying allowance for credit losses
7,798
4,777
less: investments in certain subsidiaries
and other
tier 2 capital
$
28,186
$
16,649
total qualifying capital
$
96,807
$
59,816
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
primarily includes trust preferred securities of certain business trusts.
note 25  commitments and contingencies
at december31, 2004, jpmorgan chase and its subsidiaries were obligated under a number of
noncancelable operating leases for premises and equipment used primarily for banking purposes.
certain leases contain rent escalation clauses for real estate taxes; they may also contain other
operating expenses and renewal-option clauses calling for increased rents. no lease agreement
imposes restrictions on the firms ability to pay dividends, engage in debt or equity financing
transactions, or enter into further lease agreements.
the following table shows required future minimum rental payments under operating leases with
noncancelable lease terms that expire after december31, 2004:
year ended december 31, (in millions)
$
1,060
after
5,301
total minimum payments required
9,853
less: sublease rentals under noncancelable subleases
(689
)
net minimum payment required
$
9,164
total rental expense was as follows:
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
gross rentals
$
1,187
$
1,061
$
1,012
sublease rentals
(158
)
(106
)
(134
)
net rental expense
$
1,029
$
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
at december31, 2004, assets were pledged to secure public deposits and for other purposes.
the significant components of the assets pledged were as follows:
december 31, (in billions)
2003(b)
reverse repurchase/securities
borrowing agreements
$
$
securities
loans
other(a)
total assets pledged
$
$
(a)
primarily composed of trading assets.
(b)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
litigation reserve
during 2004, jpmorgan chase increased its litigation reserve by $3.7billion. while the outcome of
litigation is inherently uncertain, the amount of the firms litigation reserve at december31,
2004, reflected managements assessment of the appropriate litigation reserve level in light of all
information known as of that date. management reviews litigation reserves periodically, and the
reserve may be increased or decreased in the future to reflect further developments. the firm
believes it has meritorious defenses to claims asserted against it and intends to continue to
defend itself vigorously, litigating or settling cases, according to managements judgment as to
what is in the best interest of stockholders.
note 26  accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities
derivative instruments enable end users to increase, reduce or alter exposure to credit or
market risks. the value of a derivative is derived from its reference to an underlying variable or
combination of variables such as equity, foreign exchange, credit, commodity or interest rate
prices or indices. jpmorgan chase makes markets in derivatives for
its customers and also is an end-user of derivatives in order to manage the firms exposure to credit and market risks.
sfas 133, as amended by sfas 138 and sfas 149, establishes accounting and reporting standards for
derivative instruments, including those used for trading and hedging activities, and derivative
instruments embedded in other contracts. all free-standing derivatives, whether designated for
hedging relationships or not, are required to be recorded on the balance sheet at fair value. the
accounting for changes in value of a derivative depends on whether the contract is for trading
purposes or has been designated and qualifies for hedge accounting. the majority of the firms
derivatives are entered into for trading purposes. the firm also uses derivatives as an end user to
hedge market exposures, modify the interest rate characteristics of related balance sheet
instruments or meet longer-term investment objectives. both trading and end-user derivatives are
recorded at fair value in trading assets and trading liabilities as set forth in note 3 on pages
9091 of this annual report.
in order to qualify for hedge accounting, a derivative must be considered highly effective at
reducing the risk associated with the exposure being hedged. each derivative must be designated as
a hedge, with documentation of the risk management objective and strategy, including identification
of the hedging instrument, the hedged item and the risk exposure, and how effectiveness is to be
assessed prospectively and retrospectively. the extent to which a hedging instrument is effective
at achieving offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows must be assessed at least quarterly.
any ineffectiveness must be reported in current-period earnings. for certain types of hedge
relationships meeting stringent criteria, sfas 133s shortcut method provides for an assumption
of zero ineffectiveness. under the shortcut method, quarterly effectiveness assessment is not
required, and the entire change in the fair value of the hedging derivative is considered to be
effective at achieving offsetting changes in fair values or cash flows. due to the strict criteria
of the shortcut method, the firms use of this method is primarily limited to hedges of long-term
debt.
for qualifying fair value hedges, all changes in the fair value of the derivative and in the fair
value of the item for the risk being hedged are recognized in earnings. if the hedge relationship
is terminated, then the fair value adjustment to the hedged item continues to be reported as part
of the basis of the item and is amortized to earnings as a yield adjustment. for qualifying cash
flow hedges, the effective portion of the change in the fair value of the derivative is recorded
in other comprehensive income and recognized in the income statement when the hedged cash flows
affect earnings. the ineffective portions of cash flow hedges are immediately recognized in
earnings. if the hedge relationship is terminated, then the change in fair value of the derivative
recorded in other comprehensive income is recognized when the cash flows that were hedged occur,
consistent with the original hedge strategy. for hedge relationships discontinued because the
forecasted transaction is not expected to occur according to the original strategy, any related
derivative amounts recorded in other comprehensive income are immediately recognized in earnings.
for qualifying net investment hedges, changes in the fair value of the derivative or the
revaluation of the foreign currencydenominated debt instrument are recorded in the translation
adjustments account within other comprehensive income. any ineffective portions of net investment
hedges are immediately recognized in earnings.
jpmorgan chases fair value hedges primarily include hedges of fixed-rate long-term debt, loans,
afs securities and msrs. interest rate swaps are the most common type of derivative contract used
to modify exposure to interest rate risk, converting fixed-rate assets and liabilities to a
floating rate. interest rate options, swaptions and forwards are also used in combination with
interest rate swaps to hedge the fair value of the firms msrs. for a further discussion of msr
risk management activities, see note 15 on pages 109111 of this annual report. all amounts have
been included in earnings consistent with the classification of the hedged item, primarily net
interest income, mortgage fees and related income, and other income. the firm did not recognize any
gains or losses during 2004 on commitments that no longer qualify as fair value hedges.
jpmorgan chase also enters into derivative contracts to hedge exposure to variability in cash flows
from floating-rate financial instruments and forecasted transactions, primarily the rollover of
short-term assets and liabilities, and foreign currency-denominated revenues and expenses. interest
rate swaps, futures and forward contracts are the most common instruments used to reduce the impact
of interest rate and foreign exchange rate changes on future earnings. all amounts affecting
earnings have been recognized consistent with the classification of the hedged item, primarily net
interest income.
the firm uses forward foreign exchange contracts and foreign currency-denominated debt instruments
to protect the value of its net investments in foreign currencies in its non-u.s. subsidiaries. the
portion of the hedging instruments excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness (forward
points) is recorded in net interest income.
the following table presents derivative instrument hedging-related activities for the periods
indicated:
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
fair value hedge ineffective net gains/(losses)(b)
$
$731(c)
cash flow hedge ineffective net gains/(losses)(b)
(5
)
cash flow hedging gains on forecasted
transactions that failed to occur
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of
heritage
jpmorgan chase results. 2003 reflects the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes ineffectiveness and the components of hedging instruments that have been
excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness.
(c)
amount restated to include the ineffectiveness and amounts excluded from the assessment
of effectiveness associated with msr hedging results.
over the next 12months, it is expected that $157million (after-tax) of net gains recorded in
other comprehensive income at december31, 2004, will be recognized in earnings. the maximum length
of time over which forecasted transactions are hedged is 10years, related to core lending and
borrowing activities.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
jpmorgan chase does not seek to apply hedge accounting to all of its economic hedges. for example,
the firm does not apply hedge accounting to credit derivatives used to manage the credit risk of
loans and commitments because of the difficulties in qualifying such contracts as hedges under sfas
133. similarly, the firm does not apply hedge accounting to certain interest rate derivatives used
as economic hedges.
note 27  off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments and guarantees
jpmorgan chase utilizes lending-related financial instruments (e.g., commitments and
guarantees) to meet the financing needs of its customers. the contractual amount of these financial
instruments represents the maximum possible credit risk should the counterparty draw down the
commitment or the firm fulfill its obligation under the guarantee, and the counterparty
subsequently failed to perform according to the terms of the contract. most of these
commitments and guarantees expire without a default occurring or without being drawn. as a result,
the total contractual amount of these instruments is not, in the firms view, representative of its
actual future credit exposure or funding requirements. further, certain commitments, primarily
related to consumer financings, are cancelable, upon notice, at the option of the firm.
to provide for the risk of loss inherent in wholesale-related contracts, an allowance for credit
losses on lending-related commitments is maintained. see note 12 on pages 102103 of this annual
report for a further discussion on the allowance for credit losses on lending-related commitments.
the following table summarizes the contractual amounts of offbalance sheet lending-related
financial instruments and guarantees and the related allowance for credit losses on lending-related
commitments at december31, 2004 and 2003:
off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments
allowance for
contractual
lending-related
amount
commitments
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
(a)
consumer
$
601,196
$
181,198
$
$
wholesale:
other unfunded commitments
to extend credit(b)(c)(d)
$
225,152
$
172,369
$
$
standby letters of credit
and guarantees(b)
78,084
34,922
other letters of credit(b)
6,163
4,192
total wholesale
$
309,399
$
211,483
$
$
total
$
910,595
$
392,681
$
$
customers securities lent
$
215,972
$
143,143
na
na
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
represents contractual amount net of risk participations totaling $26.4billion and $16.5
billion at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
(c)
includes unused advised lines of credit totaling $22.8billion and $19.4billion at december
31, 2004 and 2003, respectively, which are not legally binding. in regulatory filings with the
federal reserve board, unused advised lines are not reportable.
(d)
includes certain asset purchase agreements to the firms administered multi-seller asset-backed commercial paper conduits of $31.8billion and $11.7billion at december31, 2004
and 2003, respectively; excludes $31.7billion and $6.3billion at december31, 2004 and
2003, respectively, of asset purchase agreements related to the firms administered multi-seller asset-backed commercial paper conduits consolidated in accordance with fin 46r,
as the underlying assets of the conduits are reported in the firms consolidated balance sheets.
it also includes $7.5billion and $9.2billion at december31, 2004 and 2003, respectively, of
asset purchase agreements to structured wholesale loan vehicles and other third-party entities.
the allowance for credit losses on lending-related commitments related to these agreements was
insignificant at december31, 2004 and 2003.
fin 45 establishes accounting and disclosure requirements for guarantees, requiring that a
guarantor recognize, at the inception of a guarantee, a liability in an amount equal to the fair
value of the obligation undertaken in issuing the guarantee. fin 45 defines a guarantee as a
contract that contingently requires the firm to pay a guaranteed party, based on: (a)changes in an
underlying asset, liability or equity security of the guaranteed party; or (b)a third partys
failure to perform under a specified agreement. the firm considers the following offbalance sheet
lending arrangements to be guarantees under fin 45: certain asset purchase agreements, standby
letters of credit and financial guarantees, securities lending indemnifications, certain
indemnification agreements included within third-party contractual arrangements and certain
derivative contracts. these guarantees are described in further detail below.
as of january1, 2003, newly issued or modified guarantees that are not derivative contracts have
been recorded on the firms consolidated balance sheets at their fair value at inception. the fair
value of the obligation undertaken in issuing the guarantee at inception is typically equal to the
net present value of the future amount of premium receivable under the contract. the firm has
recorded this amount in other liabilities with an offsetting entry recorded in other assets. as
cash is received under the contract, it is applied to the premium receivable recorded in other
assets, and the fair value of the liability recorded at inception is amortized into income as
lending & deposit related fees over the life of the guarantee contract. the amount of the liability
related to guarantees recorded at december31, 2004 and 2003, excluding the allowance for credit
losses on lending-related commitments and derivative contracts discussed below, was approximately
$341million and $59million, respectively.
unfunded commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend only when a customer has complied with
predetermined conditions, and they generally expire on fixed dates. the allowance for credit losses
on wholesale lending-related commitments includes $185million and $153million at december31,
2004 and 2003, respectively, related to unfunded commitments to extend credit. the majority of the
firms unfunded commitments are not guarantees as defined in fin 45, except for certain asset
purchase agreements. these asset-purchase agreements are principally used as a mechanism to provide
liquidity to spes, primarily multi-seller conduits, as described in note 14 on pages 106109 of
this annual report.
certain asset purchase agreements can be exercised at any time by the spes administrator, while
others require a triggering event to occur. triggering events include, but are not limited to, a
need for liquidity, a market value decline of the assets or a downgrade in the rating of jpmorgan
chase bank. these agreements may cause the firm to purchase an asset from the spe at an amount
above the assets fair value, in effect providing a guarantee of the initial value of the reference
asset as of the date of the agreement. in most instances, third-party credit enhancements of the
spe mitigate the firms potential losses on these agreements. the allowance for credit losses on
wholesale lending-related commitments related to these agreements was insignificant at december31,
2004.
standby letters of credit and financial guarantees are conditional lending commitments issued by
jpmorgan chase to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party under certain
arrangements, such as commercial paper facilities, bond financings, acquisition financings and
similar transactions. approximately 70% of these arrangements mature within three years. the firm
typically has recourse to recover from the customer any amounts paid under these guarantees; in
addition, the firm may hold cash or other highly liquid collateral to support these guarantees. at
december31, 2004 and 2003,
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
the firm held collateral relating to $7.4billion and $7.7billion, respectively, of
these arrangements. the allowance for credit losses on lending-related commitments at december31,
2004 and 2003, included $292million and $165million, respectively, related to standby letters of
credit and financial guarantees.
the firm holds customers securities under custodial arrangements. at times, these securities are
loaned to third parties, and the firm issues securities lending indemnification agreements to the
customer that protect the customer against the risk of loss if the third party fails to return the
securities. to support these indemnification agreements, the firm obtains from the third party cash
or other highly liquid collateral with a market value exceeding 100% of the value of the loaned
securities. at december31, 2004 and 2003, the firm held $221.6billion and $146.7billion,
respectively, in collateral in support of these agreements.
in connection with issuing securities to investors, the firm may enter into contractual
arrangements with third parties that may require the firm to make a payment to them in the event of
a change in tax law or an adverse interpretation of tax law. in certain cases, the contract may
also include a termination clause, which would allow the firm to settle the contract at its fair
value; thus, such a clause would not require the firm to make a payment under the indemnification
agreement. even without the termination clause, management does not expect such indemnification
agreements to have a material adverse effect on the consolidated financial condition of jpmorgan
chase. the firm may also enter into indemnification clauses when it sells a business or assets to a
third party, pursuant to which it indemnifies that third party for losses it may incur due to
actions taken by the firm prior to the sale. see below for more information regarding the firms
loan securitization activities. it is difficult to estimate the firms maximum exposure under these
indemnification arrangements, since this would require an assessment of future changes in tax law
and future claims that may be made against the firm that have not yet occurred. however, based on
historical experience, management expects the risk of loss to be remote.
as part of the firms loan securitization activities, as described in note 13 on pages 103106 of
this annual report, the firm provides representations and warranties that certain securitized loans
meet specific requirements. the firm may be required to repurchase the loans and/or indemnify the
purchaser of the loans against losses due to any breaches of such representations or warranties.
generally, the maximum amount of future payments the firm would be required to make under such
repurchase and/or indemnification provisions would be equal to the current amount of assets held by
such securitization-related spes as of december31, 2004, plus, in certain circumstances, accrued
and unpaid interest on such loans and certain expenses. the potential loss due to such repurchase
and/or indemnity is mitigated by the due diligence the firm performs to ensure that the assets
comply with the requirements set forth in the representations and warranties. historically, losses
incurred on such repurchases and/or indemnifications have been insignificant, and therefore
management expects the risk of material loss to be remote.
in connection with card services, the firm is a partner with one of the leading companies in
electronic payment services in two separate ventures, chase merchant services and paymentech (the
ventures), the latter of which was acquired as a result of the merger. these ventures provide
merchant processing services in the united states and canada. the ventures are each individually
contingently liable for processed credit card sales transactions in the event of a dispute between
the cardmember and a merchant. if a dispute is resolved in the cardmembers favor, the ventures
will credit or refund the amount to the cardmember and charge back the transaction to the merchant.
if the ventures are unable to collect the amount from the merchant, the
ventures will bear the loss for the amount credited or refunded to the card-member. the ventures
mitigate this risk by withholding settlement, or by obtaining escrow deposits or letters of credit
from certain merchants. however, in the unlikely event that: 1) a merchant ceases operations and is
unable to deliver products, services or a refund; 2) the ventures do not have sufficient collateral
from the merchants to provide customer refunds; and 3) the ventures do not have sufficient
financial resources to provide customer refunds, the firm would be liable to refund the cardholder
in proportion to its approximate equity interest in the ventures. for the year ended december31,
2004, the ventures incurred aggregate credit losses of $7.1million on $396billion of aggregate
volume processed, of which the firm shared liability only on $205billion of aggregate volume
processed. at december31, 2004, the ventures held $620million of collateral. in 2003, the chase
merchant services venture incurred aggregate credit losses of $2.0million on $260billion of
aggregate volume processed, of which the firm shared liability only on $77billion of aggregate
volume processed. at december31, 2003, the chase merchant services venture held $242million of
collateral. the firm believes that, based on historical experience and the collateral held by the
ventures, the fair value of the guarantee would not be materially different from the credit loss
allowance recorded by the ventures; therefore, the firm has not recorded any allowance for losses
in excess of the allowance recorded by the ventures.
the firm is a member of several securities and futures exchanges and clearinghouses both in the
united states and overseas. membership in some of these organizations requires the firm to pay a
pro rata share of the losses incurred by the organization as a result of the default of another
member. such obligation varies with different organizations. it may be limited to members who dealt
with the defaulting member or to the amount (or a multiple of the amount) of the firms
contribution to a members guaranty fund, or, in a few cases, it may be unlimited. it is difficult
to estimate the firms maximum exposure under these membership agreements, since this would require
an assessment of future claims that may be made against the firm that have not yet occurred.
however, based on historical experience, management expects the risk of loss to be remote.
in addition to the contracts described above, there are certain derivative contracts to which the
firm is a counterparty that meet the characteristics of a guarantee under fin 45. these derivatives
are recorded on the consolidated balance sheets at fair value. these contracts include written put
options that require the firm to purchase assets from the option holder at a specified price by a
specified date in the future, as well as derivatives that effectively guarantee the return on a
counterpartys reference portfolio of assets. the total notional value of the derivatives that the
firm deems to be guarantees was $53billion and $50billion at december31, 2004 and 2003,
respectively. the firm reduces its exposures to these contracts by entering into offsetting
transactions or by entering into contracts that hedge the market risk related to these contracts.
the fair value related to these contracts was a derivative receivable of $180million and $163
million, and a derivative payable of $622million and $333million at december31, 2004 and 2003,
respectively. finally, certain written put options and credit derivatives permit cash settlement
and do not require the option holder or the buyer of credit protection to own the reference asset.
the firm does not consider these contracts to be guarantees as described in fin 45.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
note 28  credit risk concentrations
concentrations of credit risk arise when a number of customers are engaged in similar business
activities or activities in the same geographic region, or when they have similar economic features
that would cause their ability to meet contractual obligations to be similarly affected by changes
in economic conditions.
jpmorgan chase regularly monitors various segments of its credit risk portfolio to assess potential
concentration risks and to obtain collateral when deemed necessary. in the firms wholesale
portfolio, risk concentrations are primarily evaluated by industry and by geographic region. in the
consumer portfolio, concentrations are primarily evaluated by product and by u.s. geographic
region.
for further information regarding on-balance sheet credit concentrations by major product and
geography, see note 11 on page 101 of this annual report. for information regarding concentrations
of off-balance sheet lending-related financial instruments by major product, see note 27 on page
119 of this annual report. more information about concentrations can be found in the following
tables or discussion in the md&a:
wholesale exposure
page 60
wholesale selected industry concentrations
page 61
country exposure
page 65
consumer real estate by geographic location
page 67
the table below presents both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet wholesale- and
consumer-related credit exposure as of december31, 2004 and 2003:
2003(c)
credit
on-balance
off-balance
credit
on-balance
off-balance
december 31, (in billions)
exposure
sheet(a)
sheet(b)
exposure
sheet(a)
sheet(b)
wholesale-related:
banks and finance companies
$
56.2
$
25.7
$
30.5
$
62.7
$
39.7
$
23.0
real estate
28.2
16.7
11.5
14.5
8.8
5.7
healthcare
22.0
4.5
17.5
11.3
1.8
9.5
retail and consumer services
21.7
6.0
15.7
14.5
4.2
10.3
consumer products
21.4
7.1
14.3
13.8
3.6
10.2
all other wholesale
392.7
172.8
219.9
258.7
105.9
152.8
total wholesale-related
542.2
232.8
309.4
375.5
164.0
211.5
consumer-related:
home finance
177.9
124.7
53.2
106.2
74.6
31.6
auto & education finance
67.9
62.7
5.2
45.8
43.2
2.6
consumer & small business and other
25.4
15.1
10.3
10.0
4.2
5.8
credit card receivables(d)
597.0
64.5
532.5
158.5
17.4
141.1
total consumer-related
868.2
267.0
601.2
320.5
139.4
181.1
total exposure
$
1,410.4
$
499.8
$
910.6
$
696.0
$
303.4
$
392.6
(a)
represents loans, derivative receivables, interests in purchased receivables and other
receivables.
(b)
represents lending-related financial instruments.
(c)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(d)
excludes $70.8billion and $34.9billion of securitized credit card receivables at december31,
2004 and 2003, respectively.
note 29  fair value of financial instruments
the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be
exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation
sale.
the accounting for an asset or liability may differ based on the type of instrument and/or its use
in a trading or investing strategy. generally, the measurement framework in financial statements
is one of the following:
at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets, with changes in fair value
recorded each period in the consolidated statements of income;
at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets, with changes in fair value
recorded each period in a separate component of stockholders equity and
as part of other comprehensive income;
at cost (less other-than-temporary impairments), with changes in fair value
not recorded in the financial statements but disclosed in the notes thereto;
or
at the lower of cost or fair value.
the firm has an established and well-documented process for determining fair values. fair value is
based on quoted market prices, where available. if listed prices or quotes are not available, fair
value is based on internally-developed models that primarily use market-based or independent
information as inputs to the valuation model. valuation adjustments may be necessary to ensure that
financial instruments are recorded at fair value. these adjustments include amounts to reflect
counterparty credit quality, liquidity and concentration concerns and are based on defined
methodologies that are applied consistently over time.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
credit valuation adjustments are necessary when the market price (or
parameter) is not indicative of the credit quality of the counterparty. as few
derivative contracts are listed on an exchange, the majority of derivative
positions are valued using internally developed models that use as their
basis observable market parameters. market practice is to quote parameters equivalent to a aa credit rating; thus, all counterparties are assumed
to have the same credit quality. an adjustment is therefore necessary to
reflect the credit quality of each derivative counterparty and to arrive at
fair value. without this adjustment, derivative positions would not be
appropriately valued.
liquidity adjustments are necessary when the firm may not be able to
observe a recent market price for a financial instrument that trades in inactive (or less active) markets. thus, valuation adjustments for risk of loss due
to a lack of liquidity are applied to those positions to arrive at fair value.
the firm tries to ascertain the amount of uncertainty in the initial valuation
based upon the liquidity or illiquidity, as the case may be, of the market in
which the instrument trades and makes liquidity adjustments to the financial instruments. the firm measures the liquidity adjustment based on the
following factors: (1)the amount of time since the last relevant pricing
point; (2)whether there was an actual trade or relevant external quote;
and (3)the volatility of the principal component of the financial instrument.
concentration valuation adjustments are necessary to reflect the cost of
unwinding larger-than-normal market-size risk positions. the cost is determined based on the size of the adverse market move that is likely to occur
during the extended period required to bring a position down to a nonconcentrated level. an estimate of the period needed to reduce, without market disruption, a position to a nonconcentrated level is generally based on
the relationship of the position to the average daily trading volume of that
position. without these adjustments, larger positions would be valued at a
price greater than the price at which the firm could exit the positions.
valuation adjustments are determined based on established policies and are controlled by a price
verification group independent of the risk-taking function. economic substantiation of models,
prices, market inputs and revenue through price/input testing, as well as backtesting, is done to
validate the appropriateness of the valuation methodology. any changes to the valuation
methodology are reviewed by management to ensure the changes are justified.
the methods described above may produce a fair value calculation that may not be indicative of net
realizable value or reflective of future fair values. furthermore, the use of different
methodologies to determine the fair value of certain financial instruments could result in a
different estimate of fair value at the reporting date.
certain financial instruments and all nonfinancial instruments are excluded from the scope of sfas
107. accordingly, the fair value disclosures required by sfas 107 provide only a partial estimate
of the fair value of jpmorgan chase. for example, the firm has developed long-term relationships
with its customers through its deposit base and credit card accounts, commonly referred to as core
deposit intangibles and credit card relationships. in the opinion of management, these items, in
the aggregate, add significant value to jpmorgan chase, but their fair value is not disclosed in
this note.
the following describes the methodologies and assumptions used, by financial instrument, to
determine fair value.
financial assets
assets for which fair value approximates carrying value
the firm considers fair values of certain financial assets carried at cost  including cash and
due from banks, deposits with banks, securities borrowed, short-term receivables and accrued
interest receivable  to approximate their respective carrying values, due to their short-term
nature and generally negligible credit risk.
assets where fair value differs from cost
the firms debt, equity and derivative trading instruments are carried at their estimated fair
value. quoted market prices, when available, are used to determine the fair value of trading
instruments. if quoted market prices are not available, then fair values are estimated by using
pricing models, quoted prices of instruments with similar characteristics, or discounted cash
flows.
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements are typically short-term in
nature and, as such, for a significant majority of the firms transactions, cost approximates
carrying value. this balance sheet item also includes structured resale agreements and similar
products with long-dated maturities. to estimate the fair value of these instruments, cash flows
are discounted using the appropriate market rates for the applicable maturity.
securities
fair values of actively traded securities are determined by the secondary market, while the
fair values for nonactively traded securities are based on independent broker quotations.
derivatives
fair value for derivatives is determined based on the following:
position valuation, principally based on liquid market pricing as evidenced
by exchange-traded prices, broker-dealer quotations or related input
parameters, which assume all counterparties have the same credit rating;
credit valuation adjustments to the resulting portfolio valuation, to reflect
the credit quality of individual counterparties; and
other fair value adjustments to take into consideration liquidity, concentration and other factors.
for those derivatives valued based on models with significant unobservable market parameters, the
firm defers the initial trading profit for these financial instruments. the deferred profit is
recognized in trading revenue on a systematic basis and when observable market data becomes
available.
the fair value of derivative payables does not incorporate a valuation adjustment to reflect
jpmorgan chases credit quality.
interests in purchased receivables
the fair value of variable-rate interests in purchased receivables approximate their respective
carrying amounts due to their variable interest terms and negligible credit risk. the estimated
fair values for fixed-rate interests in purchased receivables are determined using a discounted
cash flow analysis using appropriate market rates for similar instruments.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
loans
fair value for loans is determined using methodologies suitable for each type of loan:
fair value for the wholesale loan portfolio is estimated primarily using the
cost of credit derivatives, which is adjusted to account for the differences
in recovery rates between bonds, on which the cost of credit derivatives is
based, and loans.
fair values for consumer installment loans (including automobile financings) and consumer real estate, for which market rates for comparable
loans are readily available, are based on discounted cash flows, adjusted
for prepayments. the discount rates used for consumer installment loans
are current rates offered by commercial banks. for consumer real estate,
secondary market yields for comparable mortgage-backed securities,
adjusted for risk, are used.
fair value for credit card receivables is based on discounted expected cash
flows. the discount rates used for credit card receivables incorporate only
the effects of interest rate changes, since the expected cash flows already
reflect an adjustment for credit risk.
the fair value of loans in the held-for-sale and trading portfolios is generally based on observable market prices and on prices of similar instruments,
including bonds, credit derivatives and loans with similar characteristics. if
market prices are not available, the fair value is based on the estimated cash
flows adjusted for credit risk; that risk is discounted, using a rate appropriate for each maturity that incorporates the effects of interest rate changes.
other assets
this caption includes private equity investments and msrs.
for a discussion of the fair value methodology for private equity investments, see note 9 on page
100 of this annual report.
for a discussion of the fair
value methodology for msrs, see note 15 on pages 109-111 of this
annual report.
financial liabilities
liabilities for which fair value approximates carrying value
sfas 107 requires that the fair value for deposit liabilities with no stated maturity (i.e.,
demand, savings and certain money market deposits) be equal to their carrying value. sfas 107 does
not allow for the recognition of the inherent funding value of these instruments.
fair value of commercial paper, other borrowed funds, accounts payable and accrued liabilities is
considered to approximate their respective carrying values due to their short-term nature.
interest-bearing deposits
fair values of interest-bearing deposits are estimated by discounting cash flows based on the
remaining contractual maturities of funds having similar interest rates and similar maturities.
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements are typically
short-term in nature; as such, for a significant majority of these transactions, cost approximates
carrying value. this balance sheet item also includes structured repurchase agreements and similar
products with long-dated maturities. to estimate the fair value of these instruments, the cash
flows are discounted using the appropriate market rates for the applicable maturity.
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies (beneficial interests) are generally
short-term in nature and, as such, for a significant majority of the firms transactions, cost
approximates carrying value. the consolidated balance sheets also include beneficial
interests with long-dated maturities. the fair value of these instruments is based on current
market rates.
long-term debt-related instruments
fair value for long-term debt, including the junior subordinated deferrable interest
debentures held by trusts that issued guaranteed capital debt securities, is based on current
market rates and is adjusted for jpmorgan chases credit quality.
lending-related commitments
although there is no liquid secondary market for wholesale commitments, the firm estimates the fair
value of its wholesale lending-related commitments primarily using the cost of credit derivatives
(which is adjusted to account for the difference in recovery rates between bonds, on which the cost
of credit derivatives is based, and loans) and loan equivalents (which represent the portion of an
unused commitment expected, based on the firms average portfolio historical experience, to become
outstanding in the event an obligor defaults). the firm estimates the fair value of its consumer
commitments to extend credit based on the primary market prices to originate new commitments. it is
the change in current primary market prices that provides the estimate of the fair value of these
commitments.
on this basis, at december31, 2004 and 2003, the fair value of the firms lending-related
commitments approximated the allowance for lending-related commitments of $492million and $324
million, respectively.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
the following table presents the carrying value and estimated fair value of financial assets
and liabilities valued under sfas 107; accordingly, certain assets and liabilities that are
not considered financial instruments are excluded from the table.
2003(a)(b)
carrying
estimated
appreciation/
carrying
estimated
appreciation/
december 31, (in billions)
value
fair value
(depreciation)
value
fair value
(depreciation)
financial assets
assets for which fair value approximates carrying value
$
125.7
$
125.7
$
$
84.6
$
84.6
$
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale
agreements
101.4
101.3
(0.1
)
76.9
77.2
0.3
trading assets
288.8
288.8
252.9
252.9
securities
94.5
94.5
60.3
60.3
loans:
wholesale, net of allowance for loan losses
132.0
134.6
2.6
73.2
74.5
1.3
consumer, net of allowance for loan losses
262.8
262.5
(0.3
)
137.0
138.2
1.2
interests in purchased receivables
31.7
31.8
0.1
4.8
4.8
other assets
50.4
51.1
0.7
61.0
61.5
0.5
total financial assets
$
1,087.3
$
1,090.3
$
3.0
$
750.7
$
754.0
$
3.3
financial liabilities
liabilities for which fair value approximates carrying value
$
228.8
$
228.8
$
$
146.6
$
146.6
$
interest-bearing deposits
385.3
385.5
(0.2
)
247.0
247.1
(0.1
)
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements
127.8
127.8
113.5
113.6
(0.1
)
trading liabilities
151.2
151.2
149.4
149.4
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies
48.1
48.0
0.1
12.3
12.3
long-term debt-related instruments
105.7
107.7
(2.0
)
54.8
57.0
(2.2
)
total financial liabilities
$
1,046.9
$
1,049.0
$
(2.1
)
$
723.6
$
726.0
$
(2.4
)
net appreciation
$
0.9
$
0.9
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
amounts have been revised to reflect the current years presentation.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
note 30  international operations
the following table presents income statement
information of jpmorgan chase by major geographic
area. the firm defines international activities as
business transactions that involve customers
residing outside of the united states, and the
information presented below is based primarily on
the domicile of the customer. however, many of the
firms u.s. operations serve international
businesses.
as the firms operations are highly integrated,
estimates and subjective assumptions have been made
to apportion revenue and expense between u.s. and
international operations. these estimates and
assumptions are consistent with the allocations
used for the firms segment reporting as set forth
in note 31 on pages 126-127 of this annual report.
the firms long-lived assets for the periods
presented are not considered by management to be
significant in relation to total assets. the
majority of the firms long-lived assets are
located in the united states.
income before
for the year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
revenue
(b)
expense
(c)
income taxes
net income
europe/middle east and africa
$
6,566
$
4,635
$
1,931
$
1,305
asia and pacific
2,631
1,766
latin america and the caribbean
other
total international
10,125
6,889
3,236
2,132
total u.s.
32,972
30,014
2,958
2,334
total
$
43,097
$
36,903
$
6,194
$
4,466
europe/middle east and africa
$
6,344
$
4,076
$
2,268
$
1,467
asia and pacific
1,902
1,772
latin america and the caribbean
1,000
other
total international
9,296
6,396
2,900
1,879
total u.s.
24,088
16,960
7,128
4,840
total
$
33,384
$
23,356
$
10,028
$
6,719
europe/middle east and africa
$
5,120
$
4,882
$
$
asia and pacific
1,900
1,820
latin america and the caribbean
other
total international
7,747
7,293
total u.s.
21,867
19,802
2,065
1,363
total
$
29,614
$
27,095
$
2,519
$
1,663
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
revenue is composed of net interest income and noninterest revenue.
(c)
expense is composed of noninterest expense and provision for credit losses.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
note 31  business segments
jpmorgan chase is organized into six major reportable business segments: the investment
bank, retail financial services, card services, commercial banking, treasury & securities services
and asset & wealth management, as well as a corporate segment. the segments are based on the
products and services provided or the type of customer served, and they reflect the manner in
which financial information is currently evaluated by management. results of these lines of
business are presented on an operating basis. for a definition of operating basis, see the
footnotes to the table below. for a further discussion concerning jpmorgan chases business
segments, see business segment results on pages 28-29 of this annual report.
in connection with the merger, business segment reporting was realigned to reflect the new
business structure of the combined firm. treasury was transferred from the investment bank into
corporate. the segment formerly known as chase financial services had been comprised of chase home
finance, chase cardmember services, chase auto finance, chase regional banking and chase middle
market; as a result of the merger, this segment is now called retail financial services and is
comprised of home finance, auto & education finance, consumer & small business banking and
insurance. chase middle market moved into commercial banking, and chase cardmember services is now
its own segment called card services. treasury & securities services remains unchanged. investment
management & private banking has been renamed asset & wealth management. jpmorgan partners, which
formerly was a stand-alone business segment, was moved into corporate. lastly,
segment results and reconciliation(a) (table continued on next page)
year ended december 31,(b)
investment bank(e)
retail financial services
card services(f)
commercial banking
(in millions, except ratios)
net interest income
$
1,325
$
1,667
$
1,978
$
7,714
$
5,220
$
3,823
$
8,374
$
5,052
$
4,930
$
1,692
$
$
noninterest revenue
11,705
11,270
8,881
3,119
2,232
2,541
2,349
1,097
intersegment revenue(c)
(425
)
(253
)
(177
)
(42
)
(24
)
(16
)
(5
)
(12
)
total net revenue
12,605
12,684
10,682
10,791
7,428
6,348
10,745
6,144
5,913
2,374
1,352
1,365
provision for credit losses
(640
)
(181
)
2,392
4,851
2,904
2,751
credit
reimbursement(to)/from tss(d)
(36
)
(82
)
merger costs
litigation reserve charge
excess real estate charge
other noninterest expense
8,696
8,202
7,798
6,825
4,471
3,733
3,883
2,178
2,129
1,343
income (loss)before
income tax expense
4,639
4,527
3,517
2,436
2,281
2,011
1,062
1,033
income tax expense (benefit)
1,691
1,722
(3
)
1,318
net income (loss)
$
2,948
$
2,805
$
$
2,199
$
1,547
$
1,432
$
1,274
$
$
$
$
$
average equity
$
17,290
$
18,350
$
19,134
$
9,092
$
4,220
$
3,907
$
7,608
$
3,440
$
3,444
$
2,093
$
1,059
$
1,199
average assets
473,121
436,488
429,866
185,928
147,435
114,248
94,741
51,406
49,648
36,435
16,460
15,973
return on average equity
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
overhead ratio
(a)
in addition to analyzing the firms results on a reported basis,
management looks at results on an operating basis, which is a non-gaap financial measure.
operating basis starts with the reported u.s. gaap results. in the case of the investment bank, the operating basis includes the
reclassification of net interest income related to trading activities to trading revenue. in
the case of card services, refer to footnote (f). these adjustments do not change jpmorgan chases reported net income.
finally, operating basis excludes the merger costs, the litigation reserve charge and
accounting policy conformity adjustments related to the merger, as management believes these items are not part of the
firms normal daily business operations (and, therefore, not indicative of trends) and do not
provide meaningful comparisons with other periods.
(b)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
intersegment revenue includes intercompany revenue and revenue-sharing agreements,
net of intersegment expenses. transactions between business segments are primarily
conducted at fair value.
(d)
tss reimburses the ib for credit portfolio exposures the ib manages on behalf of
clients the segments share. at the time of the merger, the reimbursement methodology was
revised to be based on pre-tax earnings, net of the cost of capital related to those exposures. prior to the merger, the
credit reimbursement was based on pre-tax earnings, plus the allocated capital associated with
the shared clients.
(e)
segment operating results include the reclassification of net interest income (nii)
related to trading activities to trading revenue within noninterest revenue, which
primarily impacts the investment bank. trading-related nii reclassified to trading revenue was $2.0billion, $2.1billion and
$1.9billion for 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. these amounts are eliminated in
corporate/reconciling items to arrive at nii and noninterest revenue on a reported gaap basis for jpmorgan chase.
(f)
operating results for card services exclude the impact of credit card securitizations on
revenue, provision for credit losses and average assets, as jpmorgan chase treats the sold
receivables as if they were still on the balance sheet in evaluating the overall performance of the credit card
portfolio. the related securitization adjustments for 2004, 2003 and 2002 were: $5.3billion,
$3.3billion and $2.8billion, respectively, in nii; $(2.4) billion, $(1.4) billion and $(1.4) billion,
respectively, in noninterest revenue; $2.9billion, $1.9billion and $1.4billion,
respectively, in provision for credit losses;
and $51.1billion, $32.4billion and $26.5billion, respectively, in average assets. these
adjustments are eliminated in corporate/reconciling items to arrive at the firms reported gaap
results.
(g)
includes
$858million of accounting policy conformity adjustments
consisting of approximately $1.4billion related to the
decertification of the sellers retained interest in credit card
securitizations, partially offset by a benefit of $584million related to conforming wholesale and consumer provision methodologies for the combined firm.
(h)
merger costs attributed to the lines of business for 2004 were as follows: $74
million, investment bank; $201million, retail financial services; $79million, card
services; $23million, commercial banking; $68million, treasury & securities services;
$31million, asset & wealth management; and $889million, corporate.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
corporate is currently comprised of private equity (jpmorgan partners and one
equity partners), treasury, as well as corporate support areas, which include central technology and
operations, internal audit, executive office, finance, general services, human
resources, marketing& communications, office of the
general counsel, real estate and business
services, risk management and strategy and development.
segment results, which are
presented on an operating basis, reflect revenues on a tax-equivalent basis.
the tax-equivalent gross-up for each business segment is based upon the level,
type and tax jurisdiction of the earnings and assets within each business segment.
operating revenue for the investment bank includes tax-equivalent adjustments for income tax credits primarily
related to affordable housing investments as well as
tax-exempt
income from
municipal bond investments. information prior to the merger has not
been restated to conform with this new presentation. the amount of
the tax-equivalent gross-up for each business segment is eliminated
within the corporate segment and was $(303)million,
$(122)million and $(116)million for the years ended
december31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
the following table provides a summary of the firms segment results for 2004, 2003 and 2002 on
an operating basis. the impact of credit card securitizations, merger costs, litigation charges and
accounting policy conformity adjustments have been included in corporate/reconciling items so that
the total firm results are on a reported basis. segment results for periods prior to july
1, 2004, reflect heritage jpmorgan chase-only results and have been restated to reflect the current
business segment organization and reporting classifications.
(table continued from previous page)
corporate/
treasury & securities services
asset & wealth management
reconciling items(e)(f)
total
$1,383
$
$
$
$
$
$
(4,523
)
$
(1,368
)
$
(981
)
$
16,761
$
12,965
$
12,178
3,226
2,475
2,387
3,297
2,415
2,328
2,079
(44
)
26,336
20,419
17,436
(10
)
(10
)
(136
)
4,857
3,608
3,535
4,179
2,970
2,932
(2,454
)
(802
)
(1,161
)
43,097
33,384
29,614
(14
)
(2,150
)(g)
(1,746
)
(1,306
)
2,544
1,540
4,331
(90
)
1,365
(h)
1,210
1,365
1,210
3,700
1,300
3,700
1,300
4,113
3,028
2,771
3,133
2,486
2,408
1,301
29,294
21,716
20,156
1,060
(6,670
)
(2,971
)
6,194
10,028
2,519
(2,986
)
(253
)
(1,015
)
1,728
3,309
$440
$
$
$
$
$
$
(3,684
)
$
$
(1,956
)
$
4,466
$
6,719
$
1,663
$2,544
$
2,738
$
2,700
$
3,902
$
5,507
$
5,649
$
33,112
$
7,674
$
5,335
$
75,641
$
42,988
$
41,368
23,430
18,379
17,239
37,751
33,780
35,813
111,150
72,030
70,570
962,556
775,978
733,357
%
%
%
%
%
%
nm
nm
nm
%
%
%
nm
nm
nm
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
notes to consolidated
financial statements
jpmorgan chase & co.
note 32  parent company
parent company  statements of income
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
income
dividends from bank and bank
holding company subsidiaries(b)
$
1,208
$
2,436
$
3,079
dividends from nonbank subsidiaries(c)
2,688
interest income from subsidiaries
1,370
1,174
other interest income
other income from subsidiaries, primarily fees:
bank and bank holding company
nonbank
other income
(25
)
total income
5,024
7,191
5,754
expense
interest expense to subsidiaries(c)
other interest expense
1,834
1,329
1,511
compensation expense
other noninterest expense
1,105
total expense
3,895
2,846
2,993
income before income tax benefit and
undistributed net income of subsidiaries
1,129
4,345
2,761
income tax benefit
equity in undistributed net income (loss)
of subsidiaries
2,781
1,900
(1,530
)
net income
$
4,466
$
6,719
$
1,663
parent company - balance sheets
december 31, (in millions)
2003(d)
assets
cash with banks, primarily with bank subsidiaries
$
$
deposits with banking subsidiaries
10,703
12,554
securities purchased under resale agreements,
primarily with nonbank subsidiaries
trading assets
3,606
3,915
available-for-sale securities
2,376
2,099
loans
advances to, and receivables from, subsidiaries:
bank and bank holding company
19,076
9,239
nonbank
34,456
24,489
investment (at equity) in subsidiaries:
bank and bank holding company
105,599
43,853
nonbank(c)
17,701
10,399
goodwill and other intangibles
other assets
11,557
9,213
total assets
$
206,639
$
117,604
liabilities and stockholders equity
borrowings from, and payables to, subsidiaries(c)
$
14,195
$
9,488
other borrowed funds, primarily commercial paper
15,050
16,560
other liabilities
6,309
4,767
long-term debt(e)
65,432
40,635
total liabilities
100,986
71,450
stockholders equity
105,653
46,154
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
206,639
$
117,604
parent company  statements of cash flows
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
operating activities
net income
$
4,466
$
6,719
$
1,663
less: net income of subsidiaries
4,762
7,017
1,971
parent company net loss
(296
)
(298
)
(308
)
add: cash dividends from subsidiaries(b)(c)
1,964
5,098
2,320
other, net
(81
)
(272
)
(912
)
net cash provided by operating activities
1,587
4,528
1,100
investing activities
net cash change in:
deposits with banking subsidiaries
1,851
(2,560
)
(3,755
)
securities purchased under resale agreements,
primarily with nonbank subsidiaries
(40
)
loans
(490
)
(27
)
advances to subsidiaries
(5,772
)
(3,165
)
6,172
investment (at equity) in subsidiaries
(4,015
)
(2,052
)
(2,284
)
other, net
(37
)
available-for-sale securities:
purchases
(392
)
(607
)
(1,171
)
proceeds from sales and maturities
1,877
cash received in business acquisitions
4,608
net cash (used in) provided by
investing activities
(2,833
)
(8,109
)
financing activities
net cash change in borrowings
from subsidiaries(c)
2,005
net cash change in other borrowed funds
(1,510
)
(2,104
)
(915
)
proceeds from the issuance of
long-term debt
12,816
12,105
12,533
repayments of long-term debt
(6,149
)
(6,733
)
(12,271
)
proceeds from the issuance of stock
and stock-related awards
1,213
redemption of preferred stock
(670
)
treasury stock purchased
(738
)
cash dividends paid
(3,927
)
(2,865
)
(2,784
)
net cash provided by (used in)
financing activities
1,611
3,621
(2,139
)
net increase (decrease)in cash with banks
(304
)
cash with banks
at the beginning of the year
cash with banks at the end of
the year, primarily with bank subsidiaries
$
$
$
cash interest paid
$
2,383
$
1,918
$
1,829
cash income taxes paid
$
$
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
for a further discussion of the merger, see note 2 on pages89-90 of this annual report.
(b)
dividends in 2002 include a stock dividend of $1.2billion from the mortgage business,
which was contributed to jpmorgan chase bank.
(c)
subsidiaries include trusts that issued guaranteed capital debt securities (issuer trusts).
as a result of fin 46, the parent deconsolidated these trusts in 2003. the parent received
dividends of $15million and $11million from the issuer trusts in 2004 and 2003, respectively. for a further discussion on these issuer trusts, see note 17 on pages 112-113 of this
annual report.
(d)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(e)
at december31, 2004, all debt that contractually matures in 2005 through 2009 totaled $10.8billion, $10.5billion, $9.4billion, $6.8billion and $9.2billion, respectively.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
supplementary information
selected quarterly financial data (unaudited)
(in millions, except per share, ratio and headcount data)
2003(b)
as of or for the period ended
4th(a)
3rd(a)
2nd(b)
1st(b)
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
selected income statement data
net interest income
$
5,329
$
5,452
$
2,994
$
2,986
$
3,182
$
3,198
$
3,228
$
3,357
noninterest revenue
7,621
7,053
5,637
6,025
4,924
4,582
5,840
5,073
total net revenue
12,950
12,505
8,631
9,011
8,106
7,780
9,068
8,430
provision for credit losses
1,157
1,169
noninterest expense before merger costs and litigation reserve charge
8,863
8,625
5,713
6,093
5,258
5,127
5,766
5,565
merger costs
litigation reserve charge
3,700
total noninterest expense
9,386
9,377
9,503
6,093
5,258
5,127
5,866
5,565
income (loss)before income tax expense (benefit)
2,407
1,959
(1,075
)
2,903
2,709
2,430
2,767
2,122
income tax expense (benefit)
(527
)
net income (loss)
$
1,666
$
1,418
$
(548
)
$
1,930
$
1,864
$
1,628
$
1,827
$
1,400
per common share
net income (loss)per share: basic
$
0.47
$
0.40
$
(0.27
)
$
0.94
$
0.92
$
0.80
$
0.90
$
0.69
diluted
0.46
0.39
(0.27
)
0.92
0.89
0.78
0.89
0.69
cash dividends declared per share
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
book value per share
29.61
29.42
21.52
22.62
22.10
21.55
21.53
20.73
common shares outstanding
average:
basic
3,515
3,514
2,043
2,032
2,016
2,012
2,006
2,000
diluted
3,602
3,592
2,043
2,093
2,079
2,068
2,051
2,022
common shares at period end
3,556
3,564
2,088
2,082
2,043
2,039
2,035
2,030
selected ratios
return on common equity (roe)(c)
%
%
nm
%
%
%
%
%
return on assets (roa)(c)(d)
0.57
0.50
nm
1.01
0.95
0.83
0.96
0.73
tier 1 capital ratio
8.7
8.6
8.2
%
8.4
8.5
8.7
8.4
8.4
total capital ratio
12.2
12.0
11.2
11.4
11.8
12.1
12.0
12.2
tier 1 leverage ratio
6.2
6.5
5.5
5.9
5.6
5.5
5.5
5.0
selected balance sheet (period-end)
total assets
$
1,157,248
$
1,138,469
$
817,763
$
801,078
$
770,912
$
792,700
$
802,603
$
755,156
securities
94,512
92,816
64,915
70,747
60,244
65,152
82,549
85,178
total loans
402,114
393,701
225,938
217,630
214,766
225,287
227,394
217,471
deposits
521,456
496,454
346,539
336,886
326,492
313,626
318,248
300,667
long-term debt
95,422
91,754
52,981
50,062
48,014
43,945
43,371
42,851
common stockholders equity
105,314
104,844
44,932
47,092
45,145
43,948
43,812
42,075
total stockholders equity
105,653
105,853
45,941
48,101
46,154
44,957
44,821
43,084
credit quality metrics
allowance for credit losses
$
7,812
$
8,034
$
4,227
$
4,417
$
4,847
$
5,082
$
5,471
$
5,651
nonperforming assets
3,231
3,637
2,482
2,882
3,161
3,853
4,111
4,448
allowance for loan losses to total loans(e)
1.94
%
2.01
%
1.92
%
2.08
%
2.33
%
2.51
%
2.60
%
2.73
%
net charge-offs
$
1,398
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
net charge-off rate(c)(f)
1.47
%
0.93
%
0.77
%
0.92
%
0.76
%
1.27
%
1.31
%
1.43
%
wholesale net charge-off rate(c)(f)
0.21
(0.08
)
0.29
0.50
(0.05
)
1.25
1.25
1.36
managed card net charge-off rate(c)
5.24
4.88
5.85
5.81
5.77
5.84
6.04
5.95
headcount
160,968
162,275
94,615
96,010
96,367
95,931
95,862
96,637
share price(g)
high
$
40.45
$
40.25
$
42.57
$
43.84
$
36.99
$
38.26
$
36.52
$
28.29
low
36.32
35.50
34.62
36.30
34.45
32.40
23.75
20.13
close
39.01
39.73
38.77
41.95
36.73
34.33
34.18
23.71
(a)
quarterly results include three months of the combined firms results.
(b)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(c)
based on annualized amounts.
(d)
represents net income /total average assets.
(e)
excluded from this ratio were loans held for sale.
(f)
excluded from this ratio were average loans held for sale.
(g)
jpmorgan chases common stock is listed and traded on the new york stock exchange,
the london stock exchange limited and the tokyo stock exchange. the high, low and
closing prices of jpmorgan chases common stock are from the new york stock exchange composite transaction tape.
nm  not meaningful due to net loss.
jpmorgan chase & co./2004 annual report
table of contents
five-year summary of consolidated financial highlights
jpmorgan chase & co
(unaudited)
(in millions, except per share, headcount and ratio data)
heritage jpmorgan chase only
as of or for the year ended december 31,
(a)
selected income statement data
net interest income
$
16,761
$
12,965
$
12,178
$
11,401
$
9,865
noninterest revenue
26,336
20,419
17,436
17,943
23,321
total net revenue
43,097
33,384
29,614
29,344
33,186
provision for credit losses
2,544
1,540
4,331
3,182
1,380
noninterest expense before merger costs and litigation reserve
charge
29,294
21,716
20,254
21,073
21,642
merger and restructuring costs
1,365
1,210
2,523
1,431
litigation reserve charge
3,700
1,300
total noninterest expense
34,359
21,816
22,764
23,596
23,073
income before income tax expense and effect of accounting change
6,194
10,028
2,519
2,566
8,733
income tax expense
1,728
3,309
3,006
income before effect of accounting change
4,466
6,719
1,663
1,719
5,727
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle (net of tax)
(25
)
net income
$
4,466
$
6,719
$
1,663
$
1,694
$
5,727
per common share
net income per share:
basic
$
1.59
$
3.32
$
0.81
$
0.83
(f)
$
2.99
diluted
1.55
3.24
0.80
0.80
(f)
2.86
cash dividends declared per share
1.36
1.36
1.36
1.36
1.28
book value per share
29.61
22.10
20.66
20.32
21.17
common shares outstanding
average:
basic
2,780
2,009
1,984
1,972
1,884
diluted
2,851
2,055
2,009
2,024
1,969
common shares at period-end
3,556
2,043
1,999
1,973
1,928
selected ratios
return on common equity (roe)
%
%
%
%
%
return on assets (roa)(b)
0.46
0.87
0.23
0.23
0.85
tier 1 capital ratio
8.7
8.5
8.2
8.3
8.5
total capital ratio
12.2
11.8
12.0
11.9
12.0
tier 1 leverage ratio
6.2
5.6
5.1
5.2
5.4
selected balance sheet (period-end)
total assets
$
1,157,248
$
770,912
$
758,800
$
693,575
$
715,348
securities
94,512
60,244
84,463
59,760
73,695
loans
402,114
214,766
216,364
217,444
216,050
deposits
521,456
326,492
304,753
293,650
279,365
long-term debt
95,422
48,014
39,751
39,183
43,299
common stockholders equity
105,314
45,145
41,297
40,090
40,818
total stockholders equity
105,653
46,154
42,306
41,099
42,338
credit quality metrics
allowance for credit losses
$
7,812
$
4,847
$
5,713
$
4,806
$
3,948
nonperforming assets
3,231
3,161
4,821
4,037
1,923
allowance for loan losses to total loans(c)
1.94
%
2.33
%
2.80
%
2.25
%
1.77
%
net charge-offs
$
3,099
$
2,272
$
3,676
$
2,335
$
1,480
net charge-off rate(d)
1.08
%
1.19
%
1.90
%
1.13
%
0.73
%
headcount
160,968
96,367
97,124
95,812
(g)
99,757
(g)
share price(e)
high
$
43.84
$
38.26
$
39.68
$
59.19
$
67.17
low
34.62
20.13
15.26
29.04
32.38
close
39.01
36.73
24.00
36.35
45.44
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms
results and six months of heritage jpmorgan chase results.
(b)
represents net income / total average assets.
(c)
excluded from this ratio were loans held for sale of $25.7billion, $20.8billion, $25.0
billion, $16.6billion and $8.8billion at december31, 2004, 2003, 2002, 2001 and 2000,
respectively.
(d)
excluded from the net charge-off rates were average loans held for sale of $21.1
billion, $29.1billion, $17.8billion, $12.7billion and $7.1billion as of december31, 2004,
2003, 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively.
(e)
jpmorgan chases common stock is listed and traded on the new york stock exchange, the london
stock exchange limited and the tokyo stock exchange. the high, low and closing prices of jpmorgan
chases common stock are from the new york stock exchange composite transaction tape.
(f)
basic and diluted earnings per share were each reduced by $0.01 in 2001 because of the impact
of the adoption of sfas 133 relating to the accounting for derivative instruments and hedging
activities.
(g)
represents full-time equivalent employees, as headcount data is
unavailable.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
glossary of terms
jpmorgan chase & co.
aicpa: american institute of certified public accountants.
apb: accounting principles board opinion.
apb 25: accounting for stock issued to employees.
assets under management: represent assets actively
managed by asset & wealth management on behalf of
institutional, private banking, private client
services and retail clients.
assets under supervision: represent assets under
management as well as custody, brokerage,
administration and deposit accounts.
average managed assets: refers to total assets
on the firms balance sheet plus credit card
receivables that have been securitized.
bp: denotes basis points; 100 bp equals 1%.
contractual credit card charge-off: in accordance
with the federal financial institutions examination
council policy, credit card loans are charged-off
by the end of the month in which the account
becomes 180days past due or within 60days from
receiving notification of the filing of bankruptcy,
whichever is earlier.
core deposits: u.s. deposits insured by the
federal deposit insurance corporation, up to
the legal limit of $100,000 per depositor.
eitf: emerging issues task force.
eitf issue 03-01: the meaning of
other-than-temporary impairment and its
application to certain investments.
fasb: financial accounting standards board.
fin 39: fasb interpretation no.39, offsetting
of amounts related to certain contracts.
fin 41: fasb interpretation no.41, offsetting
of amounts related to certain repurchase and
reverse repurchase agreements.
fin 45: fasb interpretation no.45, guarantors
accounting and disclosure requirement for
guarantees, including indirect guarantees of
indebtedness of others.
fin 46r: fasb interpretation no.46 (revised
december2003), consolidation of variable interest
entities, an interpretation of accounting research
bulletin no.51.
fasb staff position (fsp) eitf issue 03-1-1:
effective date of paragraphs 1020 of eitf
issue no.03-01, the meaning of
other-than-temporary impairment and
its application to certain investments.
fsp sfas 106-2: accounting and disclosure
requirements related to the medicare prescription
drug, improvement and modernization act of 2003.
fsp sfas 109-2: accounting and disclosure guidance
for the foreign earnings repatriation provision
within the american jobs creation act of 2004.
investment-grade: an indication of credit quality
based on jpmorgan chases internal risk assessment
system. investment-grade generally represents a
risk profile similar to a rating of a bbb-/baa3 or
better, as defined by independent rating agencies.
mark-to-market exposure: a measure, at a point in
time, of the value of a derivative or foreign
exchange contract in the open market. when the
mark-to-market value is positive, it indicates the
counterparty owes jpmorgan chase and, therefore,
creates a repayment risk for the firm. when the
mark-to-market value is negative, jpmorgan chase
owes the counterparty. in this situation, the firm
does not have repayment risk.
master netting agreement: an agreement between two
counterparties that have multiple derivative
contracts with each other that provides for the net
settlement of all contracts through a single
payment, in a single currency, in the event of
default on or termination of any one contract. see
fin 39.
na: data is not applicable for the period presented.
net yield on interest-earning assets: the
average rate for interest-earning assets less
the average rate paid for all sources of funds.
nm: not meaningful.
overhead ratio: noninterest expense as a percentage of total net revenue.
sfas: statement of financial accounting standards.
sfas 87: employers accounting for pensions.
sfas 88: employers accounting for
settlements and curtailments of defined
benefit pension plans and for termination
benefits.
sfas 106: employers accounting for
postretirement benefits other than pensions.
sfas 107: disclosures about fair value of
financial instruments.
sfas 109:
accounting for income taxes.
sfas 114:
accounting by creditors for impairment of a
loan.
sfas 115: accounting for certain investments in debt and equity securities.
sfas 123: accounting for stock-based compensation.
sfas 123r: share-based payment.
sfas 128: earnings per share.
sfas 133: accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities.
sfas 138: accounting for certain derivative
instruments and certain hedging activities
an amendment of fasb statement no.133.
sfas 140: accounting for transfers and servicing
of financial assets and extinguishments of
liabilities  a replacement of fasb statement no.
125.
sfas 142: goodwill and other intangible assets.
sfas 149: amendment of statement no.133 on
derivative instruments and hedging activities.
staff accounting bulletin (sab) 105:
application of accounting principles to loan
commitments.
statement of position (sop) 98-1:
accounting for the costs of computer software
developed or obtained for internal use.
statement of position (sop) 03-3: accounting
for certain loans or debt securities acquired in
a transfer.
stress testing: a scenario that measures market
risk under unlikely but plausible events in
abnormal markets.
u.s. gaap: accounting principles generally
accepted in the united states of america.
value-at-risk (var): a measure of the dollar
amount of potential loss from adverse market
moves in an ordinary market environment.
jpmorgan chase & co. / 2004 annual report
table of contents
distribution of assets, liabilities and stockholders equity;
interest rates and interest differentials
consolidated average balance sheet, interest and rates
provided below is a summary of jpmorgan
chases consolidated average balances, interest
rates and interest differentials on a
taxable-equivalent basis for the years 2002 through
2004. income computed on a taxable-equivalent basis
is the income reported in the consolidated
statements of income, adjusted to make income and
earnings yields on assets
exempt from income taxes (primarily federal
taxes) comparable with other taxable income. the
incremental tax rate used for calculating the
taxable-equivalent adjustment was approximately
40% in 2004 and 41% in 2003 and 2002. a
substantial portion of jpmorgan chases
securities is taxable.
(table continued on next page)
year ended december 31,(a)
average
average
(taxable-equivalent interest and rates; in millions, except rates)
balance
interest
rate
assets
deposits with banks
$
28,625
$
1.88
%
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements
93,979
1,627
1.73
securities borrowed
49,387
0.94
trading assets  debt and equity instruments
169,203
7,535
4.45
securities:
available-for-sale
78,697
3,463
4.40
(b)
held-to-maturity
6.50
interests in purchased receivables(e)
15,564
1.87
loans
308,450
16,808
(c)
5.45
total interest-earning assets
744,077
30,737
4.13
allowance for loan losses
(5,951
)
cash and due from banks
25,390
trading assets  derivative receivables
59,521
all other assets
139,519
total assets
$
962,556
liabilities
interest-bearing deposits
$
309,020
$
4,600
1.49
%
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements
155,665
2,298
1.48
commercial paper
12,699
1.38
other borrowings(d)
83,721
3,817
4.56
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies(e)
26,817
1.78
long-term debt
79,193
2,466
3.11
total interest-bearing liabilities
667,115
13,834
2.07
noninterest-bearing deposits
101,994
trading liabilities  derivative payables
52,761
all other liabilities, including the allowance for lending-related
commitments
64,038
total liabilities
885,908
preferred stock of subsidiary
stockholders equity
preferred stock
1,007
common stockholders equity
75,641
total stockholders equity
76,648
(f)
total liabilities, preferred stock of subsidiary and stockholders equity
$
962,556
interest rate spread
2.06
%
net interest income and net yield on interest-earning assets
$
16,903
2.27
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
the annualized rate for available-for-sale securities based on amortized cost was 4.37% in 2004,
4.63% in 2003 and 5.13% in 2002.
(c)
fees and commissions on loans included in loan interest amounted to $1,374million
for 2004, $876million in 2003 and $928million in 2002.
(d)
includes securities sold
but not yet purchased.
(e)
not applicable for years prior to 2003 since the firm
adopted fin 46 during 2003.
(f)
the ratio of average stockholders equity to average assets was 8.0% for 2004, 5.7% for 2003
and 5.8% for 2002. the return on average stockholders equity was 5.8% for 2004, 15.3% for 2003 and
3.9% for 2002.
table of contents
within the consolidated average balance
sheets, interest and rates summary, the principal
amounts of nonaccrual loans have been included in
the average loan balances used to determine the
average interest rate
earned on loans. for additional information on
nonaccrual loans, including interest accrued, see
note 11 on pages 101 and 102.
(continuation of table)
average
average
average
average
balance
interest
rate
balance
interest
rate
$
9,742
$
2.20
%
$
11,945
$
2.54
%
87,273
1,497
1.72
84,194
2,078
2.47
40,305
0.80
42,703
1.59
148,970
6,608
4.44
137,272
6,814
4.96
77,156
3,553
4.60
(b)
66,619
3,389
5.09
(b)
7.19
6.45
5,414
1.18
na
na
na
220,692
11,824
(c)
5.36
211,432
12,720
(c)
6.02
589,838
24,104
4.09
554,611
26,014
4.69
(5,161
)
(5,178
)
17,951
18,850
85,628
73,641
87,722
91,433
$
775,978
$
733,357
$
227,645
$
3,604
1.58
%
$
217,417
$
5,253
2.42
%
161,020
2,199
1.37
168,428
3,313
1.97
13,387
1.13
16,134
1.74
69,703
3,521
5.05
69,393
3,444
4.96
9,421
1.13
na
na
na
49,095
1,498
3.05
43,927
1,467
3.34
530,271
11,079
2.09
515,299
13,758
2.67
77,640
69,999
67,783
57,607
56,287
47,988
731,981
690,893
1,009
1,009
42,988
41,368
43,997
(f)
42,377
(f)
$
775,978
$
733,357
2.00
%
2.02
%
$
13,025
2.21
$
12,256
2.21
table of contents
interest rates and interest differential analysis of net interest income  u.s. and non-u.s.
presented below is a summary of interest rates and
interest differentials segregated between u.s. and
non-u.s. operations for the years 2002 through
2004. the segregation of u.s. and non-u.s.
components is based on the location of the office
recording the transaction.
intracompany funding generally comprises
dollar-denominated deposits originated in various
locations that are centrally managed by jpmorgan
chases treasury unit. u.s. net interest income was
$15.3billion in 2004, an increase of $4.1billion
from the prior year. the increase primarily was
(table continued on next page)
year ended december 31,(a)
average
average
(taxable-equivalent interest and rates; in millions, except rates)
balance
interest
rate
interest-earning assets:
deposits with banks, primarily non-u.s.
$
28,625
$
1.88
%
federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale
agreements:
u.s.
64,673
1,182
1.83
non-u.s.
29,306
1.52
securities borrowed, primarily u.s.
49,387
0.94
trading assets  debt and equity instruments:
u.s.
100,658
4,361
4.33
non-u.s.
68,545
3,174
4.63
securities:
u.s.
65,853
3,045
4.62
non-u.s.
13,016
3.29
interests in purchased receivables, primarily u.s.(b)
15,564
1.87
loans:
u.s.
275,914
15,819
5.73
non-u.s.
32,536
3.04
total interest-earning assets
744,077
30,737
4.13
interest-bearing liabilities:
interest-bearing deposits:
u.s.
198,075
2,671
1.35
non-u.s.
110,945
1,929
1.74
federal funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase
agreements:
u.s.
122,760
1,816
1.48
non-u.s.
32,905
1.47
other borrowed funds:
u.s.
61,687
2,182
3.54
non-u.s.
34,733
1,810
5.21
beneficial interests issued by consolidated vies, primarily
u.s.(b)
26,817
1.78
long-term debt, primarily u.s.
79,193
2,466
3.11
intracompany funding:
u.s.
26,687
non-u.s.
(26,687
)
(207
)
total interest-bearing liabilities
667,115
13,834
2.07
noninterest-bearing liabilities(c)
76,962
total investable funds
$
744,077
$
13,834
1.86
%
net interest income and net yield:
$
16,903
2.27
%
u.s.
15,261
2.76
non-u.s.
1,642
0.86
percentage of total assets and liabilities attributable
to non-u.s. operations:
assets
29.7
liabilities
30.6
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
not applicable for years prior to 2003 since the firm adopted fin 46 during 2003.
(c)
represents the amount of noninterest-bearing liabilities funding interest-earning assets.
table of contents
attributable to the merger. net interest income from non-u.s. operations was $1.6billion for 2004,
compared with $1.9billion in 2003. the decrease reflects declining spreads.
for further information, see the net interest
income discussion in consolidated results of operations on pages 22
and 23.
(continuation of table)
average
average
average
average
balance
interest
rate
balance
interest
rate
$
9,742
$
2.20
%
$
11,945
$
2.54
%
61,925
1.59
60,176
1,302
2.16
25,348
2.01
24,018
3.23
40,305
0.80
42,703
1.59
86,234
4,013
4.65
81,202
4,397
5.42
62,736
2,595
4.14
56,070
2,417
4.31
67,024
3,184
4.75
53,745
2,913
5.42
10,418
3.75
13,320
3.79
5,414
1.18
na
na
na
188,637
10,973
5.82
174,359
11,514
6.60
32,055
2.66
37,073
1,206
3.25
589,838
24,104
4.09
554,611
26,014
4.69
117,035
1,688
1.44
107,823
2,412
2.24
110,610
1,916
1.73
109,594
2,841
2.59
129,715
1,599
1.23
131,213
2,800
2.13
31,305
1.92
37,215
1.38
59,249
2,323
3.92
58,533
2,490
4.25
23,841
1,349
5.66
26,994
1,235
4.58
9,421
1.13
na
na
na
49,095
1,498
3.05
43,927
1,467
3.34
44,856
68,736
1,758
(44,856
)
(946
)
(68,736
)
(1,758
)
530,271
11,079
2.09
515,299
13,758
2.67
59,567
39,312
$
589,838
$
11,079
1.88
%
$
554,611
$
13,758
2.48
%
$
13,025
2.21
%
$
12,256
2.21
%
11,140
2.55
9,564
2.42
1,885
1.24
2,692
1.69
30.7
31.7
35.5
34.9
table of contents
changes in net interest income, volume and rate analysis
the table below presents an analysis of the effect on net interest income of volume and rate
changes for the periods 2004 versus 2003 and 2003 versus 2002. in this analysis, the change due to
the volume/rate variance has been allocated to volume.
2004 versus 2003 (a)
2003 versus 2002(a)
(on a taxable-equivalent basis;
increase (decrease) due to change in:
net
increase (decrease) due to change in:
net
in millions)
volume
rate
change
volume
rate
change
interest-earning assets
deposits with banks,
primarily non-u.s.
$
$
(31
)
$
$
(48
)
$
(41
)
$
(89
)
federal funds sold and
securities
purchased under resale
agreements:
u.s.
(343
)
(314
)
non-u.s.
(124
)
(64
)
(293
)
(267
)
securities borrowed,
primarily u.s.
(21
)
(337
)
(358
)
trading assets  debt and
equity instruments:
u.s.
(276
)
(625
)
(384
)
non-u.s.
(95
)
securities:
u.s.
(52
)
(87
)
(139
)
(360
)
non-u.s.
(48
)
(110
)
(5
)
(115
)
interests in purchased
receivables, primarily
u.s.(b)
loans:
u.s.
5,016
(170
)
4,846
(1,360
)
(541
)
non-u.s.
(136
)
(219
)
(355
)
change in interest income
6,698
(65
)
6,633
1,768
(3,678
)
(1,910
)
interest-bearing liabilities
interest-bearing deposits:
u.s.
1,088
(105
)
(863
)
(724
)
non-u.s.
(943
)
(925
)
federal funds purchased and
securities
sold under repurchase
agreements:
u.s.
(107
)
(20
)
(1,181
)
(1,201
)
non-u.s.
(141
)
(118
)
(114
)
other borrowed funds:
u.s.
(225
)
(141
)
(193
)
(167
)
non-u.s.
(107
)
(178
)
beneficial interests issued
by consolidated vies,
primarily u.s.(b)
long-term debt, primarily
u.s.
(127
)
intracompany funding:
u.s.
(142
)
(597
)
(739
)
(503
)
(309
)
(812
)
non-u.s.
change in interest expense
2,908
(153
)
2,755
(2,814
)
(2,679
)
change in net interest income
$
3,790
$
$
3,878
$
1,633
$
(864
)
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
not applicable for years prior to 2003 since the firm adopted fin 46 during 2003.
table of contents
securities portfolio
the table below presents the amortized cost, estimated fair value and average yield (including the
impact of related derivatives) of jpmorgan chases securities by contractual maturity range and
type of security.
maturity schedule of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities
due in 1
due after 1
due after 5
due after
december 31, 2004 (in millions, rates on a taxable-equivalent basis)
year or less
through 5 years
through 10 years
10 years(a)
total
u.s. government and federal
agencies/corporations obligations:
amortized cost
$
1,970
$
9,450
$
3,245
$
47,638
$
62,303
fair value
1,972
9,334
3,169
47,186
61,661
average
yield(b)
1.67
%
3.22
%
3.46
%
4.77
%
4.37
%
other:(c)
amortized cost
$
6,671
$
10,190
$
6,025
$
9,632
$
32,518
fair value
6,672
10,266
6,109
9,694
32,741
average
yield(b)
2.67
%
3.15
%
3.94
%
3.03
%
3.16
%
total available-for-sale securities:(d)
amortized cost
$
8,641
$
19,640
$
9,270
$
57,270
$
94,821
fair value
8,644
19,600
9,278
56,880
94,402
average
yield(b)
2.44
%
3.18
%
3.77
%
4.48
%
3.95
%
total held-to-maturity securities:(d)
amortized cost
$
$
$
$
$
fair value
average
yield(b)
%
%
6.96
%
6.88
%
6.89
%
(a)
securities with no stated maturity are included with securities with a contractual maturity of
10years or more. substantially all of jpmorgan chases mortgaged-backed securities (mbss) and
collateralized mortgage obligations (cmos) are due in 10years or more based on contractual
maturity. the estimated duration, which reflects anticipated future prepayments based on a
consensus of dealers in the market, is approximately four years for mbss and cmos.
(b)
the average yield is based on amortized cost balances at the end of the year. yields are
derived by dividing interest income (including the effect of related derivatives on
available-for-sale securities and the amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts) by total
amortized cost. taxable-equivalent yields are used where applicable.
(c)
includes obligations of state and political subdivisions, debt securities issued by non-u.s.
governments, corporate debt securities, cmos of private issuers and other debt and equity
securities.
(d)
for the amortized cost of the above categories of securities at december31, 2003, see note 9
on page 98. at december31, 2002, the amortized cost of u.s. government and federal agencies and
other available-for-sale securities was $66,289million and $16,663million, respectively. at
december31, 2002, the amortized cost of u.s. government and federal agencies held-to-maturity
securities was $431million. there were no other held-to-maturity securities at december31, 2002.
the u.s. government and certain of its agencies
were the only issuers whose securities exceeded 10%
of jpmorgan chases total stockholders equity at
december31, 2004.
for a further discussion of jpmorgan chases
securities portfolios, see note 9 on pages
98100.
table of contents
loan portfolio
the table below presents loans based on customer type and collateral type compared to a line of
business approach that is presented in credit risk management on
pages 59 and 66, and in note11 on page 101:
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
u.s. loans:
commercial and industrial
$
76,890
$
38,879
$
49,205
$
56,680
$
64,031
commercial
real estate  commercial mortgage(b)
15,323
3,182
3,176
3,533
4,109
commercial
real estate  construction(b)
4,612
financial institutions
12,664
4,622
3,770
5,608
7,342
consumer
255,073
136,393
124,687
111,850
95,960
total u.s. loans
364,562
183,665
181,354
178,286
172,167
non-u.s. loans:
commercial and industrial
27,293
24,618
31,446
33,530
37,002
commercial real estate(b)
1,470
financial institutions
6,494
5,671
2,438
3,570
3,976
non-u.s. governments
2,778
1,161
consumer
total non-u.s. loans
37,552
31,101
35,010
39,158
43,883
total loans(c)
$
402,114
$
214,766
$
216,364
$
217,444
$
216,050
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
represents loans secured by commercial real estate.
(c)
loans are presented net of unearned income of $4.1billion, $1.3billion, $1.9billion, $1.8
billion and $1.6billion at december31, 2004, 2003, 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively.
maturities and sensitivity to changes in interest rates
the table below shows, at december31, 2004, commercial loan maturity and distribution between
fixed and floating interest rates based upon the stated terms of the commercial loan agreements.
the table does not include the impact of derivative instruments.
within
1-5
after 5
december 31, 2004 (in millions)
1 year
(a)
years
years
total
u.s.:
commercial and industrial
$
32,087
$
37,162
$
7,641
$
76,890
commercial real estate
4,027
11,507
4,401
19,935
financial institutions
6,966
4,871
12,664
non-u.s.
19,904
10,678
6,912
37,494
total commercial loans
$
62,984
$
64,218
$
19,781
$
146,983
loans at fixed interest rates
29,745
10,107
loans at variable interest rates
34,473
9,674
total commercial loans
$
64,218
$
19,781
(a)
includes demand loans and overdrafts.
table of contents
cross-border outstandings
cross-border disclosure is based upon the federal financial institutions examination councils
(ffiec) guidelines governing the determination of cross-border risk.
the following table lists all countries in which jpmorgan chases cross-border outstandings exceed
0.75% of consolidated assets as of any of the dates specified. the disclosure includes certain
exposures that are not
required under the disclosure requirements of the sec. the most significant differences between the
ffiec and sec methodologies relate to the treatments of local country exposure and to foreign
exchange and derivatives.
for a further discussion of jpmorgan chases cross-border exposure based on managements view of
this exposure, see country exposure on page 65.
cross-border outstandings exceeding 0.75% of total assets
net local
total
total
country
direct
cross-border
(in millions)
at december 31,
governments
banks
other
(b)
assets
exposure
(c)
commitments
(d)
exposure
u.k.
$
1,531
$
23,421
$
42,357
$
$
67,309
$
102,770
$
170,079
2003(a)
1,111
3,758
11,839
16,708
35,983
52,691
2002(a)
1,386
7,821
12,191
21,398
20,416
41,814
germany
$
28,114
$
10,547
$
9,759
$
$
48,929
$
47,268
$
96,197
2003(a)
14,741
12,353
4,383
31,477
31,332
62,809
2002(a)
21,705
10,213
4,789
36,707
20,405
57,112
france
$
3,315
$
15,178
$
11,790
$
2,082
$
32,365
$
33,724
$
66,089
2003(a)
2,311
3,788
6,070
12,768
22,385
35,153
2002(a)
5,212
6,461
3,136
15,793
14,902
30,695
japan
$
25,349
$
3,869
$
5,765
$
$
34,983
$
23,582
$
58,565
2003(a)
8,902
2,358
11,770
13,474
25,244
2002(a)
7,990
1,534
1,443
10,967
10,290
21,257
italy
$
12,431
$
5,589
$
6,911
$
$
25,111
$
14,895
$
40,006
2003(a)
9,336
3,743
2,570
16,467
10,738
27,205
2002(a)
7,340
3,604
2,489
13,921
6,001
19,922
netherlands
$
1,563
$
4,656
$
13,302
$
$
19,521
$
16,985
$
36,506
2003(a)
4,571
3,997
11,152
19,720
11,689
31,409
2002(a)
4,030
2,907
8,724
15,661
7,744
23,405
spain
$
4,224
$
3,469
$
4,503
$
$
12,855
$
11,086
$
23,941
2003(a)
1,365
1,909
2,964
6,238
7,301
13,539
2002(a)
2,293
1,501
1,987
6,440
5,613
12,053
switzerland
$
$
2,379
$
3,000
$
$
6,017
$
7,807
$
13,824
2003(a)
4,630
2,201
7,521
4,993
12,514
2002(a)
1,684
3,129
5,976
3,375
9,351
luxembourg
$
$
3,897
$
6,194
$
$
10,488
$
1,721
$
12,209
2003(a)
8,336
9,828
1,007
10,835
2002(a)
5,355
6,904
7,550
belgium
$
2,899
$
2,382
$
2,568
$
$
7,849
$
1,254
$
9,103
2003(a)
1,426
1,096
2,996
1,072
4,068
2002(a)
1,283
2,684
1,975
4,659
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
consists primarily of commercial and industrial.
(c)
exposure includes loans and accrued interest receivable, interest-bearing deposits with
banks, acceptances, resale agreements, other monetary assets, cross-border trading debt and
equity instruments, mark-to-market exposure of foreign exchange and derivative contracts and
local country assets, net of local country liabilities. the amounts associated with foreign
exchange and derivative contracts are presented after taking into account the impact of legally
enforceable master netting agreements.
(d)
commitments include outstanding letters of credit, undrawn commitments to extend credit and
credit derivatives.
jpmorgan chases total cross-border exposure tends to fluctuate greatly, and the amount of
exposure at year-end tends to be a function of timing rather than representing a consistent trend.
table of contents
risk elements
the following table sets forth nonperforming assets and contractually past-due assets at the
dates indicated:
december 31, (in millions)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
nonperforming assets
u.s. nonperforming loans:(b)
commercial and industrial
$
1,175
$
1,060
$
1,769
$
1,186
$
commercial real estate
financial institutions
consumer
total u.s. nonperforming loans
2,397
1,634
2,619
1,887
1,198
non-u.s. nonperforming loans:(b)
commercial and industrial
1,566
commercial real estate
financial institutions
non-u.s. governments
consumer
total non-u.s. nonperforming loans
1,615
total nonperforming loans
2,743
2,584
4,234
2,613
1,818
derivative receivables
1,300
other receivables
assets acquired in loan satisfactions
total nonperforming assets
$
3,231
$
3,161
$
4,821
$
4,037
$
1,923
contractually past-due assets(c)
u.s. loans:
commercial and industrial
$
$
$
$
$
commercial real estate
consumer
total u.s. loans
1,004
non-u.s. loans
commercial and industrial
consumer
total non-u.s. loans
total
$
1,006
$
$
$
$
(a)
heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
all nonperforming loans accounted for on a nonaccrual basis. there were no nonperforming
renegotiated loans. renegotiated loans are those for which concessions, such as the
reduction of interest rates or the deferral of interest or principal payments, have been
granted as a result of a deterioration in the borrowers financial condition.
(c)
accruing loans past-due 90days or more as to principal and interest, which are not
characterized as nonperforming loans.
for a discussion of
nonperforming loans and past-due loan accounting policies, see credit
risk management on pages 57-69, and note 11 on pages
101-102.
impact of nonperforming loans on interest income
the negative impact on interest income from nonperforming loans represents the difference
between the amount of interest income that would have been recorded on nonperforming loans
according to contractual terms and the amount of interest that actually was recognized on a cash
basis. the following table sets forth this data for the years specified.
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
u.s.:
gross amount of interest that would have been recorded at the original rate
$
$
$
interest that was recognized in income
(8
)
(5
)
(24
)
negative
impact - u.s.
non-u.s.:
gross amount of interest that would have been recorded at the original rate
interest that was recognized in income
negative
impact - non-u.s.
total negative impact on interest income
$
$
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
table of contents
summary of loan and lending-related commitments loss experience
the tables below summarize the changes in the allowance for loan losses and
lending-related commitments, respectively, during the periods indicated. for a further
discussion, see allowance for credit losses on pages68-69, and
note12 on page102-103.
allowance for loan losses
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
balance at beginning of year
$
4,523
$
5,350
$
4,524
$
3,665
$
3,738
addition resulting from the merger, july1, 2004
3,123
provision for loan losses
2,883
1,579
4,039
3,185
1,377
u.s. charge-offs
commercial and industrial
(483
)
(668
)
(967
)
(852
)
(293
)
commercial real estate
(17
)
(2
)
(5
)
(7
)
(3
)
financial institutions
(8
)
(5
)
(19
)
(35
)
(28
)
consumer
(3,079
)
(1,646
)
(2,070
)
(1,485
)
(1,067
)
total u.s. charge-offs
(3,587
)
(2,321
)
(3,061
)
(2,379
)
(1,391
)
non-u.s. charge-offs
commercial and industrial
(211
)
(470
)
(955
)
(192
)
(208
)
financial institutions
(6
)
(26
)
(43
)
(1
)
(2
)
non-u.s. governments
(9
)
(1
)
consumer
(1
)
(1
)
(1
)
(1
)
(32
)
total non-u.s. charge-offs
(218
)
(497
)
(999
)
(203
)
(243
)
total charge-offs
(3,805
)
(2,818
)
(4,060
)
(2,582
)
(1,634
)
u.s. recoveries
commercial and industrial
commercial real estate
financial institutions
consumer
total u.s. recoveries
non-u.s. recoveries
commercial and industrial
financial institutions
non-u.s. governments
consumer
total non-u.s. recoveries
total recoveries
net charge-offs
(3,099
)
(2,272
)
(3,676
)
(2,335
)
(1,400
)
charge to conform to ffiec revised policy
(80
)
allowance related to purchased portfolios
other(b)
(110
)
(134
)
balance at year-end
$
7,320
$
4,523
$
5,350
$
4,524
$
3,665
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months
of heritage jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan
chase only.
(b)
primary relates to the transfer of the allowance for accrued interest and fees on reported and
securitized credit card loans in 2004 and 2003.
allowance for lending-related commitments
year ended december 31, (in millions)(a)
balance at beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
addition resulting from the merger, july1, 2004
provision for lending-related commitments
(339
)
(39
)
(3
)
u.s.
charge-offs  commercial and industrial
(212
)
non-u.s.
charge-offs  commercial and industrial
(15
)
total charge-offs
(212
)
(15
)
non-u.s.
recoveries  commercial and industrial
total recoveries
net charge-offs
(212
)
(15
)
other
(1
)
(1
)
balance at year-end
$
$
$
$
$
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
table of contents
loan loss analysis
year ended december 31, (in millions, except ratios)(a)
balances
loans  average
$
308,450
$
220,692
$
211,432
$
219,843
$
209,488
loans  year-end
402,114
214,766
216,364
217,444
216,050
net charge-offs(b)
3,099
2,272
3,676
2,335
1,480
(c)
allowance for loan losses:
u.s.
6,617
3,677
4,122
3,743
3,006
non-u.s.
1,228
total allowance for loan losses
7,320
4,523
5,350
4,524
3,665
nonperforming loans
2,743
2,584
4,234
2,613
1,818
ratios
net charge-offs to:
loans  average(d)
1.08
%
1.19
%
1.90
%
1.13
%
0.73
%
allowance for loan losses
42.34
50.23
68.71
51.61
40.38
allowance for loan losses to:
loans  year-end(d)
1.94
2.33
2.80
2.25
1.77
nonperforming loans(d)
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of
heritage jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase
only.
(b)
excludes net charge-offs (recoveries)on lending-related commitments of $212million,
$(3) million and $15million in 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively. there were no net
charge-offs (recoveries)on lending-related commitments in 2004 or 2003.
(c)
includes a charge of $80million to conform to ffiec revised policy.
(d)
excludes loans held for sale.
deposits
the following table provides a summary of the average balances and average interest rates of
jpmorgan chases various deposits for the years indicated:
average balances(a)
average interest rates(a)
(in millions, except interest rates)
u.s.:
noninterest-bearing demand
$
31,733
$
22,289
$
23,506
%
%
%
interest-bearing demand
11,040
4,859
4,192
1.31
1.22
1.02
savings
176,850
104,863
84,215
0.79
0.75
0.26
time
73,757
55,911
57,929
1.54
1.51
3.71
total u.s. deposits
293,380
187,922
169,842
0.91
0.90
1.42
non-u.s.:
noninterest-bearing demand
6,479
6,561
7,395
interest-bearing demand
56,870
66,460
56,331
1.62
1.63
2.34
savings
1,008
0.11
0.15
0.56
time
53,539
43,735
52,840
1.88
1.90
2.87
total non-u.s. deposits(b)
117,634
117,363
117,574
1.64
1.63
2.42
total deposits
$
411,014
$
305,285
$
287,416
1.12
%
1.18
%
1.83
%
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
the majority of non-u.s. deposits were in denominations of $100,000 or more.
at december31, 2004,
other u.s. time deposits in denominations of $100,000 or more totaled
$52
billion, substantially all of which mature in three months or less. in addition, the table
below presents the maturities for u.s. time certificates of deposit in denominations of
$100,000 or more:
3 months
over 3 months
over 6 months
over
by remaining maturity at december 31, 2004 (in millions)
or less
but within 6 months
but within 12 months
12 months
total
u.s. time certificates of deposit ($100,000 or more)
$8,980
$2,932
$2,345
$3,817
$18,074
table of contents
short-term and other borrowed funds
the following table provides a summary of jpmorgan chases short-term and other borrowed
funds for the years indicated:
(in millions, except rates)
2004(a)
2003(a)
2002(a)
federal funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements:
balance at year-end
$
127,787
$
113,466
$
169,483
average daily balance during the year
155,665
161,020
168,428
maximum month-end balance
168,257
205,955
198,110
weighted-average rate at december 31
2.13
%
1.17
%
1.45
%
weighted-average rate during the year
1.48
1.37
1.97
commercial paper:
balance at year-end
$
12,605
$
14,284
$
16,591
average daily balance during the year
12,699
13,387
16,134
maximum month-end balance
15,300
15,769
23,726
weighted-average rate at december 31
2.56
%
0.98
%
1.36
%
weighted-average rate during the year
1.38
1.13
1.74
other borrowed funds:(b)
balance at year-end
$
96,981
$
87,147
$
75,810
average daily balance during the year
83,721
69,703
69,393
maximum month-end balance
99,689
95,690
92,439
weighted-average rate at december 31
3.81
%
4.47
%
5.39
%
weighted-average rate during the year
4.56
5.05
4.96
fin 46 short-term beneficial interests:(c)(d)
commercial paper:
balance at year-end
$
38,519
$
6,321
na
average daily balance during the year
19,472
6,185
na
maximum month-end balance
38,519
12,007
na
weighted-average rate at december 31
2.23
%
0.88
%
na
weighted-average rate during the year
1.80
1.11
na
other borrowed funds:
balance at year-end
$
3,149
$
3,545
na
average daily balance during the year
3,219
2,048
na
maximum month-end balance
3,447
3,545
na
weighted-average rate at december 31
1.93
%
2.26
%
na
weighted-average rate during the year
1.10
0.83
na
(a)
2004 results include six months of the combined firms results and six months of heritage
jpmorgan chase results. all other periods reflect the results of heritage jpmorgan chase only.
(b)
includes securities sold but not yet purchased.
(c)
included on the consolidated balance sheets in beneficial interests issued by consolidated
variable interest entities. vies had unused commitments to borrow an additional $4.2billion at
december31, 2004 for general liquidity purposes.
(d)
not applicable for years prior to 2003 since the firm adopted fin 46 during 2003.
federal funds purchased represents overnight
funds. securities sold under repurchase agreements
generally mature between one day and three months.
commercial paper generally is issued in amounts not
less than $100,000 and with maturities of 270days
or less. other borrowed funds
consist of demand
notes, term federal funds purchased and various
other borrowings that generally have maturities of
one year or less. at december31, 2004, jpmorgan
chase had no lines of credit for general corporate
purposes.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934,
the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on behalf of the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized.
jpmorgan chase & co.
(registrant)
by:
/s/ william b. harrison, jr.
(william b. harrison, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer)
date: march1, 2005
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacity and on the
date indicated. jpmorgan chase does not exercise the power of attorney to sign on behalf of any
director.
capacity
date
/s/ william b. harrison, jr.
director, chairman and chief executive officer
(william b. harrison, jr.)
(principal executive officer)
/s/ james dimon
director, president and chief operating officer
(james dimon)
/s/ hans w. becherer
director
(hans w. becherer)
/s/ john h. biggs
director
(john h. biggs)
march1, 2005
/s/ lawrence a. bossidy
director
(lawrence a. bossidy)
/s/ stephen b. burke
director
(stephen b. burke)
/s/ james s. crown
director
(james s. crown)
/s/ ellen v. futter
director
(ellen v. futter)
table of contents
capacity
date
/s/ william h. gray, iii
director
(william h. gray, iii)
/s/ laban p. jackson, jr.
director
(laban p. jackson, jr.)
/s/ john w. kessler
director
(john w. kessler)
/s/ robert i. lipp
director
(robert i. lipp)
/s/ richard a. manoogian
director
(richard a. manoogian)
march1, 2005
/s/ david c. novak
director
(david c. novak)
/s/ lee r. raymond
director
(lee r. raymond)
/s/ john r. stafford
director
(john r. stafford)
/s/ michael j. cavanagh
executive vice president
(michael j. cavanagh)
and chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
/s/ joseph l. sclafani
executive vice president and controller
(joseph l. sclafani)
(principal accounting officer)
