10-k
a05-3853_110k.htm
10-k
united
states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form
10-k
annual
report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
december 31, 2004
commission file number 1-3285
3m company
state of
incorporation: delaware
i.r.s. employer
identification no. 41-0417775
principal
executive offices: 3m center, st. paul,
minnesota 55144
telephone number: (651) 733-1110
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange
on which registered
common stock, par value
$.01 per share
new york stock
exchange, inc.
pacific exchange, inc.
chicago stock exchange,
inc.
note: the common
stock of the registrant is also traded on the swx swiss exchange.
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act: none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has
filed all reports required to be filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes . no o.
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent
filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will
not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k
or any amendment to this form 10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an
accelerated filer (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the act).
yes . no o.
the aggregate market value of voting stock held by
nonaffiliates of the registrant, computed by reference to the closing price and
shares outstanding, was approximately $65.2 billion as of january 31, 2005
(approximately $70.5 billion as of june 30, 2004, the last business day of the
registrants most recently completed second quarter).
shares of common
stock outstanding at january 31, 2005: 772,422,684.
documents incorporated by reference
parts of the companys definitive proxy statement (to
be filed pursuant to regulation 14a within 120 days after registrants fiscal
year end of december 31, 2004) for its annual meeting to be held on may 10,
2005, are incorporated by reference in this form 10-k in response to part iii,
items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
this document
(excluding exhibits) contains 78 pages.
the table of contents is set forth on page 2.
the exhibit index
begins on page 76.
3m
company
form
10-k
for
the year ended december 31, 2004
table
of contents
page
part i
item 1
business
item 2
properties
item 3
legal proceedings
item 4
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
part ii
item 5
market for registrants common equity, related
stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6
selected financial data
item 7
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item 7a
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item 8
financial
statements and supplementary data
index to financial
statements
item 9
changes in
and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a
controls
and procedures
item 9b
other
information
part
iii
item 10
directors
and executive officers of the registrant
item 11
executive
compensation
item 12
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
item 13
certain
relationships and related transactions
item 14
principal
accounting fees and services
part iv
item 15
exhibits,
financial statement schedules
index to exhibits
3m company
form 10-k
for the year ended december 31, 2004
part i
item 1. business.
3m company, formerly
known as minnesota mining and manufacturing company, was incorporated in 1929
under the laws of the state of delaware to continue operations begun in 1902.
the board of directors of minnesota mining and manufacturing company approved
changing the companys name to 3m company effective april 8, 2002. the mmm
ticker symbol remained the same. as used herein, the term 3m or company
includes 3m company and its subsidiaries unless the context indicates otherwise.
available
information
the company files annual
reports, quarterly reports, proxy statements and other documents with the
securities and exchange commission (sec) under the securities exchange act of
1934 (exchange act). the public may read and copy any materials that the
company files with the sec at the secs public reference room at 450 fifth
street n.w., washington, d.c. 20549. the public may obtain information on the
operation of the public reference room by calling the sec at 1-800-sec-0330.
also, the sec maintains a website that contains reports, proxy and information
statements, and other information regarding issuers, including the company,
that file electronically with the sec. the public can obtain any documents that
the company files with the sec at http://www.sec.gov.
the corporation also
makes available free of charge through its website (http://investor.3m.com) the
companys annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current
reports on form 8-k, and, if applicable, amendments to those reports filed or
furnished pursuant to the exchange act as soon as reasonably practicable after
the company electronically files such material with, or furnishes it to, the
sec.
general
3m is a diversified
technology company with a global presence in the following markets: health
care; industrial; display and graphics; consumer and office; safety, security
and protection services; electronics and telecommunications; and
transportation. 3m is among the leading manufacturers of products for many of
the markets it serves. most 3m products involve expertise in product
development, manufacturing and marketing, and are subject to competition from
products manufactured and sold by other technologically oriented companies.
at december 31, 2004, the
company employed 67,071 people, with 32,648 employed in the united states and
34,423 employed internationally.
business segments
financial information and
other disclosures relating to 3ms business segments and operations in major
geographic areas are provided in the notes to consolidated financial
statements. 3m manages its operations in seven operating business segments:
health care; industrial; display and graphics; consumer and office; safety,
security and protection services; electro and communications; and
transportation. 3ms seven business segments bring together common or related
3m technologies, enhancing the development of innovative products and services
and providing for efficient sharing of business resources. these segments have
worldwide responsibility for virtually all 3m product lines. certain small
businesses and staff-sponsored products, as well as various corporate assets
and expenses, are not allocated to the business segments.
effective january 1, 2005, as part of the continuing
effort to drive growth by aligning businesses around markets and customers, the
electronics markets materials division and certain high temperature and display
tapes (2004 sales of approximately $350 million) within the industrial business
transferred to the electro and communications business, and the converter
markets product line (2004 sales of approximately $10 million) within the
transportation business transferred to the display and graphics business.
internal management reporting for these business segment transfers commenced
january 1, 2005. segment information for all periods presented will be
reclassified in 2005 to reflect the new segment structure.
health care business:
the health care segment serves markets that include medical, surgical,
pharmaceutical, dental and orthodontic, health information systems and personal
care. products provided to these markets include medical and surgical supplies,
skin health and infection prevention products, pharmaceuticals, drug delivery
systems, dental and orthodontic products, health information systems,
microbiology products, and closures for disposable diapers.
in the medical and
surgical area, 3m is a supplier of medical tapes, dressings, wound closure
products, orthopedic casting materials, electrodes and stethoscopes. in
infection prevention, 3m markets a variety of surgical drapes, masks and preps,
as well as sterilization assurance equipment. pharmaceutical products include
immune response modifiers, respiratory products and womens health products.
other products include drug delivery systems, such as metered-dose inhalers,
transdermal skin patches and related components. dental and orthodontic
products include restoratives, adhesives, finishing and polishing products,
crowns, impression materials, preventive sealants, professional tooth
whiteners, prophylaxis and orthodontic appliances. in early 2001, 3m combined
its german dental business with espe dental ag, a leading german supplier of
crowns, bridges and other dental products. in december 2002, 3m purchased the
remaining 43% minority interest of these operations.
in health information
systems, 3m develops and markets computer software for hospital coding and data
classification, as well as providing related consulting services. 3m provides
microbiology products that make it faster and easier for food processors to
test the microbiological quality of food. tape closures for disposable diapers,
and reclosable fastening systems and other diaper components help disposable
diapers fit better.
industrial business:
the industrial segment serves a broad range of industrial markets, from
appliance and electronics to paper and packaging and food and beverage.
products include tapes, a wide variety of coated and non-woven abrasives,
adhesives, specialty materials and supply chain execution software solutions.
major product lines
include vinyl, polyester, foil and specialty industrial tapes and adhesives;
scotch masking tape, scotch filament tape and scotch packaging tape;
packaging equipment; 3m vhb bonding tapes; conductive, low surface energy,
hot melt, spray and structural adhesives; reclosable fasteners; label materials
for durable goods; and coated, nonwoven and microstructured surface finishing
and grinding abrasives for the industrial market. other products include
fluoroelastomers for seals, tubes and gaskets in engines; engineering fluids;
and high-performance fluids used in the manufacture of computer chips, and for
electronics cooling and lubricating of computer hard disk drives. in early
2003, 3m acquired 100% of the common shares of solvay fluoropolymers, with
manufacturing facilities located in decatur, alabama. in early 2004, 3m
purchased highjump software, inc., a u.s. company that provides supply chain
execution software and solutions.
display and graphics business:
the display and graphics segment serves markets that include electronic
display, touch screen, traffic safety and commercial graphics. this segment
includes optical film and lens solutions for electronic displays; touch screens
and touch monitors; reflective sheeting for transportation safety; and
commercial graphics systems.
optical products include
display enhancement films for electronic displays, lens systems for projection
televisions, and touch screens and touch monitors. in december 2002, 3m
acquired corning precision lens, inc., a manufacturer of lens systems for
projection televisions. this acquisition is part of the optical systems product
line. in traffic safety systems, 3m provides reflective sheetings used on
highway signs, vehicle license plates, construction workzone devices, trucks
and other vehicles, and also provides pavement marking systems. 3ms
intelligent transportation systems (its) include emergency response and transit
signal priority systems, traffic monitoring systems, and driver feedback signs.
major commercial graphic products include equipment, films, inks and related
products used to produce graphics for vehicles and signs. in the fourth quarter
of 2004, 3m announced the phase out of its commercial videotape business.
consumer and office business: the
consumer and office segment serves markets that include consumer retail, office
retail, education, home improvement, building maintenance and other markets.
products in this segment include office supply products, stationery products,
construction and home improvement/home care products, protective material
products, and visual systems products.
major consumer and office
products include scotch brand products like
scotch magic tape, scotch glue stick and scotch cushioned mailer; post-it
note products, such as post-it flags, post-it memo pads, post-it labels, and
post-it pop-up notes and dispensers; home care products, including
scotch-brite scour pads, scotch-brite scrub sponges, scotch-brite microfiber
cloth products, o-cel-o sponges and scotchgard fabric protectors; home
improvement products, including surface-preparation and wood-finishing
materials; filtrete filters for furnaces and air conditioners; command
adhesive products; and 3m nexcare adhesive bandages. visual communication
products serve the worlds office and education markets with overhead
projectors and transparency films, plus equipment and materials for electronic
and multimedia presentations.
safety,
security and protection services business: the safety,
security and protection services segment serves a broad range of markets that
strive to increase the safety, security and productivity of workers, facilities
and systems.
major product offerings
include personal protection products, safety and security products, energy
control products, cleaning and protection products for commercial
establishments, and roofing granules for asphalt shingles.
this segments products
include maintenance-free and reusable respirators, electronic surveillance
products, films that protect against counterfeiting, and reflective materials
that are widely used on apparel, footwear and accessories, enhancing visibility
in low-light situations. other products include theft protection systems for
libraries and library patron self-checkout systems; spill-control sorbents;
thinsulate insulation and thinsulate lite loft insulation; 3m scotchtint
window film for buildings; 3m scotchshield ultra safety and security film for
property; nonwoven abrasive materials for floor maintenance and commercial
cleaning; floor matting; and natural and color-coated mineral granules for
asphalt shingles. in march 2004, 3m completed the acquisition of hornell
holding ab, a global supplier of personal protective equipment.
electro and communications
business: the electro and communications segment serves
manufacturers of electronic and electrical equipment, as well as the construction
and maintenance segments of electric utilities, telecommunications and other
industries, with products that speed the delivery of information and ideas,
while also reducing costs. products include electronic and interconnect
solutions, microinterconnect systems, telecommunications products and
electrical products.
major electronic and
electrical products include packaging and interconnection devices; insulating
materials, including pressure-sensitive tapes and resins; and related items.
3m flexible circuits use electronic packaging and interconnection technology,
providing more connections in less space, and are used in ink-jet print
cartridges, cell phones and electronic devices. this segment serves the worlds
telecommunications companies with a wide array of products for fiber-optic and
copper-based telecommunications systems.
transportation
business: the transportation segment serves markets that
include automotive, automotive aftermarket, marine, aerospace and specialty
vehicle markets. this segment provides components and products that are used in
the manufacture, repair and maintenance of automotive, marine, aircraft and
specialty vehicles.
major product categories
include insulation components, including components for catalytic converters;
functional and decorative graphics; abrasion-resistant films; masking tapes;
fasteners and tapes for attaching nameplates, trim, moldings, interior panels
and carpeting; coated, nonwoven and microstructured finishing and grinding
abrasives; structural adhesives; and other specialty materials. this segment
also provides paint finishing and detailing products, including a complete
system of cleaners, dressings, polishes, waxes and other products.
distribution
3m products are sold
through numerous distribution channels. products are sold directly to users and
through numerous wholesalers, retailers, jobbers, distributors and dealers in a
wide variety of trades in many countries around the world. management believes
the confidence of wholesalers, retailers, jobbers, distributors and dealers in
3m and its products, developed through long association with skilled marketing
and sales representatives, has contributed significantly to 3ms position in
the marketplace and to its growth. 3m has 189 sales offices worldwide, with 15
in the united states and 174 internationally.
research, patents and raw
materials
research and product
development constitute an important part of 3ms activities. products resulting
from research and development have been a major driver of 3ms growth.
research, development and related expenses totaled $1.143 billion in 2004,
$1.102 billion in 2003 and $1.070 billion in 2002. research and development,
covering basic scientific research and the application of scientific advances
to the development of new and improved products and their uses, totaled $759
million in 2004, $749 million in 2003 and $738 million in 2002. related
expenses primarily include technical support provided to customers for existing
products by 3m laboratories.
3m
realigned its research and development efforts in 2003. this realignment was
designed to develop technologies needed for the future, to more closely align
technical resources with business priorities, and to shorten the distance
between research and development and 3ms customers. 3m established a single
global corporate research laboratory, which brings together more than 600
researchers focused on technology building while also freeing up approximately
400 other 3m technical people to directly support the growth of 3m business
units.
the companys products
are sold around the world under various trademarks that are important to the
company. the company also owns, or holds licenses to use, numerous u.s. and
foreign patents. the companys research and development activities continuously
generate new inventions that are covered by patents. patents applicable to
specific products extend for varying periods according to the date of patent
application filing or patent grant and the legal term of patents in the various
countries where
patent protection is
obtained. the actual protection afforded by a patent, which can vary from
country to country, depends upon the type of patent, the scope of its coverage
and the availability of legal remedies in the country. the company believes
that its patents provide an important competitive advantage in many of its
businesses. in general, no single patent or group of related patents is in
itself essential to the company as a whole or to any of the companys business
segments. the importance of patents in the health care and display and graphics
segments is described in performance by business segment  health care
business and display and graphics business in part ii, item 7, of this form
10-k.
in 2004, the company
experienced both price increases and supply limitations affecting several
oil-derived raw materials, but to date the company is receiving sufficient
quantities of such materials to meet its reasonably foreseeable production
requirements. it is impossible to predict future shortages of raw materials or
the impact any such shortages would have.
environmental law compliance
3ms manufacturing operations are affected by
national, state and local environmental laws around the world. 3m has made, and
plans to continue making, necessary expenditures for compliance with applicable
laws. 3m is also involved in remediation actions relating to environmental
matters from past operations at certain sites (refer to part i, item 3, legal
proceedings).
environmental expenditures relating to existing
conditions caused by past operations that do not contribute to current or
future revenues are expensed. environmental expenditures for capital projects
that contribute to current or future operations generally are capitalized and
depreciated over their estimated useful lives.
in 2004, 3m expended about $17 million for capital
projects related to protecting the environment. the comparable amount in 2003
was about $40 million. these amounts exclude expenditures for remediation
actions relating to existing matters caused by past operations. capital
expenditures for environmental purposes have included pollution control devices
such as wastewater treatment plant improvements, scrubbers, containment
structures, solvent recovery units and thermal oxidizers  at new and existing
facilities constructed or upgraded in the normal course of business. consistent
with the companys policies stressing environmental responsibility, average
annual capital expenditures (other than for remediation projects) are presently
expected to be about $23 million over the next two years for new or expanded
programs to build facilities or modify manufacturing processes to minimize
waste and reduce emissions.
while the company cannot predict with certainty the
future costs of such cleanup activities, capital expenditures or operating
costs for environmental compliance, the company does not believe they will have
a material effect on its capital expenditures, earnings or competitive
position.
executive officers
following is a list of
the executive officers of 3m, their ages, present positions, the years elected
to their present positions and other positions held during the past five years.
no family relationships exist among any of the executive officers named, nor is
there any arrangement or understanding pursuant to which any person was
selected as an officer.
name
age
present position
year elected
to present
position
other positions
held during 2000-2005
w. james mcnerney, jr.
chairman of the board
and
chief executive officer
president
and ceo, general electric aircraft engines, cincinnati, ohio, 1997-2000
patrick d. campbell
senior vice president
and
chief financial officer
vice
president, finance, general motors europe, zurich, switzerland, 2001-2002
executive
director, investor relations and worldwide benchmarking, general motors,
detroit, michigan, 2000-2001
m. kay grenz
senior vice president,
human resources
vice
president, human resources, 1998-2003
joe e. harlan
executive vice
president,
electro and communications business
president
and chairman of the board, sumitomo 3m limited, 2003-2004
executive
vice president, sumitomo 3m limited, 2002-2003
staff
vice president, financial planning and analysis, 2001-2002
vice
president and chief financial officer, general electric lighting, 1999-2001
jay v. ihlenfeld
senior vice president,
research and development
vice
president, research and development, 2002-2003
executive
vice president, sumitomo 3m limited, 2001-2002
division
vice president, performance materials division, 1999-2001
steven j. landwehr
executive vice
president,
transportation business
division
vice president, automotive aftermarket division, 1999-2002
jean lobey
executive vice
president, safety, security and protection services business
managing
director, 3m brazil, 2003-2004
executive
director, six sigma, europe and middle east, 2001-2003
regional
managing director, central europe marketing subsidiaries region, 2000-2001
managing
director, consumer and office markets, europe, 1996-2000
robert d. macdonald
senior vice president,
marketing and sales
division
vice president, automotive aftermarket division, 2002-2004
managing
director, 3m italy, 1999-2002
james t. mahan
senior vice president,
engineering, manufacturing and logistics
division
vice president, industrial adhesives and tapes division, 2002-2003
division
vice president, engineered adhesives division, 2001-2002
division
vice president, bonding systems division, 1999-2001
moe s. nozari
executive vice
president,
consumer and office business
executive
vice president, consumer and office markets, 1999-2002
name
age
present position
year elected
to present
position
other positions
held during 2000-2005
frederick j. palensky
executive vice
president,
enterprise services
executive
vice president, safety, security and protection services business, 2002-2004
executive
vice president, specialty material markets and corporate services, 2001-2002
vice
president and general manager 3m espe, 2001
division
vice president, dental products division, 1997-2001
brad t. sauer
executive vice
president,
health care business
executive
vice president, electro and communications business, 2002-2004
executive
director, six sigma, 2001-2002
managing
director, 3m korea ltd.,
1999-2001
james b. stake
executive vice
president,
display and graphics business
division
vice president, industrial tape and specialties division; and vice president,
marketing, industrial markets, 2002
division
vice president, industrial tape and specialties division, 2000-2002
division
vice president, packaging systems division, 1999-2000
inge g. thulin
executive vice
president,
international operations
vice
president, asia pacific and executive vice president, international
operations,
2003-2004
vice
president, europe and middle east,
2002-2003
division
vice president, skin health division, 2000-2002
general
manager, skin health division,
1999-2000
harold j. wiens
executive vice
president,
industrial business
executive
vice president, industrial markets, 1999-2002
richard f. ziegler
senior vice president,
legal affairs and
general counsel
partner,
cleary, gottlieb, steen & hamilton, 1983-2002
item 2. properties.
3ms general offices,
corporate research laboratories, and certain division laboratories are located
in st. paul, minnesota. in the united states, 3m has 15 sales offices in 12
states and operates 58 manufacturing facilities in 22states.
internationally, 3m has 174 sales offices. the company operates 74
manufacturing and converting facilities in 29 countries outside the united
states.
3m owns substantially all
of its physical properties. 3ms physical facilities are highly suitable for
the purposes for which they were designed. because 3m is a global enterprise
characterized by substantial intersegment cooperation, properties are often
used by multiple business segments.
item 3. legal
proceedings.
the company and some of
its subsidiaries are involved in numerous claims and lawsuits, principally in
the united states, and regulatory proceedings worldwide. these include various
products liability (involving products that the company now or formerly
manufactured and sold), intellectual property, and commercial claims and
lawsuits, including those brought under the antitrust laws, and environmental
proceedings. the following sections first describe the significant legal
proceedings in which the company is involved, and then describe the liabilities
and associated insurance receivables the company has accrued relating to its
significant legal proceedings. unless otherwise stated, the company is
vigorously defending all such litigation.
antitrust litigation
as previously reported,
lepages inc., a transparent tape competitor of 3m, filed a lawsuit against the
company in june 1997 alleging that certain marketing practices of the company
constituted unlawful monopolization under the antitrust laws. as a result of an
appeals court ruling, 3m recorded a charge of $93 million (pre-tax) in the
first quarter of 2003. on june 30, 2004, the supreme court denied 3ms petition
to review the appeals court ruling, which concluded the lepages lawsuit
against 3m. the company paid lepages $96.5 million for the judgment, interest
and attorneys fees on july 2, 2004.
following the lepages
verdict and appellate rulings, certain direct and indirect tape purchasers
filed multiple purported class actions
and one individual action against the company in various state and
federal courts. twelve putative class actions brought on behalf of indirect
purchasers of tape are now pending in california, pennsylvania, florida,
tennessee, wisconsin, kansas, south carolina, new mexico, and iowa, and two
brought on behalf of direct purchasers are pending in the federal court in
philadelphia (some of the pending actions were filed in the fourth quarter of
2004 and one was filed in january 2005). these cases allege that the company
competed unfairly and unlawfully monopolized alleged markets for transparent
tape, and they seek to recover on behalf of variously defined classes of direct
and indirect purchasers damages in the form of price overcharges the company
allegedly charged for these products. in the case in federal court in
california in which the lower court had previously granted the companys motion
for summary judgment, the ninth circuit court of appeals granted the parties
joint request to hold the plaintiffs appeal of the summary judgment ruling in
abeyance pending settlement discussions.
3m has reached a proposed
settlement in february 2005 with all named plaintiffs in the 12 indirect
purchaser antitrust putative class actions pending against the company in the various
state courts noted above and in the california federal court. if an agreement is executed by the parties and
receives federal court approval and all conditions in the agreement are
satisfied, the settlement would terminate all 12 actions and release the claims
of class members nationwide. the amount of the proposed settlement is not
material to 3m. the proposed settlement does not affect the class and
individual actions brought by direct purchasers of 3m transparent tape that are
pending in a federal court in pennsylvania and does not constitute any
admission of liability by the company.
pretrial proceedings
continue in the direct purchaser class action pending in the federal court in
philadelphia. in august 2004, that court certified a class consisting of all 3m
customers who directly bought transparent and invisible tape (but not private
label tape) from october 1998 to the present. thereafter, two additional
lawsuits were filed against the company by alleged direct tape purchasers in
the federal court in philadelphia. in one, the plaintiff opted out of the class
described above and filed an individual lawsuit in september 2004. in the other,
the plaintiff filed a purported class action in december 2004 on behalf of
customers (private label tape purchasers) excluded from the august class
certification order; the company has moved to dismiss that action as untimely
and on other grounds.
breast implant litigation
the company and certain
other companies were named as defendants in a number of claims and lawsuits
alleging damages for personal injuries of various types resulting from breast
implants formerly manufactured by the company or a related company. the vast
majority of claims against the company have been resolved. the company does not
consider its remaining probable liability to be material. information
concerning the associated insurance receivable and legal proceedings related to
it follows in the paragraph entitled breast
implant insurance receivables.
respirator mask/asbestos
litigation
for more than 25 years,
the company has defended and resolved the claims of over 340,000 individual
claimants alleging injuries from occupational dust exposures. as of december
31, 2004, the company is a named defendant, with multiple co-defendants, in
numerous lawsuits in various courts that purport to represent approximately
76,600 individual claimants, a decrease from the approximately 88,700 individual
claimants with actions pending at december 31, 2003.
the vast majority of the
lawsuits and claims resolved by and currently pending against the company
allege use of some of the companys mask and respirator products and seek
damages from the company and other defendants for alleged personal injury from
workplace exposures to asbestos, silica, coal or other occupational dusts,
found in products manufactured by other defendants or generally in the workplace.
the remaining claimants generally allege personal injury from occupational
exposure to asbestos from products previously manufactured by the company,
which are often unspecified, and by other defendants, or occasionally at
company premises.
in many of these lawsuits
and claims, the company is named as a defendant with multiple co-defendants
where no product the company manufactured is involved or where the company is
ultimately determined not to have manufactured the products identified by the
plaintiffs. the companys vigorous defense of this litigation has resulted in:
(i) dismissals of many lawsuits without any payment by the company; (ii) an
average settlement value of less than $1,000 per claimant for all of the claims
and lawsuits that the company has resolved, including those dismissed without
payment; and (iii) jury verdicts for the company in six of the seven cases
tried to verdict, and an appellate reversal of the one jury verdict adverse to
the company.
on january 20, 2005, the
mississippi supreme court reversed the $22.5 million jury verdict adverse to
the company that was returned in holmes county, mississippi, in 2001. the
supreme court ruled, in part, that the plaintiffs failed to prove any claim
against the companys respiratory products and in effect that the trial judge
should not have submitted the case to the jury in the first place. the
mississippi supreme courts decision is final and terminates the claims of the
plaintiffs against the company. it will not affect 3ms earnings or reserves.
on february 3, 2005, the plaintiffs filed a petition for rehearing with the mississippi
supreme court to which the company opposed.
of the claims currently
pending against the company noted above, the company joined other defendants in
removing approximately 7,600 silica-related claims from certain mississippi
state courts to the united states district courts for the northern and southern
district of mississippi. these claims were subsequently consolidated before a
single federal court in the southern district of texas (corpus christi) for
coordinated pretrial proceedings. the company has manufactured and continues to
manufacture certain products that contain silica, but does not believe these
products pose a health risk to any user or bystander when used as intended. the
company understands that the vast majority of these claims, however, are based
on alleged use of some of the companys mask and respirator products.
plaintiffs have asserted
specific dollar claims for damages in approximately 57% of the 10,967 lawsuits
that were pending against the company at the end of 2004 in all jurisdictions.
a majority of states restrict or prohibit specifying damages in tort cases such
as these, and most of the remaining jurisdictions do not require such specification.
in those cases in which plaintiffs choose to assert specific dollar amounts in
their complaints, brought in states that permit such pleading, the amounts
claimed are typically not meaningful as an indicator of the companys potential
liability. this is because (a) the amounts claimed typically bear no relation
to the extent of the plaintiffs injury, if any; (b) the complaints nearly
always assert claims against multiple defendants, with the typical complaint
asserting claims against more than 50 different defendants, the damages alleged
are not attributed to individual defendants, and a defendants share of
liability may turn on the law of joint and several liability, which can vary by
state, and by the amount of fault a jury allocates to each defendant if a case
is ultimately tried before a jury; (c) many cases are filed against the company
even though the plaintiffs did not use any of the companys products and,
ultimately, are withdrawn or dismissed without any payment; and (d) many cases
are brought on behalf of plaintiffs who have not suffered any medical injury,
and, ultimately, are resolved without any payment or a payment that is a small
fraction of the damages initially claimed. of the 6,248 pending cases in which
purported damage amounts are specified in the complaints, 5,383 cases involve
claims of $100,000 or less (two of these cases also allege punitive damages of
$10,000 and $75,000 respectively), 215 cases involve claims between $100,000
and $3million (83 of these cases also each allege punitive damages of
$250,000, one of them also alleges punitive damages of $1 million, 46 of them
also each allege punitive damages of $1.5 million, 72 of them each allege
punitive damages of $2 million, and one of them also alleges punitive damages
of $3 million), 62 cases involve claims of $7.5 million, one case has claims of
$8.7 million and alleges punitive damages of $5million, 519 cases involve
claims of $10 million (one of these cases also alleges punitive damages of
$350,000, and 446 of them also each allege $10 million in punitive damages), 16
cases involve claims of $15 million (14 of these cases also each allege $15
million in punitive damages), 50 cases involve claims of $20 million (all of
which also allege an equal amount in punitive damages), and two cases involve
claims of $50 million (one of which also alleges punitive damages of $50
million). some complaints allege that the compensatory and punitive damages are
at least the amounts specified. as previously stated, the company has more than
25 years of experience in defending litigation of this type, has resolved the
claims of over 340,000 individuals with a cumulative average settlement amount
of less than $1,000 per claimant, and based on this experience and for the
other reasons cited,
believes that the damage
amounts specified in complaints are not a meaningful factor in any assessment
of the companys potential liability.
the state of west
virginia, through its attorney general, filed a complaint in 2003 against the
company and two other manufacturers of respiratory protection products in the
circuit court of lincoln county, west virginia. the complaint seeks
substantial, but unspecified, compensatory damages primarily for reimbursement
of the costs allegedly incurred by the state for workers compensation and
healthcare benefits provided to more than 20,000 current or former miners
allegedly suffering from silicosis and/or coal miners pneumoconiosis (black
lung disease). the complaint also seeks unquantified punitive damages. on
january 25, 2005, the federal court to which the company and the co-defendants
removed the case granted the state of west virginias motion to remand the case
to the state court where the case was originally filed. the company and the
co-defendants have filed a motion to dismiss the case.
employment litigation
on december 21, 2004, one
current and one former employee of the company filed a purported class action
in the district court of ramsey county, minnesota, seeking to represent a class
of all salaried employees employed by 3m in minnesota below a certain salary
grade who were age 46 or older at any time during the applicable period to be
determined by the court. the complaint alleges the plaintiffs suffered various
forms of employment discrimination on the basis of age in violation of the
minnesota human rights act and seeks unspecified injunctive relief, and
compensatory and punitive damages in excess of $50,000 per plaintiff and class
member.
environmental matters and
litigation
the companys operations
are subject to environmental laws and regulations enforceable by national,
state and local authorities around the world, and private parties in the united
states and abroad, including those pertaining to air emissions, wastewater
discharges, toxic substances, and the handling and disposal of solid and
hazardous wastes. these laws and regulations provide, under certain
circumstances, a basis for the remediation of contamination, as well as
personal injury and property damage claims. the company has incurred, and will
continue to incur, costs and capital expenditures in complying with these laws
and regulations, defending personal injury and property damage claims, and
modifying its business operations in light of its environmental
responsibilities. in its effort to satisfy its environmental responsibilities
and comply with environmental laws and regulations, the company has
established, and periodically updates, policies relating to environmental
standards of performance for its operations worldwide.
remediation:
under certain environmental laws, including the united states comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act of 1980 and similar
state laws, the company may be jointly and severally liable, typically with
other companies, for the costs of environmental contamination at current or
former facilities and at off-site locations. the company has identified
numerous locations, most of which are in the united states, at which it may have
some liability. please refer to the following section, accrued liabilities and
insurance receivables related to legal proceedings for more information on
this subject.
regulatory
activities: the company has been voluntarily cooperating with
ongoing reviews by local, state, national (primarily the u.s. environmental
protection agency (epa)), and international agencies of possible environmental
and health effects of perfluorooctanyl compounds (perflurooctanoic acid or
pfoa and perfluorooctane sulfonate or pfos). as a result of its phase-out
decision in may 2000, the company no longer manufactures perfluorooctanyl
compounds except that a subsidiary recycles pfoa for its manufacturing
operations.
the previously disclosed
epa consent order negotiating process to obtain additional information to
enable the epa to further develop a human health risk assessment and identify
routes of exposure concerning pfoa is in progress. the epa signed a memorandum
of understanding with the company and dyneon llc, a subsidiary of the company,
on october 25, 2004, under which the company is monitoring at and around the
companys manufacturing facility in decatur, alabama the potential presence of
pfoa.
on january 12, 2005, the
epa issued a draft risk assessment for pfoa and submitted it for review to a
science advisory board that the epa empanelled. the epa document expresses the
epas preliminary assessment in terms of the margin of exposure between the
levels of that compound that cause adverse health effects in laboratory animals
and the levels found in human blood sera in the u.s. population.
on october 2, 2004, a
canadian regulatory agency, health canada, issued a draft report concluding
that exposures to pfos do not pose a risk to human health in that country.
another canadian agency, environment canada, issued a separate draft report at
the same time proposing to regulate pfos on the ground that it could be harmful
to the environment. the company has submitted comments on each draft report.
regulatory evaluation
activities continue in the european union (including some of its member
countries), other countries and certain international bodies as to pfoa and/or
pfos. these activities include gathering of exposure and use information,
preliminary risk assessment, and examination of regulatory approaches.
the company, in
cooperation with local and state agencies, tested groundwater beneath two
former waste disposal sites in washington county, minnesota, used many years
ago by the company to dispose of waste containing perfluorooctanyl compounds.
the test results show that water from municipal wells near the former disposal
sites contain low levels of perfluorooctanyl compounds (pfos and pfoa) that the
minnesota department of health does not currently consider to pose a health
risk. additional testing will be conducted and the company expects to assist
the government authorities in addressing such circumstances as appropriate.
the company has completed
the self-audit it agreed with the epa in june 1999 to undertake concerning its
compliance with the toxic substances control act (tsca) that included the tsca
section 8(e) reporting requirement as applied to studies on perfluorooctanyl
chemistry and other products. based on communications with epa, the company
understands that epa is presently evaluating the results of this self-audit
pursuant to the agreement, which provides for stipulated monetary penalties.
the company markets its
newly reformulated scotchgard products, which replace previous versions,
pursuant to a consent agreement with the epa that requires extensive health and
environmental effects testing of the base chemistry underlying such products, most
of which has been completed. the epa has not yet issued the anticipated hazard
assessment of that health and environmental effects testing for the
reformulated scotchgard products.
the company cannot
predict what regulatory actions arising from the foregoing proceedings and
activities, if any, may be taken regarding such compounds or the consequences
of any such actions.
litigation:
a purported class action lawsuit involving perfluorooctanyl chemistry that
originally was filed in 2002 against the company by a former employee in the
circuit court of morgan county, alabama, remains pending. the lawsuit seeks
unstated compensatory and punitive damages and alleges that the plaintiffs
suffered fear, increased risk, and sub clinical injuries from exposure to
perfluorooctanyl chemistry at or near the companys decatur, alabama,
manufacturing facility. the complaint also alleges that the company acted
improperly with respect to disclosures to workers concerning such chemistry.
the company is awaiting a decision from the court on the companys motion to
dismiss the complaint that was heard on december 10, 2003. the companys
separate motion to dismiss the class action allegations is also pending. on
september 10, 2004, three residents of morgan county, alabama, filed a
purported class action lawsuit involving perfluorooctanyl chemistry in the
circuit court of morgan county. the lawsuit seeks unstated compensatory and
punitive damages and alleges that the plaintiffs suffered damage to their
property from emissions of perfluorooctanyl compounds from the companys
decatur, alabama, manufacturing facility that formerly produced those
compounds. the purported class appears to be included in the putative class
action described above. on february 3, 2005, the judge granted the companys
motion to abate the case, effectively putting the case on hold pending the
outcome of the class certification decision in the action described above filed
in the same court in 2002.
on october 8, 2004, two
residents of washington county, minnesota, filed a purported class action in
the district court of washington county on behalf of washington county
residents whose property has allegedly been harmed by perfluorooctanyl
compounds and who have allegedly suffered personal injury from such compounds
from the companys cottage grove, minnesota, manufacturing facility that
formerly produced those compounds and other of its facilities nearby. the
lawsuit seeks unspecified damages in excess of $50,000 per plaintiff and class
member.
several hundred
plaintiffs who claim to have lived in the vicinity of the acme barrel companys
storage drum reconditioning facility in chicago, illinois, filed a lawsuit in
the third quarter of 2003 in the circuit court of cook county, illinois,
against 3m and a number of other companies that allegedly were customers of
acme barrel. the complaint seeks unspecified damages for personal injuries and
death allegedly caused by the plaintiffs exposure to chemicals migrating from
acme barrels drum reconditioning operations. the plaintiffs also assert that a
class should be certified on behalf of all persons similarly situated. a
separate wrongful death lawsuit was filed in the circuit court of cook county,
illinois, against 3m and a number of other companies on behalf of the estate
and family of a person who worked at the cook county juvenile detention center
in the vicinity of the acme barrel facility. the lawsuit alleges unspecified
damages from personal injuries and death allegedly caused by exposure to
chemicals migrating from acme barrels drum reconditioning operations.
accrued liabilities and
insurance receivables related to legal proceedings
the company complies with
the requirements of statement of financial accounting standards no. 5,
accounting for contingencies, and related guidance, and records liabilities
for legal proceedings in those instances where it can reasonably estimate the
amount of the loss and where liability is probable. where the reasonable estimate
of the probable loss is a range, the company records the most likely estimate
of the loss, or the low end of the range if there is no one best estimate. the
company either discloses the amount of a possible loss or range of loss in
excess of established reserves if estimable, or states that such an estimate
cannot be made. for those insured matters where the company has taken a
reserve, the company also records receivables for the amount of insurance that
it expects to recover under the companys insurance program. for those insured
matters where the company has not taken a reserve because the liability is not
probable or the amount of the liability is not estimable, or both, but where
the company has incurred an expense in defending itself, the company records
receivables for the amount of insurance that it expects to recover for the
expense incurred. the company discloses significant legal proceedings even
where liability is not probable or the amount of the liability is not
estimable, or both, if the company believes there is at least a reasonable
possibility that a loss may be incurred.
because litigation is
subject to inherent uncertainties, and unfavorable rulings or developments
could occur, there can be no certainty that the company may not ultimately
incur charges in excess of presently recorded liabilities. a future adverse
ruling, settlement, or unfavorable development could result in future charges
that could have a material adverse effect on the companys results of
operations or cash flows in the period in which they are recorded. the company
currently believes that such future charges, if any, would not have a material
adverse effect on the consolidated financial position of the company, taking
into account the significant available insurance coverage for products
liability claims. based on experience and developments, the company
periodically reexamines its estimates of probable liabilities and associated
expenses and receivables, and whether it is able to estimate a liability
previously determined to be not estimable and/or not probable. where
appropriate, the company makes additions to or adjustments of its estimated
liabilities. as a result, the current estimates of the potential impact on the
companys consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows
for the legal proceedings and claims pending against the company could change
in the future.
the company estimates
insurance receivables based on an analysis of its numerous policies, including
their exclusions, pertinent case law interpreting comparable policies, its
experience with similar claims, and assessment of the nature of the claim, and
records an amount it has concluded is likely to be recovered.
the following table shows
the major categories of claims for which the company has been able to estimate
its probable liability and for which the company has taken reserves and the
related insurance receivables:
at december 31
(millions)
breast implant
liabilities
$
$
$
breast implant
receivables
$
$
$
respirator
mask/asbestos liabilities
$
$
$
respirator
mask/asbestos receivables
$
$
$
environmental
remediation liabilities
$
$
$
environmental
remediation receivables
$
$
$
for those significant
pending legal proceedings that do not appear in the table, the company has
determined that liability is not probable or the amount of the liability is not
estimable, or both, and the company is unable to estimate the possible loss or
range of loss at this time. the amounts
in the preceding table with respect to breast implant and environmental
remediation represent the companys best estimate of the respective liabilities.
breast
implant insurance receivables: as of december 31, 2004, the
company had receivables for insurance recoveries related to the breast implant
matter of $278 million, representing amounts covered by the minnesota supreme
courts ruling of august, 2003, against the insurers but yet to be received
(approximately $215 million) and other amounts that have been claimed from
various reinsurers, the minnesota insurance guaranty association, and the
estates of certain insolvent insurance carriers. the company received about $50
million in 2004, offsetting a portion of the previously recorded receivable,
pursuant to settlements with six insurers and one reinsurer that were
consistent with the companys overall expectation of recovery as a result of
the minnesota
supreme court ruling.
various factors could affect the timing and amount of proceeds to be received
under the balance of the companys various insurance policies, including (i)
additional delays in or avoidance of payment by insurers; (ii) the extent to
which insurers may become insolvent in the future, and (iii) the outcome of the
pending legal proceedings involving the insurers, including the insurers
pending motion for partial relief from the amount the company believes is due
under the minnesota supreme court decision.
respirator
mask/asbestos liabilities and insurance receivables: the
company estimates its respirator mask/asbestos liabilities, both the cost to
resolve the claim and defense costs, by examining: (i) the companys experience
in resolving claims, (ii) apparent trends, (iii) the apparent quality of
newly-filed claims (e.g., the company believes many of the recently filed
claims have been asserted on behalf of asymptomatic claimants), (iv) changes in
the nature and mix of claims (e.g., the proportion of claims asserting usage of
the companys mask or respirator products and alleging exposure to each of
asbestos, silica or other occupational dusts, and claims pleading use of
asbestos-containing products allegedly manufactured by the company), (v) the
number of current claims and an assumption for projection of the number of
future asbestos and other claims that may be filed against the company, (vi)
the cost to resolve recently settled claims, and (vii) an estimate of the cost
to resolve and defend against current and future claims. because of the
inherent difficulty in projecting claims that have not yet been asserted,
particularly with respect to the companys respiratory products that themselves
did not contain any harmful materials (which makes the various published
studies that purport to project future asbestos claims substantially removed
from the companys principal experience and which themselves vary widely), the
company does not believe that there is any single best estimate of this
liability, nor that it can reliably estimate the amount or range of amounts by
which the liability may exceed the reserve the company has established.
developments may occur
that could affect the companys estimate of its liabilities and associated
expenses. these developments include, but are not limited to, significant
changes in (i) the number of future claims, (ii) the average cost of resolving
claims, (iii) the legal costs of defending these claims and in maintaining
trial readiness, (iv) changes in the mix and nature of claims received, (v)
trial and appellate outcomes, (vi) changes in the law and procedure applicable
to these claims, and (vii) the financial viability of other co-defendants and
insurers. congress is currently considering legislation that would terminate
essentially all litigation related to asbestos (but not other occupational
dusts) in exchange for substantial annual payments by the defendant companies
and their insurers and, accordingly, such legislation, if enacted, would bring
considerable certainty to the assessment of the companys future
asbestos-related liability; the company supports such legislation in principle,
although enactment of the proposed legislation could cause the company to
record substantial additional liabilities.
as a result of the
caseload and the costs of aggressively defending itself, the company made
payments of $81million in 2004 and increased its reserves in the fourth
quarter of 2004 for the respirator mask/asbestos liabilities by $40 million to
$248 million. no liability had been previously recorded regarding the
now-reversed mississippi jury verdict and no liability has been recorded
regarding the pending action brought by the west virginia attorney general
previously described.
as of december 31, 2004,
the company had receivables for insurance recoveries related to the respirator
mask/asbestos litigation of $464 million. the company increased its receivables
in the fourth quarter of 2004 for insurance recoveries related to respirator
mask/asbestos litigation by $20 million and received payments from insurers and
one reinsurer of $4 million in the third quarter of 2004. while the company has
substantial remaining claims-made and occurrence (pre-1986) insurance coverage,
as previously noted, this additional receivable represents a lower percentage
of the additional liability than was the case with receivables recorded prior
to 2004, primarily because of varying degrees of prior settlements at higher
levels of the companys insurance coverage, insolvencies of certain insurers,
uncertainties concerning the precise manner of assigning particular costs to
specific policies, and the types of claims asserted. various factors could
affect the timing and amount of proceeds to be received under the companys
various insurance policies, including (i) delays in or avoidance of payment by insurers;
(ii) the extent to which insurers may become insolvent in the future, and (iii)
the outcome of possible legal proceedings with respect to respirator
mask/asbestos liability insurance coverage.
the difference between
the accrued liability and insurance receivable represents the time delay
between payment of claims and receipt of insurance reimbursements. because of
the lag time between settlement and payment of a claim, no meaningful
conclusions may be drawn from quarterly changes in the amount of receivables
for expected insurance recoveries and the quarterly changes in the number of
claimants at the end of each quarter.
environmental
remediation liabilities and insurance receivables: as of
december 31, 2004, the company had recorded liabilities of $39 million for
estimated environmental remediation costs based upon an evaluation of currently
available facts with respect to each individual site and also recorded related
insurance receivables of $16million. the company records liabilities for
remediation costs on an undiscounted basis when they are
probable and reasonably
estimable, generally no later than the completion of feasibility studies or the
companys commitment to a plan of action. liabilities for estimated costs of
environmental remediation, depending on the site, are based primarily upon
internal or third-party environmental studies, and estimates as to the number,
participation level and financial viability of any other potentially responsible
parties, the extent of the contamination and the nature of required remedial
actions. the company adjusts recorded liabilities as further information
develops or circumstances change. the company expects that it will pay the
amounts recorded over the periods of remediation for the applicable sites,
currently ranging up to 30 years. amounts expensed for environmental remediation
activities were not material at these locations, nor have there been material
changes in the recorded liabilities for environmental matters.
it is difficult to
estimate the cost of environmental compliance and remediation given the
uncertainties regarding the interpretation and enforcement of applicable
environmental laws and regulations, the extent of environmental contamination
and the existence of alternate cleanup methods. developments may occur that
could affect the companys current assessment, including, but not limited to:
(i) changes in the information available regarding the environmental impact of
the companys operations and products; (ii) changes in environmental
regulations or enforcement policies, including efforts to recover natural
resource damages; (iii) new and evolving analytical and remediation techniques;
(iv) success in allocating liability to other potentially responsible parties;
and (v) the financial viability of other potentially responsible parties and
third-party indemnitors.
item 4. submission
of matters to a vote of security holders.
none in the quarter ended
december 31, 2004.
part ii
item 5. market for registrants common equity, related
stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities.
equity compensation
plans information is incorporated by reference from part iii, item 12,
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management, of this
document, and should be considered an integral part of item 5. at january 31,
2005, there were approximately 126,117 shareholders of record. 3ms stock is
listed on the new york stock exchange, inc. (nyse), pacific exchange, inc.,
chicago stock exchange, inc., and the swx swiss exchange. cash dividends
declared and paid totaled $.36 per share for each quarter of 2004, and $.33 per share for each quarter of
2003. stock price comparisons follow:
stock
price comparisons (nyse composite transactions)
(per share amounts)
first
quarter
second
quarter
third
quarter
fourth
quarter
year
high
$
86.20
$
90.29
$
90.11
$
83.03
$
90.29
low
74.35
80.90
77.20
73.31
73.31
2003 high
$
67.48
$
68.38
$
72.85
$
85.40
$
85.40
2003 low
59.73
60.26
63.40
69.80
59.73
issuer purchases of equity
securities
repurchases of common
stock are made to support the companys stock-based employee compensation plans
and for other corporate purposes. on november 10, 2003, the board of directors
authorized the purchase of up to $1.5billion of the companys common
stock between january 1, 2004 and december 31, 2004. on november 8, 2004, the
board of directors authorized the purchase of an additional $200 million of the
companys common stock for calendar year 2004 and also authorized the purchase
of $2.0 billion of the companys common stock between january 1, 2005 and
january 31, 2006.
issuer purchases of equity securities (registered
pursuant to section 12 of the exchange act)
period
(a)
total number
of shares
purchased
(1)
(b)
average
price paid
per share
(c)
total number
of shares
purchased as
part of
publicly
announced
plans or
programs
(d)
maximum
approximate
dollar value of
shares that
may
yet be
purchased
under the
plans or
programs
(millions)
january 1-31, 2004
1,967,130
$
82.57
1,742,100
$
1,356
february 1-29,
2,079,179
79.41
2,059,000
1,193
march 1-31, 2004
1,406,826
78.45
1,288,700
1,092
total january 1
march 31, 2004
5,453,135
$
80.30
5,089,800
$
1,092
april 1-30, 2004
1,435,523
$
86.29
1,257,000
$
may 1-31, 2004
1,530,309
84.30
1,320,500
june 1-30, 2004
1,168,954
86.85
1,109,000
total april 1
june 30, 2004
4,134,786
$
85.71
3,686,500
$
july 1-31, 2004
785,977
$
83.19
745,000
$
august 1-31,
3,330,062
80.13
3,256,200
september 1-30,
1,364,818
81.23
1,344,500
total july 1
september 30, 2004
5,480,857
$
80.85
5,345,700
$
october 1-31,
1,152,298
$
77.73
1,114,700
$
november 1-30,
3,083,467
80.85
2,980,800
december 1-31,
2,693,741
80.46
2,575,500
total october 1
dec. 31, 2004
6,929,506
$
80.18
6,671,000
$
total january 1
december 31, 2004
21,998,284
$
81.42
20,793,000
$
(1) the total number of
shares purchased includes: (i) shares purchased under the boards $1.5 billion
authorization and $200 million authorization described above, and (ii) shares
purchased in connection with the exercise of stock options and a small number
of shares purchased from individuals (which combined totaled 225,030 shares in
january 2004, 20,179 shares in february 2004, 118,126 shares in march 2004,
178,523 shares in april 2004, 209,809 shares in may 2004, 59,954 shares in june
2004, 40,977 shares in july 2004, 73,862 shares in august 2004, 20,318 shares
in september 2004, 37,598 shares in october 2004, 102,667 shares in november
2004, and 118,241 shares in december 2004).
item 6. selected
financial data.
(dollars in millions, except
per share amounts)
years ended
december 31:
net sales
$
20,011
$
18,232
$
16,332
$
16,054
$
16,699
income from
continuing operations
2,990
2,403
1,974
1,430
1,857
per share of
common stock:
continuing
operations  basic
3.83
3.07
2.53
1.81
2.35
continuing
operations  diluted
3.75
3.02
2.50
1.79
2.32
cash dividends
declared and paid
1.44
1.32
1.24
1.20
1.16
at december 31:
total assets
$
20,708
$
17,600
$
15,329
$
14,606
$
14,522
long-term debt
(excluding portion due within one year) and long-term capital lease
obligations
1,805
2,142
1,520
the above income and
earnings per share information exclude the cumulative effect of accounting
change in 2000 ($75 million, or 9 cents per diluted share) related to a change
in the companys revenue recognition policies. these policies were consistent
with the guidance contained in sec staff accounting bulletin no. 101, revenue
recognition in financial statements.
as discussed in the notes
to consolidated financial statements, 2003 results included charges related to
an adverse ruling in a lawsuit filed against 3m in 1997 by lepages inc. that
reduced operating income by $93million ($58 million after tax), or 7 cents per diluted share. 2002 charges
in connection with 3ms 2001/2002 restructuring plan reduced operating income
by $202 million ($108 million after tax and minority interest), or 13 cents per diluted share.
2001 includes net losses
that reduced operating income by $504 million ($312 million after tax and
minority interest), or 39 cents per diluted share, principally related to
charges in connection with 3ms 2001/2002 restructuring plan,
acquisition-related charges, a reversal of a 1999 litigation accrual, and a net
gain related to the sale of available-for-sale equity securities, partially
offset by the write-down of available-for-sale equity securities. 2000 includes
net losses that reduced operating income by $23 million ($15 million after
tax), or 2 cents per diluted share, related to charges recorded for the companys
phase-out of its perfluorooctanyl-based chemistry products, a write-down of
certain corporate and unallocated assets, gains related to corporate and
unallocated asset dispositions, a gain from the termination of a product
distribution agreement in the health care segment, and other items.
item 7. managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.
overview
3m is a diversified
global manufacturer, technology innovator and marketer of a wide variety of
products. 3m manages its operations in seven operating business segments:
health care; industrial; display and graphics; consumer and office; safety,
security and protection services; electro and communications; and transportation.
3ms performance in 2004 was broad-based, with strong performance and growth in
display and graphics, but 3m also had success in established businesses like
industrial; safety, security and protection services; and consumer and office.
all seven business segments contributed to sales growth in 2004. in 2004, 3m
reported record net sales of $20.011 billion and record net income of $2.990
billion, or $3.75 per diluted share, compared with net sales of $18.232 billion
and net income of $2.403 billion, or $3.02 per diluted share, in 2003. the
combination of a 9.8% increase in net sales, including core volume sales growth
of 6.2% (which excludes the impact of businesses acquired in the last 12
months), and declining operating expenses as a percent of sales, resulted in a
22.9% operating income profit margin. the following table contains sales and
operating income results by business segment for the years ended
december31.
2004 vs. 2003
% change
(dollars in millions)
net
sales
% of
total
oper.
income
net
sales
% of
total
oper.
income
net
sales
oper.
income
business
segments
health care
$
4,230
21.1
%
$
1,123
$
3,995
21.9
%
$
1,027
5.9
%
9.3
%
industrial
3,792
19.0
%
3,354
18.4
%
13.1
%
44.5
%
display and
graphics
3,406
17.0
%
1,131
2,962
16.2
%
15.0
%
27.8
%
consumer and
office
2,861
14.3
%
2,607
14.3
%
9.7
%
17.9
%
safety, security
and protection services
2,125
10.6
%
1,928
10.6
%
10.2
%
12.3
%
electro and
communications
1,876
9.4
%
1,818
10.0
%
3.2
%
14.1
%
transportation
1,683
8.4
%
1,538
8.4
%
9.4
%
10.1
%
corporate and unallocated
0.2
%
(89
)
0.2
%
(198
)
total company
$
20,011
%
$
4,578
$
18,232
%
$
3,713
9.8
%
23.3
%
sales growth in 2004 was
strongest in the display and graphics segment, driven by sales of display
enhancement films used in flat-panel devices, and the industrial segment, led
by broad-based sales across industrial businesses and geographies. sales growth
in the safety, security and protection services segment was driven by continued
demand for personal protection products along with strong demand for cleaning and
protection products. sales growth in the consumer and office segment was
broad-based, with the transportation segment led by both the automotive oem and
repair markets. the health care segment experienced tough year-on-year
comparisons through the first three quarters of the year, with improvement in
the fourth quarter of 2004. for the electro and communications segment, this
was the first year of positive sales growth since 2000. refer to the
performance by business segment section for a more detailed discussion of the
results of the respective segments.
asia pacific
local-currency sales (which excludes translation impacts) increased 13.6%, with
the strongest growth in china, korea and taiwan. all seven business segments
contributed to this increase. u.s. sales revenue increased 3.9%, with growth
led by consumer and office; safety, security and protection services; and the
industrial businesses. european local-currency sales increased 0.8%, with
growth in safety, security and protection services; transportation; industrial;
and health care. in the combined latin america, africa and canada area, six of
seven businesses had local-currency sales increases, led by electro and
communications; transportation; industrial; and health care. foreign currency
translation positively impacted european sales by 8.9%, asia pacific sales by
5.6%, and the combined latin america, africa and canada area by 2.4%, as the
u.s. dollar weakened against these currencies. refer to the performance by
geographic area section for a more detailed discussion of the results for the
respective areas.
operating income in 2004
increased by 23.3% versus 2003, as all seven business segments posted
increases. the combination of solid sales growth and positive benefits from
3ms 2004 corporate initiatives drove the operating income increase. cost
reduction projects related to these initiatives  six sigma, global sourcing
effectiveness, 3m acceleration and eproductivity  contributed over $400
million in aggregate operating income benefits in 2004 (see note a at the end
of this overview section). currency impacts, related primarily to the weaker
u.s. dollar, boosted 2004 operating income by an estimated $286 million,
partially offset by increased
pension expense of $157
million. operating income in 2003 was negatively impacted by a $93million
pre-tax charge related to an adverse ruling in a lawsuit filed against 3m in
1997 by lepages inc.
3m generated $4.282
billion of operating cash flows in 2004, a $509 million increase over 2003, and
ended the year with $2.757 billion of cash and cash equivalents. cash flow in
2004 was primarily driven by higher net income. in 2004, the company utilized
$2.916 billion of cash to repurchase 3m common stock and pay dividends, and
contributed $591 million to its pension plans. 3ms debt to total capital ratio
(total capital defined as debt plus equity) as of december 31, 2004, was
approximately 21%. 3m has an aa credit rating from standard & poors and an
aa1 credit rating from moodys investors service.
in 2005, 3m expects to
continue its momentum to drive sales, operational efficiency and cash flow
growth. 3m is looking for continued broad-based product sales to drive its
growth, in addition to expected continued growth in optical film products, and
will also continue to assess potential acquisitions. continued core volume
sales growth will require both faster growth of existing products/services and
successful introduction of new products. while international sales now
represent 61% of worldwide sales, the company will also focus on execution of
sales and growth opportunities in the united states. in part to energize the 3m
acceleration initiative, early in 2004 the company launched an extensive effort
to reconnect and re-engage with customers. this will aid 3m in its continuing
quest to provide additional customer value, with both the customer and 3m
benefiting through value creation and also facilitating 3ms ability to achieve
appropriate pricing. the company also is focused on its corporate initiatives
to improve productivity and reduce costs. cost reduction projects related to
these initiatives are expected to contribute an additional $400 million to
operating income in 2005. the company has experienced both price increases and
supply limitations affecting several oil-derived raw materials, but to date the
company is receiving sufficient quantities of such materials to meet its
reasonably foreseeable production requirements. fluctuations in foreign currency
exchange rates also impact results, although the company minimizes this effect
through hedging about half of this impact. 3m will also continue, as it has for
many years, to incur expenses (insured and uninsured) in managing its
litigation and environmental contingencies. these forward-looking statements
involve risks and uncertainties that could cause results to differ materially
from those projected (refer to the forward-looking statements discussion later
in item 7 for discussion of these risks and uncertainties).
(note a). the companys
five corporate initiatives (six sigma, global sourcing effectiveness, 3m
acceleration, eproductivity and global business processes) are aimed at
accelerating long-term top-line growth, improving cash flow and lowering its
total cost structure. indirect cost control, which focused on reducing costs
not directly associated with products or services, is no longer a formal
initiative and is now managed using a productivity metric. six sigma focuses on
higher growth, productivity and cash flow. global sourcing effectiveness
generates savings by leveraging purchasing economies of scale, encouraging
competition among suppliers, geographic broadening and e-applications. through
its 3m acceleration initiative, the company is driving toward more and better
new product ideas and faster, more impactful new product introductions, along
with reallocating research and development resources to larger, more global
projects. in eproductivity, 3m believes it has a significant opportunity to
improve productivity for its customers, suppliers and for 3m itself. 3ms
global business processes initiative continues 3ms ongoing effort to
standardize, simplify and strengthen its business processes in order to
increase the speed, efficiency and quality of service functions vital to its
business operations worldwide. there can be no assurance that all of the
estimated cost savings from such activities will be realized. numerous factors
may create offsets to these savings, such as the potential for weakness in
sales volumes, normal increases in compensation and benefits, and other
inflationary pressures. the company estimates that cost reduction projects
related to initiatives provided a combined incremental benefit to operating
income of more than $400 million in 2004, after contributing a similar amount
in 2003. these initiatives provided an incremental benefit to operating income
of more than $500 million in 2002.
index to managements discussion
and analysis
of financial condition and
results of operations:
reference (pages)
item 7
results
of operations
performance by business
segment
performance by
geographic area
critical accounting
estimates
new accounting
pronouncements
financial condition
and liquidity
financial instruments
forward-looking statements
item
7a
quantitative and
qualitative disclosures about market risk
results of operations
net sales:
worldwide
u.s.
international
worldwide
u.s.
international
net sales (millions)
$
20,011
$
7,878
$
12,133
$
18,232
$
7,581
$
10,651
components ofnet sales change:
volume  core
6.2
%
3.2
%
8.2
%
4.7
%
0.6
%
8.2
%
volume
acquisitions
0.5
0.8
0.3
1.9
1.5
2.2
volume  total
6.7
4.0
8.5
6.6
2.1
10.4
price
(0.7
)
(0.1
)
(1.1
)
(0.2
)
(0.3
)
local currency
6.0
3.9
7.4
6.4
2.1
10.1
translation
3.8
6.5
5.2
9.5
total
9.8
%
3.9
%
13.9
%
11.6
%
2.1
%
19.6
%
in
2004, core volume growth (which excludes the impact of businesses acquired in
the last 12 months) was broad-based, with all seven businesses posting
worldwide local-currency sales growth. local-currency growth was led by display
and graphics; industrial; consumer and office; safety, security and protection
services; and the transportation businesses. health care local-currency sales
increased 1.7%, as results were negatively impacted by 2003 sales from
pharmaceutical and drug delivery agreements that did not repeat in 2004.
electro and communications local-currency sales increased 0.3%, the first year
of positive growth since 2000. acquisitions increased 2004 sales by 0.5%,
driven by the 2004 acquisitions of highjump software, inc. and hornell holding
ab. internationally, selling prices declined 1.1%, with most of the decline
coming in certain businesses that serve the electronics industry, where it is
important to look at the combined impact of volume and price. on a geographic
basis, local-currency sales growth in 2004 was led by the asia pacific area.
refer to both the performance by business segment and performance by
geographic area sections for additional discussion of sales change.
in
2003, core volume growth (which excludes the impact of businesses acquired in
the last 12 months) was led by display enhancement films, broad-based growth in
most of the health care businesses, personal protection products, and growth in
products related to construction and home improvement/home care. acquisitions
increased 2003 sales by nearly 2%, driven primarily by the december 2002
acquisition of corning precision lens, inc. on a geographic basis, 2003 core
volume growth was strongest in the asia pacific area.
operating expenses:
(percent of net sales)
versus
versus
cost of sales
49.8
%
50.9
%
52.0
%
(1.1
)%
(1.1
)%
selling, general
and administrative expenses
21.6
22.2
22.8
(0.6
)
(0.6
)
research,
development and related expenses
5.7
6.0
6.5
(0.3
)
(0.5
)
other expense
0.5
(0.5
)
0.5
operating income
22.9
20.4
18.7
2.5
1.7
cost of sales:
cost of sales includes
manufacturing, engineering and freight costs. cost of sales decreased 1.1
percentage points in both 2004 and 2003. the 2004 decrease as a percent of net
sales was driven by a combination of higher volumes, productivity gains,
ongoing benefits of corporate initiatives and positive currency impacts
(including hedging impacts). while 3m raw material costs increased during the
year, 3ms global sourcing initiative was important in enabling 3m to minimize
raw material cost increases during a period of commodity price inflation.
cost of sales in 2003
benefited from six sigma and other projects aimed at improving manufacturing
throughput, yield and productivity. 3ms global sourcing initiative has helped
mitigate the impact of raw material price increases. in 2003, raw material
costs were essentially flat versus 2002. charges related to the 2001/2002
corporate restructuring program negatively impacted cost of sales by 0.7
percentage points in 2002.
selling, general and administrative expenses:
selling, general and
administrative (sg&a) expenses have improved by 0.6 percentage points in
each of the past two years. the improvement in 2004 as a percent of net sales
was helped by leverage related to 3ms strong growth in the asia pacific area.
sg&a expenses in u.s. dollars increased in 2004, negatively impacted by
currency translation and increased advertising and merchandising spending to
support 3ms strong brand portfolio. on an ongoing basis, the company is
shifting sg&a dollars toward faster-growth businesses and geographic areas.
sg&a expenses in u.s.
dollars in 2003 increased due to currency translation, as well as higher
advertising and merchandising spending. charges related to the 2001/2002
corporate restructuring program negatively impacted sg&a in 2002 by
$77million, or 0.5% of sales. excluding these charges, sg&a for 2003
was relatively flat as a percent of sales compared with 2002.
other expense:
in 2003, 3m recorded pre-tax charges of $93 million ($58 million
after-tax, or 7 cents per diluted share) related to an adverse ruling in a lawsuit
filed against 3m in 1997 by lepages inc. the pre-tax charge of $93 million is
classified as other expense within operating income. for more detail, refer
to the discussion of legal proceedings in part i, item 3 of this document.
2001/2002 corporate restructuring program:
in 2002, charges related to the 2001/2002 corporate
restructuring program reduced operating income by $202 million and net income
by $108 million. these charges principally related to employee severance and
benefit costs, accelerated depreciation charges, and other associated exit
costs under the companys restructuring plan announced in june 2001. these
charges are included in cost of sales ($121 million); selling, general and
administrative expenses ($77 million); and research, development and related
expenses ($4 million). the 2001/2002
corporate restructuring program actions were substantially completed by june
30, 2002. the company estimated incremental savings under this plan of
approximately $100 million on a pre-tax basis in 2003, primarily in the first
half of the year. the company estimated incremental savings of $300 million on
a pre-tax basis in 2002. the majority of these savings were from reduced
employee costs. for more detail, refer to the discussion in note 4 to the
consolidated financial statements (2001/2002 corporate restructuring program).
operating income:
3m uses operating income
as one of its primary business segment performance measurement tools. operating
income in 2004 was 22.9% of sales, up from 20.4% of sales in 2003 and 18.7% of
sales in 2002. operating income in 2004 grew by $865 million, or 23.3 percent,
following 2003 operating income growth of $667 million, or 21.9%. the lepages
inc. lawsuit negatively impacted operating income in 2003 by $93 million, or
0.5% of sales. the 2001/2002 corporate restructuring program negatively
impacted operating income in 2002 by $202 million, or 1.2% of sales.
interest expense and income:
(millions)
interest expense
$
$
$
interest income
(46
)
(28
)
(39
)
total
$
$
$
interest
expense: the decrease in 2004 interest expense was primarily
the result of lower average debt balances, partially offset by higher interest
rates in the united states. the slight increase in 2003 interest expense was
primarily due to a reduced benefit from capitalized interest (related to lower
capital spending) and higher average debt balances, largely offset by lower
interest rates.
interest
income: interest income increased in 2004 due to
substantially higher cash balances. in 2003, while average cash balances were
higher than in 2002, interest income decreased due to lower interest rates.
provision for income taxes:
(percent of pretax income)
effective tax
rate
33.0
%
32.9
%
32.1
%
the tax rate of 33.0% for
2004 was comparable to the 2003 rate of 32.9%. income taxes associated with
repatriating certain cash from outside the united states negatively impacted the
2004 and 2003 income tax rates. refer to note 1 to the consolidated financial
statements for discussion of the american jobs creation act of 2004 and the
possible impact on the 2005 tax rate.
minority
interest:
(millions)
minority interest
$
$
$
minority interest
represents the elimination of the non-3m ownership interests, primarily in
sumitomo 3m limited and 3m inter-unitek gmbh (in 2002 only). the increase in
2004 related primarily to higher net income in sumitomo 3m, as 3m eliminates
the non-3m ownership portion of net income. the decrease in 2003 related to
3ms purchase of the minority interest shares of 3m inter-unitek gmbh in
december 2002 and the purchase of an additional 25% ownership in sumitomo 3m in
early 2003. refer to note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information on these acquisitions.
currency effects:
3m estimates that
year-on-year currency effects, including hedging impacts, increased net income
by $181 million in 2004 and $73 million in 2003, and reduced net income by $35
million in 2002. this estimate includes the effect of translating profits from
local currencies into u.s. dollars; the impact of currency fluctuations on the
transfer of goods between 3m operations in the united states and abroad; and
transaction gains and losses, including derivative instruments designed to
reduce foreign currency exchange rate risks.
performance by business segment
disclosures relating to
3ms business segments are provided in item 1, business segments. financial
information and other disclosures are provided in the notes to the consolidated
financial statements. the reportable segments are health care; industrial;
display and graphics; consumer and office; safety, security and protection
services; electro and communications; and transportation. information related
to 3ms business segments is presented in the tables that follow.
local-currency sales (which include both core and acquisition volume impacts,
plus price impacts) are provided for each segment. the translation impact and
total sales change are also provided for each segment.
effective january 1, 2005, as part of the continuing
effort to drive growth by aligning businesses around markets and customers, the
electronics markets materials division and certain high temperature and display
tapes (2004 sales of approximately $350 million) within the industrial business
transferred to the electro and communications business, and the converter
markets product line (2004 sales of approximately $10 million) within the
transportation business transferred to the display and graphics business.
internal management reporting for these business segment transfers commenced
january 1, 2005. segment information for all periods presented will be reclassified
in 2005 to reflect the new segment structure.
health care business (21.1% of consolidated sales):
sales (millions)
$
4,230
$
3,995
$
3,560
sales change
analysis:
local currency
(volume and price)
1.7
%
6.0
%
7.7
%
translation
4.2
6.2
0.2
total sales
change
5.9
%
12.2
%
7.9
%
operating income
(millions)
$
1,123
$
1,027
$
percent change
9.3
%
14.1
%
19.5
%
percent of sales
26.5
%
25.7
%
25.3
%
the health care segment
serves markets that include medical, surgical, pharmaceutical, dental and
orthodontic, health information systems and personal care. products provided to
these markets include medical and surgical supplies, skin health and infection
prevention products, pharmaceuticals, drug delivery systems, dental and
orthodontic products, health information systems, microbiology products, and
closures for disposable diapers.
in
2004, local-currency sales in health care increased 1.7%, with the first nine
months of 2004 negatively impacted by 2003 pharmaceutical and drug delivery
agreements that did not repeat. fourth quarter 2004 local-currency sales grew
5.0%, as year-on-year comparisons became more favorable. operating income
increased 9.3% to $1.123billion in 2004.
the 3m product platform
of immune response modifiers (irms) continues to progress. 3m received u.s.
food and drug administration (fda) approval in march 2004 to market aldara
(imiquimod) cream, 5%, for the treatment of certain types of actinic keratosis
(a pre-cancerous skin condition). in july 2004, the fda granted approval for
aldara for the treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma (a common form of
non-melanoma skin cancer). the patent and related rights for the imiquimod
molecule are important to the health care business. the original patent on the
imiquimod molecule expired in august 2004, but the patent term extension runs through
august 2009.
in the pharmaceuticals
business, an agreement was reached with eli lilly and company in september of
2001 to collaborate on resiquimod, an investigational compound for the
treatment of genital herpes. 3m received $100million in the fourth
quarter of 2001 from lilly in consideration for research and development
efforts. revenue was recognized on a pro-rata basis over the service period. 3m
recognized $44 million of revenue relating to this agreement in 2003, $43
million in 2002 and $7 million in 2001. in the third quarter of 2003, 3m and
eli lilly reached a final agreement to return control of resiquimod to 3m. upon
termination of the agreement in 2003, 3m recognized the majority of the
remaining revenue (with deferral of some immaterial remaining obligations until
2004 when the obligations were finalized).
in october 2003, ivax
corporation agreed to assume exclusive rights to 3ms branded health care
respiratory products, together with related marketing and sales personnel, in
nine european countries. the agreement covered qvar (beclomethasone
dipropionate hfa) inhalation aerosol, a maintenance medication used to
prevent asthma attacks, and also covered airomir (albuterol sulfate) inhaler,
a rescue medication used to relieve acute asthma symptoms. 3m will continue
to manufacture and supply these products to ivax. the total consideration due
under the agreement, including minimum annual royalty payments, was $77
million, of which $26 million was paid in 2003 and $24 million was paid in
2004. 3m expects to receive $24 million in 2005 and $3million in 2006. 3m
may also receive additional royalty payments (up to a maximum of approximately
$7 million in total) if ivax achieves certain annual sales levels. the company
recognizes the royalty revenue related to the ivax agreement ratably over the
term of the licensing arrangement.
in 2003, local-currency
growth and total sales growth in the health care segment was broad-based.
geographic area local-currency growth was led by the asia pacific area and the
latin america, africa and canada area, with the united states and europe
showing moderate growth. operating income improvement was also broad-based. in
2003, the combined benefit from both the eli lilly agreement and the ivax
corporation agreement was partially offset by separation costs in health care,
resulting in a net benefit to operating income of approximately
$20million.
industrial business (19.0% of consolidated sales):
sales (millions)
$
3,792
$
3,354
$
3,147
sales change
analysis:
local currency
(volume and price)
9.1
%
1.5
%
(0.3
)%
translation
4.0
5.1
(0.2
)
total sales
change
13.1
%
6.6
%
(0.5
)%
operating income
(millions)
$
$
$
percent change
44.5
%
(6.1
)%
6.6
%
percent of sales
17.4
%
13.6
%
15.5
%
the industrial segment
serves a broad range of industrial markets, from appliance and electronics to
paper and packaging and food and beverage. products include tapes, a wide
variety of coated and non-woven abrasives, adhesives, specialty materials and
supply chain execution software solutions.
industrial local-currency
sales growth of 9.1% for the year was broad-based across major geographic areas
and industrial businesses. acquisitions increased sales by 1.2%, driven by the
february 2004 acquisition of highjump software, inc., a provider of supply
chain execution software. strong local-currency sales growth helped leverage
operating income growth. operating income increased 44.5% to $661 million in
2004.
in 2003, industrial tape
and electronic materials drove local-currency sales growth. geographic area
local-currency growth was led by the asia pacific area, with the united states
and europe showing declines. acquisitions increased sales by 1.5%. driven by
local-currency sales growth, industrial tape and electronic materials also
posted operating income growth. employment reduction actions taken to improve
competitiveness and lower the industrial segments cost structure negatively
impacted operating income.
display and graphics business (17.0% of consolidated sales):
sales (millions)
$
3,406
$
2,962
$
2,228
sales change
analysis:
local currency
(volume and price)
10.4
%
26.9
%
11.2
%
translation
4.6
6.1
0.3
total sales
change
15.0
%
33.0
%
11.5
%
operating income
(millions)
$
1,131
$
$
percent change
27.8
%
65.8
%
43.5
%
percent of sales
33.2
%
29.9
%
23.9
%
the display and graphics
segment serves markets that include electronic display, touch screen, traffic
safety and commercial graphics. this segment includes optical film and lens
solutions for electronic displays; touch screens and touch monitors; reflective
sheeting for transportation safety; and commercial graphics systems. the
optical business includes a number of different products that are protected by
various patents and groups of patents. the remaining lifetimes of such patents
range from one to greater than 15 years. these patents provide varying measures
of exclusivity to 3m for a number of such products. 3ms proprietary
manufacturing technology and know-how also provide a competitive advantage to
3m independent of such patents.
display and graphics
local-currency sales growth was 10.4% for 2004. strong demand for 3m films that
brighten the displays on electronic products, such as flat-panel computer
monitors, cellular phones, notebook pcs and lcd televisions, continued to drive
results in 2004. year-on-year local-currency sales growth in the optical
systems business was slower in the last half of 2004, primarily due to
inventory channel adjustments in the lcd market. this resulted in reduced
demand for 3ms proprietary optical films and components. while this business
is subject to periodic customer inventory fluctuations, 3m believes that this
business will continue to be a significant growth engine for 3m. in the fourth
quarter of 2004, 3m announced the phase out of its commercial videotape business,
and this action, combined with a continuing decline in lens systems for the crt
rear-projection television market, negatively impacted sales and operating
income. operating income increased 27.8% to $1.131 billion in 2004.
the strong 2003
local-currency sales growth in the display and graphics segment was primarily
due to optical systems growth, including the corning precision lens acquisition
that benefited sales by approximately 11%. optical systems growth was led by
sales of display enhancement films used in flat-panel devices. geographic area
local-currency sales growth was led by the asia pacific area and the latin
america, africa and canada area. local-currency growth was moderate in the
united states and europe. operating income increased 65.8% to $885 million in
2003, driven primarily by local-currency sales growth, production facilities
running at high utilization levels and benefits from 3ms corporate
initiatives.
consumer and office business (14.3% of consolidated sales):
sales (millions)
$
2,861
$
2,607
$
2,444
sales change
analysis:
local currency
(volume and price)
6.9
%
2.6
%
(3.7
)%
translation
2.8
4.1
0.5
total sales
change
9.7
%
6.7
%
(3.2
)%
operating income
(millions)
$
$
$
percent change
17.9
%
2.5
%
9.3
%
percent of sales
18.9
%
17.6
%
18.3
%
the consumer and office
segment serves markets that include consumer retail, office retail, education, home
improvement, building maintenance and other markets. products in this segment
include office supply products, stationery products, construction and home
improvement/home care products, protective material products, and visual
systems products.
in 2004, local-currency
sales growth in consumer and office was 6.9%. sales growth was fairly
broad-based across the many retail channels 3m serves, most notably in
mass-market consumer retail and home improvement. this included strong sales
growth in construction and home improvement/home care products, office supply
products and stationery products. geographic area local-currency growth was led
by the united states. operating income increased 17.9% to $542 million in 2004.
2003 local-currency
growth was led by the construction and home improvement, home care, and
stationery products businesses, partially offset by lower local-currency sales
in the visual systems business. geographic area local-currency growth was
moderate in all areas except europe, which showed a decline. the modest
increase in operating income resulted from strong gains in construction and
home improvement and home care, partially offset by a decrease in visual
systems operating income.
safety, security and protection services business (10.6% of
consolidated sales):
sales (millions)
$
2,125
$
1,928
$
1,686
sales change
analysis:
local currency
(volume and price)
6.6
%
9.5
%
3.3
%
translation
3.6
4.9
(0.5
)
total sales
change
10.2
%
14.4
%
2.8
%
operating income
(millions)
$
$
$
percent change
12.3
%
29.1
%
11.9
%
percent of sales
23.1
%
22.7
%
20.1
%
the safety, security and
protection services segment serves a broad range of markets that strive to
increase the safety, security and productivity of workers, facilities and
systems. major product offerings include personal protection products, safety
and security products, energy control products, cleaning and protection
products for commercial establishments, and roofing granules for asphalt
shingles.
safety, security and
protection services local-currency sales growth was 6.6% in 2004.
local-currency growth was driven by strong global demand for personal protective
products and solutions, along with cleaning and protective products for
commercial buildings. 3ms acquisition of hornell holding ab, a european-based
global supplier of
personal safety
equipment, added 2.3 percentage points of growth in 2004. operating income
increased 12.3% to $491 million in 2004.
2003 local-currency sales
and operating income increases were primarily driven by the occupational health
and environmental safety business, which experienced higher demand for
respiratory masks, primarily resulting from concerns related to severe acute
respiratory syndrome (sars). security systems, commercial care, building safety
solutions, and industrial mineral products also posted local-currency growth
and operating income improvements. all geographic areas showed local-currency
growth, with growth strongest in the asia pacific and latin america, africa and
canada areas.
electro and communications business (9.4% of consolidated
sales):
sales (millions)
$
1,876
$
1,818
$
1,831
sales change
analysis:
local currency
(volume and price)
0.3
%
(4.5
)%
(13.3
)%
translation
2.9
3.8
0.2
total sales
change
3.2
%
(0.7
)%
(13.1
)%
operating income
(millions)
$
$
$
percent change
14.1
%
0.8
%
17.7
%
percent of sales
15.5
%
14.0
%
13.8
%
the electro and
communications segment serves manufacturers of electronic and electrical
equipment, as well as the construction and maintenance segments of electric
utilities, telecommunications and other industries, with products that speed
the delivery of information and ideas, while also reducing costs. products
include electronic and interconnect solutions, microinterconnect systems, telecommunications
products and electrical products.
local-currency sales in
electro and communications increased 0.3% for 2004, led by electrical products
for insulating, testing and sensing. sales in the electronics and
telecommunications segments were negatively impacted by the general slowdown in
the semiconductor industry and continued softness in the hard-line
infrastructure segment of the telecommunications market. geographically,
local-currency growth in this business for 2004 was led by the latin america,
africa and canada area along with the asia pacific area. operating income was
up 14.1% to $291 million in 2004.
the decrease in
local-currency sales in 2003 resulted from continued weakness in the global
telecommunications industry. local-currency sales in 3ms telecom business were
down over 10% from 2002. geographic area local-currency growth was good in the
latin america, africa and canada area and the asia pacific area, but both the
united states and europe experienced local-currency declines of more than 10%.
despite a difficult economic and market environment, benefits from 3ms
corporate initiatives and productivity actions helped this business slightly
improve its 2003 operating income. operating income in 2003 was negatively
impacted by $26 million due to additional employee reductions and actions to
provide better alignment with the market environment while maintaining focus on
key customers.
transportation business (8.4% of consolidated sales):
sales (millions)
$
1,683
$
1,538
$
1,388
sales change
analysis:
local currency
(volume and price)
5.2
%
5.2
%
6.5
%
translation
4.2
5.6
(0.2
)
total sales
change
9.4
%
10.8
%
6.3
%
operating income
(millions)
$
$
$
percent change
10.1
%
16.8
%
23.3
%
percent of sales
25.4
%
25.3
%
24.0
%
the transportation
segment serves markets that include automotive, automotive aftermarket, marine,
aerospace and specialty vehicle markets. this segment provides components and
products that are used in the manufacture, repair and maintenance of
automotive, marine, aircraft and specialty vehicles.
in transportation,
local-currency sales growth was 5.2% in 2004. top-line growth in this business
continues to benefit from new products and solutions for customers, along with
a strategy of replicating successful 3m solutions across several distinct
segments of the transportation industry. operating income increased 10.1% to
$428 million in 2004.
in 2003, the automotive
oem and automotive aftermarket businesses led local-currency sales and
operating income growth. the aerospace and aircraft maintenance business also
posted local-currency sales and operating income growth. all geographic areas
showed local-currency sales growth, led by the asia pacific and latin america,
africa and canada areas.
performance by geographic area
financial information
related to 3m operations in various geographic areas is provided in note 17 to
the consolidated financial statements. a summary of key information and
discussion related to 3ms geographic areas follows:
geographic area
2004 vs. 2003% change
net sales and
operating income
(dollars in millions)
sales
% of
total
oper.
income
local
currency
translation
total
sales
change
oper.
income
united states
$
7,878
39.4
%
$
1,200
3.9
%
3.9
%
(1.0
)%
europe and
middle east
5,070
25.3
%
0.8
%
8.9
%
9.7
%
24.4
%
asia pacific
5,168
25.8
%
1,874
13.6
%
5.6
%
19.2
%
36.4
%
latin america,
africa and canada
1,844
9.2
%
9.3
%
2.4
%
11.7
%
15.2
%
other
unallocated
0.3
%
total company
$
20,011
100.0
%
$
4,578
6.0
%
3.8
%
9.8
%
23.3
%
while 3m manages its
businesses globally and believes its business segment results are the most
relevant measure of performance, the company also utilizes geographic area data
as a secondary performance measure. export sales are reported within the
geographic area where the final sales to 3m customers are made. a portion of
the products or components sold by 3ms operations to its customers are
exported by these customers to different geographic areas. thus, net sales in a
particular geography may not be indicative of end-user consumption in that
geography.
u.s. 2004 sales growth
was led by the consumer and office; safety, security and protection services;
and the industrial businesses. u.s. operating income was down 1%, as higher
year-on-year pension expense impacted operating income by 12%. european
local-currency sales increased 0.8%, with growth in safety, security and
protection services; transportation; industrial; and health care. favorable
exchange rates, coupled with ongoing productivity efforts, boosted operating
income in europe by 24.4% to almost $1 billion. local-currency sales growth in
the asia pacific area was 13.6%, with all seven business segments posting
positive local-currency sales growth. 3m posted 4.3% local-currency sales gains
in japan, despite a fairly sluggish economic picture in the second half of
2004. growth in the rest of the asia pacific area was 20.7%, led by china,
korea and taiwan. in the combined latin america, africa and canada area, six of
seven businesses had local-currency sales increases, led by electro and
communications; transportation; industrial; and health care. for 2004,
international operations represented 60.6% of 3ms sales.
geographic area supplemental information
(millions, except
employees)
employees as of
december 31
capital
spending
property, plant and
equipment  net
united states
32,648
33,329
35,024
$
$
$
$
3,290
$
3,342
$
3,523
europe and
middle east
16,250
16,354
16,852
1,284
1,231
1,136
asia pacific
10,439
9,916
9,556
latin america,
africa and canada
7,734
7,473
7,342
total company
67,071
67,072
68,774
$
$
$
$
5,711
$
5,609
$
5,621
employment:
employment was virtually
unchanged from year-end 2003. since march 31, 2001, employment has declined by
nearly 10,600 people, with 6,900 of the decline related to the 2001/2002
corporate restructuring plan, and additional declines due to the integration of
acquisitions, additional employment reduction actions and attrition. the
corning precision lens, inc. acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2002 added
approximately 1,500 employees. the company continues to increase headcount in
faster-growing areas of the world, such as asia pacific, primarily to support
increasing local sales. sales per employee in local currencies increased
approximately 7% in 2004, 8.5% in 2003 and approximately 9% in 2002.
capital
spending/net property, plant and equipment:
the bulk of 3m capital
spending historically has been in the united states, resulting in higher net
property, plant and equipment balances in the u.s. the company is striving to
more closely align its manufacturing and sourcing with geographic market sales,
and because approximately 60% of sales are outside the united states, this would
increase production outside the united states, helping to improve customer
service and reduce working capital requirements. for 2005, the company expects
to spend approximately $950 million on purchases of property, plant and
equipment.
critical accounting estimates
information regarding
significant accounting policies is included in note 1 to the consolidated
financial statements. as stated in note 1, the preparation of financial
statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect
the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. management bases its estimates
on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to
be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for
making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are
not readily apparent from other sources. actual results may differ from these
estimates.
the company believes its
most critical accounting estimates relate to legal proceedings, the companys
pension and postretirement obligations, and potential asset impairment issues.
senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of
its critical accounting estimates with the audit committee of 3ms board of
directors.
legal proceedings:
please refer to the
section entitled accrued liabilities and insurance receivables related to
legal proceedings (contained in part i, item 3, legal proceedings, of this annual
report on form 10-k) for a description of the process the company follows for
the accrual and disclosure of loss contingencies, the categories of claims for
which the company has been able to estimate its probable liability and for the
estimate of its related insurance receivables, and factors affecting such
estimates.
pension and postretirement obligations:
3m has various
company-sponsored retirement plans covering substantially all u.s. employees
and many employees outside the united states. the company accounts for its
defined benefit pension plans in accordance with sfas no.87, employers
accounting for pensions, which requires that amounts recognized in financial
statements be determined on an actuarial basis. pension benefits associated
with these plans are generally based primarily on each participants years of
service, compensation, and age at retirement or termination. see note11
to the consolidated financial statements for additional discussion of actuarial
assumptions used in determining pension liability and expense.
as previously disclosed
in the companys june 30, 2004 and september 30, 2004 form 10-qs, in 2004, the
companys u.s. plan measurement date was changed from september 30 to december
31. the primary reasons for this change include consistency between the u.s.
and international dates, the increased clarity that results from having the
same measurement and balance sheet dates, and administrative simplification.
this change did not have a material impact on the determination of periodic
pension cost or pension obligations.
a significant element in
determining the companys pension expense in accordance with sfas no.87
is the expected return on plan assets, which is based on projected results for
similar allocations among asset classes. the difference between the expected
return and the actual return on plan assets is deferred and, under certain
circumstances, amortized over future years of service. therefore, the net
deferral of past asset gains (losses) ultimately affects future pension
expense. for the u.s. pension plan, the companys assumption for the expected
return on plan assets was 9.00% for 2004. refer to note 11 to the consolidated
financial statements for information on how this rate is determined. the
company is lowering the 2005 expected return on plan assets by 0.25 percentage
points to 8.75%.
the discount rate used to measure pension plan
liabilities reflects the current rate at which the pension liabilities could be
effectively settled as of december 31, 2004. in estimating this rate, the
company looks at rates of return on fixed-income investments of similar
duration to the liabilities in the plan that receive high, investment grade
ratings by recognized ratings agencies. by applying this methodology, the
company determined a discount rate of 5.75% to be appropriate as of
december31, 2004, which is a reduction of 0.25 percentage points from the
rate used as of september30, 2003.
for the year ended
december31, 2004, the change in the minimum pension liability within
accumulated other comprehensive income increased stockholders equity by
$1.193billion (after-tax). this increase was primarily the result of the
assets being above the accumulated benefit obligation for the u.s. qualified
plan, which caused the minimum pension liability recorded for the years ended
december 31, 2003 and 2002 to be reversed. as a result, the companys u.s.
qualified plan recorded a prepaid pension asset of $1.851 billion.
for the year ended
december31, 2004, the company recognized total consolidated pre-tax
pension expense (after settlements, curtailments and special termination
benefits) of $325million, up from $168million in 2003. pension
expense (before settlements, curtailments and special termination benefits) is
anticipated to increase to approximately $342million in 2005. as
previously mentioned, the company lowered the expected return on assets
assumption from 9.00% in 2004 to 8.75% in 2005. for the u.s. pension plans, holding
all other factors constant, an increase/decrease in the expected long-term rate
of return on plan assets by 0.25 percentage points would decrease/increase u.s.
pension expense by approximately $19million in 2005. for the u.s. pension
plans, holding all other factors constant, an increase/decrease in the discount
rate used to measure plan liabilities by 0.25 percentage points would
decrease/increase u.s. pension expense by approximately $30million in
2005.
potential asset impairment issues:
3m net property, plant
and equipment totaled approximately $5.7 billion at december 31, 2004.
management makes estimates and assumptions in preparing the consolidated
financial statements for which actual results will emerge over long periods of
time. this includes the recoverability of long-lived assets employed in the
business, including assets of acquired businesses. these estimates and
assumptions are closely monitored by management and periodically adjusted as
circumstances warrant. for instance, expected asset lives may be shortened or
an impairment recorded based on a change in the expected use of the asset or
performance of the related business reporting unit. in addition, 3m goodwill
totaled approximately $2.7 billion at december 31, 2004, which, based on impairment
testing, is not impaired. a portion of this goodwill (approximately $300
million) is in 3ms telecommunications business, which competes in a very
uncertain industry. while the company believes this business will maintain its
value, events such as a significant adverse change in the business climate,
could create future impairment losses.
new accounting pronouncements
in december 2004, the
financial accounting standards board (fasb) issued statement of financial
accounting standards (sfas) no. 123 (revised 2004), share-based payment. sfas
no. 123r supersedes apb opinion no. 25, which requires recognition of an
expense when goods or services are provided. sfas no. 123r requires the
determination of the fair value of the share-based compensation at the grant
date and the recognition of the related expense over the period in which the
share-based compensation vests. the company is required to adopt the provisions
of sfas no. 123r effective july 1, 2005. additional information regarding this
and other accounting pronouncements is included in note 1 to the consolidated
financial statements.
financial
condition and liquidity
the company generates significant ongoing cash flow as
evidenced by the reduction in net debt during 2004 as follows:
at december 31
(millions)
total debt
$
2,821
$
2,937
$
3,377
less: cash &
cash equiv.
2,757
1,836
net debt
$
$
1,101
$
2,759
3m believes its ongoing cash
flows provide ample cash to fund expected investments and capital expenditures.
the company has an aa credit rating from standard & poors and an aa1
credit rating from moodys investors service. the company has sufficient access
to capital markets to meet currently anticipated growth and acquisition
investment funding needs. the company does not utilize derivative instruments
linked to the companys stock.
the companys financial
condition and liquidity at december 31, 2004, remained strong. various assets
and liabilities, including cash and short-term debt, can fluctuate
significantly from month-to-month depending on short-term liquidity needs.
working capital (defined as current assets minus current liabilities) totaled
$2.649 billion at december 31, 2004, compared with $2.638 billion at december
31, 2003. this slight increase was primarily related to an increase in cash
($921million) offset by an increase in debt classified as short-term
borrowings and current portion of long-term debt ($892 million). the cash
balance benefited from higher net income and working capital improvements in
accounts receivable, inventory and accounts payable.
the company uses various working capital measures that
place emphasis and focus on certain working capital assets and liabilities
(i.e. accounts receivable, inventory, accounts payable). these measures may not
be computed the same as similarly titled measures used by other companies. the
accounts receivable turnover index (defined as quarterly net sales  fourth quarter at year-end  multiplied by four, divided by
ending net accounts receivable) totaled 7.29 at december 31, 2004, an
improvement from 6.95 at december 31, 2003. receivables increased $78 million
compared with december 31, 2003, with currency translation of $120 million (due
to the weaker u.s. dollar) driving this increase. the inventory turnover index
(defined as quarterly factory cost
fourth quarter at year-end
multiplied by four, divided by ending inventory) was 5.29 at december 31, 2004,
an improvement from 5.12 at december 31, 2003. inventories increased $81
million compared with december 31, 2003, with currency translation of $80
million accounting for almost all of this increase. another working capital
measure used by the company also reflects the impact of accounts payable. this
combined index (defined as quarterly net sales  fourth quarter at year-end
multiplied by four, divided by ending net accounts receivable plus inventory
less accounts payable) was 5.78 at december 31, 2004, an improvement from 5.48
at december 31, 2003. accounts payable increased $81 million compared to
december 31, 2003.
cash flows from
operating activities:
years ended december 31
(millions)
net income
$
2,990
$
2,403
$
1,974
depreciation and
amortization
company pension
contributions
(591
)
(749
)
(1,086
)
company pension
expense
income taxes
(deferred and accrued income taxes)
accounts
receivable
inventories
accounts payable
other  net
(121
)
net cash
provided by operating activities
$
4,282
$
3,773
$
2,992
cash flows from operating
activities can fluctuate significantly from period to period, as pension
funding decisions, tax timing differences and other items can significantly
impact cash flows. in both 2004 and 2003, cash flow improvements were primarily
driven by higher net income, tax timing differences and certain working capital
improvements (i.e. accounts receivables, inventories, accounts payable). in all
periods presented, significant
company pension contributions negatively impacted cash
flows. in all years, with larger amounts in 2003 and 2002, a portion of the tax
timing benefit relates to the tax benefit received from company pension
contributions. in 2003, 3m made $46 million of payments under the corporate
restructuring plan, compared with $306 million in 2002.
in the quarter ended september 30, 2004, the company
made a special pension contribution to 3ms japanese pension plan of $155
million and a discretionary contribution of $300 million to its u.s. qualified
pension plan. in the third quarter of 2003, 3m made a discretionary
contribution of $600 million to its u.s. qualified pension plan, compared with
a discretionary contribution of $789 million in the third quarter of 2002.
future contributions will depend on market conditions, interest rates and other
factors. 3m believes its strong cash flow and balance sheet will allow it to
fund future pension needs without compromising growth opportunities.
the following table recaps for breast implant and
respirator masks/asbestos litigation the liabilities and associated insurance
receivables, cash received from insurance, cash fees and payments made, and the
pre-tax expense for 2004 and 2003. because of the time delay between payment of
claims and receipt of insurance reimbursements, the december 31, 2004, amounts
for both breast implant and respirator mask/asbestos liabilities are less than
expected insurance recoveries. thus, the expected net inflow of cash will
increase future cash flows. the company recorded the lepages verdict liability
of $93 million pre-tax in the first quarter of 2003. for a more detailed
discussion of these and other legal proceedings, refer to part i, item 3, legal
proceedings, of this annual report on form 10-k.
at december 31
(millions)
breast implant
liabilities:
balance at
beginning of year
$
$
increase in
liability during year
cash fees and
payments made
(8
)
(10
)
balance at end
of year
$
$
breast implant
receivables:
balance at
beginning of year
$
$
increase
(decrease) in receivable during year
(10
)
cash received
from insurance
(50
)
(17
)
balance at end
of year
$
$
breast implant
pre-tax expense recorded
$
$
1.5
respirator
mask/asbestos liabilities:
balance at
beginning of year
$
$
increase in
liability during year
cash fees and
payments made
(81
)
(103
)
balance at end
of year
$
$
respirator
mask/asbestos receivables:
balance at beginning
of year
$
$
increase in
receivable during year
cash received
from insurance
(4
)
(21
)
balance at end
of year
$
$
respirator
mask/asbestos pre-tax expense recorded
$
$
lepages verdict
liability and pre-tax expense
$
$
cash flows from
investing activities:
years ended december 31
(millions)
purchases of
property, plant and equipment (pp&e)
$
(937
)
$
(677
)
$
(763
)
proceeds from
sale of pp&e and other assets
acquisitions,
net of cash acquired
(73
)
(439
)
(1,258
)
purchases and
proceeds from sale of investments  net
net cash used in
investing activities
$
(938
)
$
(969
)
$
(1,927
)
investments in property,
plant and equipment are enabling growth in diverse markets, helping to meet
product demand and increasing manufacturing efficiency. in the first three
months of 2004, 3m entered into two business combination agreements. 3m acquired highjump software, inc., a u.s.
company that provides supply chain execution software and solutions with annual
sales of approximately $36 million. 3m initially purchased 91 percent of the
outstanding shares of hornell holding ab and subsequently acquired all of the
remaining outstanding shares. hornell holding ab is a global supplier of
personal protective equipment for welding applications with annual sales of
approximately $50 million. in august 2004, 3m acquired 100% of the outstanding
shares of info-x inc., a u.s. company that provides coding compliance software
and data for health care organizations, with annual sales of approximately $10
million. refer to note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information on these 2004 business combinations and for information
concerning 2003 and 2002 business combinations. the company is actively
considering additional acquisitions.
proceeds from the sale of
investments in 2003 include $26 million of cash received related to the sale of
3ms 50% ownership in durel corporation to rogers corporation. purchases of
investments totaled $10 million in 2004, $16million in 2003 and
$7million in 2002. these purchases include additional survivor benefit insurance
and equity investments.
cash flows from
financing activities:
years ended december 31
(millions)
change in
short-term debt  net
$
$
(215
)
$
(204
)
repayment of
debt (maturities greater than 90 days)
(868
)
(719
)
(497
)
proceeds from
debt (maturities greater than 90 days)
1,146
total change in
debt
$
(111
)
$
(440
)
$
purchases of
treasury stock
(1,791
)
(685
)
(942
)
reissuances of
treasury stock
dividends paid
to stockholders
(1,125
)
(1,034
)
(968
)
distributions to
minority interests and other  net
(15
)
(23
)
(78
)
net cash used in
financing activities
$
(2,534
)
$
(1,627
)
$
(1,021
)
total debt at december
31, 2004, was $2.821 billion, down from $2.937 billion at year-end 2003, due to
the strong cash flow generated during 2004. in 2004, the cash flow increase in
net short-term debt of $399 million includes the portion of short-term debt
with original maturities of 90 days or less. the repayment of debt of $868
million primarily related to commercial paper retirements of approximately $475
million and the retirements of $350 million in medium-term notes. proceeds from
debt of $358 million primarily related to commercial paper issuances. total
debt was 21% of total capital (total capital is defined as debt plus equity),
compared with 27% at year-end 2003.
debt securities,
including the companys shelf registration, its medium-term notes program,
dealer remarketable securities and convertible note are all discussed in more
detail in note 9 to the consolidated financial statements. 3m has a shelf
registration and medium-term notes program through which $1.5 billion of
medium-term notes may be offered. in 2004, the company issued approximately $62
million in debt securities under its medium-term notes program. the medium-term notes program and shelf
registration have remaining capacity of approximately $1.438 billion. the
companys $350 million of dealer remarketable securities (classified as current
portion of long-term debt) were remarketed for one year in december 2004. in
addition, the company has a convertible note with a book value of $556 million
at december 31, 2004. at december 31, 2004, the dealer remarketable securities,
convertible note and $62 million of medium-term notes are classified as current
portion of long-term debt as the result of put provisions associated with these
debt instruments. however, the company
does not anticipate
redemption of these securities in 2005. for a discussion of accounting
pronouncements that will affect accounting treatment for the convertible note,
refer to note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of eitf
issue no. 04-08, the effect of contingently convertible debt on diluted
earnings per share and proposed sfas no. 128r, earnings per share.
repurchases of common
stock are made to support the companys stock-based employee compensation plans
and for other corporate purposes. on november 10, 2003, the board of directors
authorized the purchase of up to $1.5 billion of the companys common stock
between january 1, 2004 and december 31, 2004. in november 2004, 3ms board of
directors authorized the repurchase of an additional $200 million of the
companys common stock in 2004 and also authorized the repurchase of up to $2.0
billion of the companys common stock between january 1, 2005 and january 31,
2006. refer to the table captioned issuer purchases of equity securities in
part ii, item 5, for more information.
cash dividends paid to
stockholders totaled $1.125 billion ($1.44 per share) in 2004, $1.034 billion
($1.32 per share) in 2003 and $968 million ($1.24 per share) in 2002. 3m has
paid dividends since 1916. in february 2005, the board of directors increased
the quarterly dividend on 3m common stock to 42 cents per share, equivalent to
an annual dividend of $1.68 per share. this marks the 47th consecutive year of
dividend increases.
other cash flows from financing activities include
distributions to minority interests, changes in cash overdraft balances, and
principal payments for capital leases.
liquidity:
the companys liquidity remains strong. primary
short-term liquidity needs are provided through u.s. commercial paper and euro
commercial paper issuances. as of december 31, 2004, outstanding total
commercial paper issued totaled $671 million and averaged approximately $387
million during 2004. medium-term note shelf borrowing capacity totaled $1.438
billion as of december 31, 2004. credit support for outstanding commercial
paper is provided by a $565 million, 364-day credit agreement among a group of
primary relationship banks. this facility provides up to $115 million in
letters of credit ($86 million of which was utilized at december 31, 2004). in
2005, it is anticipated that the 364-day credit agreement will be replaced by a
five-year agreement with terms substantially the same as that of the current
agreement. committed credit facilities of $53 million are in place across
several international subsidiary locations. the company also has uncommitted
lines of credit outside the united states totaling $637 million.
the company believes it is unlikely that its access to
the commercial paper market will be restricted. cash and cash equivalents and
certain other current assets could provide additional liquidity to meet near
term obligations, if necessary. at year-end 2004, certain debt agreements ($350
million of dealer remarketable securities and $202 million of esop debt) had
ratings triggers (bbb-/baa3 or lower) that would require repayment of debt. the
company currently has aa/aa1 debt ratings. in addition, the $565 million,
364-day credit agreement requires 3m to maintain a capitalization ratio at no
more than 0.60 to 1 at the end of each quarter. this ratio is calculated as
funded debt (including all borrowed money and letters of credit utilized) to
the sum of funded debt and equity. at december 31, 2004, this ratio was
approximately 0.22 to 1.
3ms cash balance at december
31, 2004 totaled $2.757 billion. 3ms strong balance sheet and liquidity
provide the company with significant flexibility to take advantage of numerous
opportunities going forward. the company will continue to invest in its
operations to drive growth, including continual review of acquisition
opportunities. 3m paid dividends of more than $1.1 billion in 2004, and has a
long history of dividend increases. 3ms board of directors authorized the
purchase of up to $2.0 billion of the companys common stock between january 1,
2005 and january 31, 2006. the company may also make additional contributions
to its pension plan in the future, but exact amounts are uncertain and will
depend on market conditions.
off-balance sheet arrangements and contractual obligations:
as of december 31, 2004, the company had not utilized
special purpose entities to facilitate off-balance sheet financing
arrangements. 3ms accrued product warranty liabilities, recorded on the
consolidated balance sheet as part of current and long-term liabilities, are
estimated at approximately $22 million. 3m does not consider this amount to be
material. the fair value of 3m guarantees of loans with third parties and other
guarantee arrangements are not material.
in addition to
guarantees, 3m, in the normal course of business, periodically enters into
agreements that require 3m to indemnify either major customers or suppliers for
specific risks, such as claims for injury or property damage arising out of 3m
products or the negligence of 3m personnel, or claims alleging that 3m products
infringe
third party patents or other intellectual property. while 3ms maximum
exposure under these indemnification provisions cannot be estimated, these
indemnifications are not expected to have a material impact on the companys
consolidated financial position or results of operations.
a summary of the
companys significant contractual obligations as of december 31, 2004, follows:
contractual obligations
payments due by year
(millions)
total
after
long-term debt
(including current portion)
$
2,132
$
1,405
$
$
$
$
$
operating leases
capital leases
unconditional
purchase obligations
total
contractual cash obligations
$
2,946
$
1,657
$
$
$
$
$
long-term debt payments
due in 2005 include $350 million of dealer remarketable securities (final
maturity 2010), $62 million of medium-term notes (final maturity 2044), and
$556 million of convertible notes (final maturity 2032). these securities are
classified as current portion of long-term debt as the result of put provisions
associated with these debt instruments.
unconditional purchase
obligations are defined as an agreement to purchase goods or services that is
enforceable and legally binding on the company. included in the unconditional
purchase obligations category above are certain obligations related to take or
pay contracts, capital commitments, service agreements and utilities. these
estimates include both unconditional purchase obligations with terms in excess
of one year and normal ongoing purchase obligations with terms of less than one
year. many of these commitments relate to take or pay contracts, in which 3m
guarantees payment to ensure availability of products or services that are sold
to customers. the company expects to receive consideration (products or
services) for these unconditional purchase obligations. the purchase obligation
amounts do not represent the entire anticipated purchases in the future, but
represent only those items for which the company is contractually obligated.
the majority of 3ms products and services are purchased as needed, with no
unconditional commitment. for this reason, these numbers will not provide a
reliable indicator of the companys expected future cash outflows on a
stand-alone basis.
as discussed in note 11
to the consolidated financial statements, the company does not have a required
minimum pension contribution obligation for its u.s. plans in 2005. thus,
company contributions to its u.s. and international pension plans are expected
to be largely discretionary in 2005 and future years. contractual capital
commitments are also included in the preceding table, but these commitments
represent a small part of the companys expected capital spending in 2005 and
beyond. for 2005, the company expects to spend approximately $950 million on
purchases of property, plant and equipment.
financial instruments
the company enters into
contractual derivative arrangements in the ordinary course of business to
manage foreign currency exposure, interest rate risks and commodity price
risks. a financial risk management committee, composed of senior management,
provides oversight for risk management and derivative activities. this
committee determines the companys financial risk policies and objectives, and
provides guidelines for derivative instrument utilization. this committee also
establishes procedures for control and valuation, risk analysis, counterparty
credit approval, and ongoing monitoring and reporting.
the company enters into
foreign exchange forward contracts, options and swaps to hedge against the
effect of exchange rate fluctuations on cash flows denominated in foreign
currencies and certain intercompany financing transactions. the company manages
interest rate risks using a mix of fixed and floating rate debt. to help manage
borrowing costs, the company may enter into interest rate swaps. under these
arrangements, the company agrees to exchange, at specified intervals, the
difference between fixed and floating interest amounts calculated by reference
to an agreed-upon notional principal amount. the company manages commodity
price risks through negotiated supply contracts, price protection swaps and
forward physical contracts.
a variance/co-variance
statistical modeling technique was used to test the companys exposure to
changes in currency and interest rates and assess the risk of loss in after-tax
earnings of financial instruments, derivatives and underlying exposures
outstanding at december 31, 2004. the model (third-party bank dataset) used a
95% confidence level over a 12-month time horizon. based on this analysis of
the companys interest rate risks, possible changes in interest rates would not
have a material adverse effect on after-tax earnings ($5 million at december
31, 2004 and $6 million at december 31, 2003). based on this analysis of the
primary foreign exchange risks, possible changes in foreign exchange rates
could adversely impact after-tax earnings by $61 million ($67 million at
december 31, 2003). when including certain commodity risks, possible changes in
commodity rates could adversely impact after-tax earnings by an additional $10
million (an additional $3 million at december 31, 2003). the model used
analyzed over 20 different currencies and five commodities, but does not
purport to represent what actually will be experienced by the company. this
model does not include certain hedge transactions, because the company believes
their inclusion would not materially impact the results.
the company is striving
to more closely align its manufacturing and sourcing with geographic market
sales, and because approximately 60% of sales are outside the united states,
this would increase production outside the united states. this will also help
mitigate the effects from currency fluctuations. in 2001, the company increased
the amount and duration of its foreign currency hedges to help lessen
year-over-year impacts and to improve the predictability of future earnings.
however, this hedging program will not make 3m immune to currency impacts.
the
global exposures related to purchased components and materials are such that a
one percent price change would result in a pre-tax cost or savings of
approximately $44 million per year. the global energy exposure is such that a
10% price change would result in a pre-tax cost or savings of approximately $30
million per year. derivative instruments are used to hedge less than one
percent of the purchased components and materials exposure and are used to
hedge approximately 10% of this energy exposure.
forward-looking statements
this annual report on
form 10-k, including managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations in item 7, contains forward-looking
statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act
of 1995. these statements may be identified by the use of words like plan,
expect, aim, believe, project, anticipate, intend, estimate,
will, should, could and similar expressions in connection with any
discussion, expectation or projection of future operating or financial
performance, events or trends. in particular, these include statements about
the companys strategy for growth, product development, market position, future
performance or results of current or anticipated products, interest rates,
foreign exchange rates, and the outcome of contingencies, such as legal
proceedings.
factors that could affect
future results  forward-looking statements are based on certain assumptions
and expectations of future events that are subject to risks and uncertainties.
actual future results and trends may differ materially from historical results
or those projected in any such forward-looking statements depending on a
variety of factors, including, but not limited to, the following:
results and trends are impacted by the effects of, and changes in,
worldwide economic conditions. the company operates in more than 60
countries and derives approximately 60% of its revenues from outside the united
states. the companys business may be affected by factors in the united states
and other countries that are beyond its control, such as downturns in economic
activity in a specific country or region; social, political or labor conditions
in a specific country or region; or potential adverse foreign tax consequences.
foreign currency exchange rates and fluctuations in those rates may
affect the companys ability to realize projected growth rates in its sales and
net earnings and its results of operations. because the company
derives approximately 60% of its revenues from outside the united states, its
ability to realize projected growth rates in sales and net earnings could be
adversely affected if the u.s. dollar strengthens significantly against foreign
currencies.
the companys growth objectives are largely dependent on the timing
and market acceptance of its new product offerings, including its ability to renew its pipeline of new products and
to bring those products to market. this ability may be adversely
affected by difficulties or delays in product development, such as the
inability to: identify viable new products; obtain adequate intellectual
property protection; gain market acceptance of new products; or successfully
complete clinical trials and obtain regulatory approvals. for example, new 3m
pharmaceutical products, like any pharmaceutical under development, face
substantial risks and uncertainties in the process of development and
regulatory review. there are no guarantees that new products will prove to be
commercially successful.
the companys future results are subject to fluctuations in the costs
and availability of purchased components and materials, including oil-derived compounds, due to market demand, currency exchange risks, material shortages and
other factors. the company depends on various components and
materials supplied by others for the manufacturing of its products and it is
possible that any of its supplier relationships could be interrupted or
terminated in the future. any sustained interruption in the companys receipt
of adequate supplies could have a material adverse effect on the company. in
addition, while the company has a process to minimize volatility in component
and material pricing, no assurance can be given that the company will be able
to successfully manage price fluctuations due to market demand, currency risks
or material shortages, or that future price fluctuations will not have a
material adverse effect on the company.
there is the possibility that acquisitions and strategic alliances may
not meet sales and/or profit expectations. as part of the companys
strategy for growth, the company has made and may continue to make acquisitions
and enter into strategic alliances. however, there can be no assurance that the
company will be able to quickly integrate the acquired business and obtain the
anticipated synergies or that acquisitions and strategic alliances will be
beneficial to the company.
the companys future results may be affected
if the company generates less operating income from its corporate initiatives
than estimated. 3ms corporate initiatives include six sigma, global
sourcing effectiveness, 3m acceleration, eproductivity and global business
processes. cost reduction projects related to these initiatives are expected to
contribute an additional $400million to operating income in 2005. there
can be no assurance that all of the estimated operating income improvements
from the initiatives will be realized.
the companys future results may be affected
by various legal and regulatory proceedings, including those involving product
liability, antitrust, environmental or other matters. the outcome of
these legal proceedings may differ from the companys expectations because the
outcomes of litigation, including regulatory matters, are often difficult to
reliably predict. various factors or developments can lead the company to
change current estimates of liabilities and related insurance receivables where
applicable, or make such estimates for matters previously not susceptible of
reasonable estimates, such as a significant judicial ruling or judgment,
significant settlement or changes in applicable law. a future adverse ruling,
settlement or unfavorable development could result in future charges that could
have a material adverse effect on the companys results of operations or cash
flows in any particular period. a specific factor that may influence the
companys estimate of its future asbestos-related liabilities is the pending
congressional consideration of legislation to reform asbestos-related
litigation and pertinent information derived from that process. for a more
detailed discussion of the legal proceedings involving the company and associated
accounting estimates, see the discussion of legal proceedings in part i, item
3 of this document.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative
disclosures about market risk.
in
the context of item 7a, market risk refers to the risk of loss arising from adverse
changes in financial and derivative instrument market rates and prices, such as
fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. the company
discusses risk management in various places throughout this document, including
discussions in item 7 concerning financial condition and liquidity, and
financial instruments, and in the notes to consolidated financial statements (long-term
debt and short-term borrowings, derivatives and other financial instruments,
and the derivatives and hedging activities accounting policy). all derivative
activity is governed by written policies, and a value-at-risk analysis is
provided for these derivatives. the company does not have leveraged derivative
positions.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary
data.
index to financial statements
reference (pages)
managements responsibility for financial
reporting
management's report on internal control
over financial reporting
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated statement
of income for the years ended december 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002
consolidated balance sheet
at december 31, 2004 and 2003
consolidated
statement of changes in stockholders equity and comprehensive income for the
years ended december 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002
consolidated
statement of cash flows for the years ended december 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002
notes to
consolidated financial statements
44  73
note 1.
significant accounting
policies
note 2.
acquisitions and
divestitures
note 3.
goodwill and intangible
assets
note 4.
2001/2002
corporate restructuring program
note 5.
supplemental
balance sheet information
note 6.
supplemental
stockholders equity and comprehensive income information
note 7.
supplemental
cash flow information
note 8.
income
taxes
note 9.
long-term
debt and short-term borrowings
note 10.
derivatives
and other financial instruments
note 11.
pension
and postretirement benefit plans
note 12.
commitments
and contingencies
note 13.
employee
savings and stock ownership plans
note 14.
general
employees stock purchase plan
note 15.
management
stock ownership program
note 16.
business
segments
note 17.
geographic
areas
note 18.
quarterly
data (unaudited)
managements
responsibility for financial reporting
management is responsible for the integrity and
objectivity of the financial information included in this report. the financial
statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states of america. where necessary, the
financial statements reflect estimates based on management judgment.
management has established and maintains a system of
internal accounting and other controls for the company and its subsidiaries.
this system and its established accounting procedures and related controls are
designed to provide reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded, that the
books and records properly reflect all transactions, that policies and procedures
are implemented by qualified personnel, and that published financial statements
are properly prepared and fairly presented. the companys system of internal
control is supported by widely communicated written policies, including
business conduct policies, which are designed to require all employees to
maintain high ethical standards in the conduct of company affairs. internal
auditors continually review the accounting and control system.
3m company
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
management is responsible for establishing and
maintaining an adequate system of internal control over financial reporting.
management conducted an assessment of the companys internal control over
financial reporting based on the framework established by the committee of
sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission in internal control  integrated framework.
based on the assessment, management concluded that, as of december 31, 2004,
the companys internal control over financial reporting is effective.
managements assessment
of the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting
as of december 31, 2004 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an
independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which
is included herein.
3m company
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
to the stockholders and
board of directors of 3m company:
we have completed an
integrated audit of 3m companys 2004 consolidated financial statements and of
its internal control over financial reporting as of december 31, 2004 and
audits of its 2003 and 2002 consolidated financial statements in accordance
with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united
states). our opinions, based on our audits, are presented below.
consolidated financial
statements
in our opinion, the
consolidated financial statements listed in the accompanying index present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of 3m company and its
subsidiaries (the company) at december
31, 2004 and 2003, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for
each of the three years in the period ended december 31, 2004 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted
in the united states of america. these financial statements are the
responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to express an
opinion on these financial statements based on our audits. we conducted our
audits of these statements in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit of
financial statements includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting
the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
internal control over
financial reporting
also, in our opinion,
managements assessment, included in the accompanying managements report on
internal control over financial reporting, that the
company maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of
december 31, 2004 based on criteria established in internal control  integrated framework issued by the
committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso), is fairly stated, in all material respects, based on those
criteria. furthermore, in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material
respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of december
31, 2004, based on criteria established in internal
control  integrated framework issued by the coso. the companys management is responsible for maintaining
effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of
the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. our
responsibility is to express opinions on managements assessment andon
the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting
based on our audit. we conducted our audit of internal control over financial
reporting in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting
oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective
internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects. an audit of internal control over financial reporting includes
obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, evaluating
managements assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other procedures as we
consider necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a
reasonable basis for our opinions.
a companys internal
control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation
of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. a companys internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the
maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
(ii)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of
the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management
and directors of the company; and (iii)provide reasonable assurance
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because of its inherent
limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to
future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the
policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
minneapolis, minnesota
february 14, 2005
consolidated statement of income
3m company and subsidiaries
years ended december 31
(millions, except per share
amounts)
net sales
$
20,011
$
18,232
$
16,332
operating
expenses
cost of sales
9,958
9,285
8,496
selling, general
and administrative expenses
4,332
4,039
3,720
research,
development and related expenses
1,143
1,102
1,070
other expense
total
15,433
14,519
13,286
operating income
4,578
3,713
3,046
interest expense
and income
interest expense
interest income
(46
)
(28
)
(39
)
total
income before
income taxes and minority interest
4,555
3,657
3,005
provision for
income taxes
1,503
1,202
minority
interest
net income
$
2,990
$
2,403
$
1,974
weighted average
common shares outstanding  basic
780.5
782.8
780.0
earnings per
share  basic
$
3.83
$
3.07
$
2.53
weighted average
common shares outstanding  diluted
796.5
795.3
791.0
earnings per
share  diluted
$
3.75
$
3.02
$
2.50
the accompanying notes to
consolidated financial statements are an integral part of this statement.
consolidated balance sheet
3m company and subsidiaries
at december 31
(dollars in millions, except per
share amount)
assets
current assets
cash and cash
equivalents
$
2,757
$
1,836
accounts
receivable  net
2,792
2,714
inventories
1,897
1,816
other current
assets
1,274
1,354
total current
assets
8,720
7,720
investments
property, plant
and equipment  net
5,711
5,609
goodwill
2,655
2,419
intangible
assets
prepaid pension
and postretirement benefits
2,591
other assets
total assets
$
20,708
$
17,600
liabilities
and stockholders equity
current
liabilities
short-term
borrowings and current portion of long-term debt
$
2,094
$
1,202
accounts payable
1,168
1,087
accrued payroll
accrued income
taxes
other current
liabilities
1,455
1,477
total current
liabilities
6,071
5,082
long-term debt
1,735
other
liabilities
3,532
2,898
total
liabilities
$
10,330
$
9,715
commitments and
contingencies (note 12)
stockholders
equity
common stock,
par value $.01 per share
shares
outstanding  2004: 773,518,281
shares
outstanding  2003: 784,117,360
capital in
excess of par value
retained
earnings
15,649
14,010
treasury stock
(5,503
)
(4,641
)
unearned
compensation
(196
)
(226
)
accumulated
other comprehensive income (loss)
(1,554
)
stockholders
equity  net
10,378
7,885
total liabilities
and stockholders equity
$
20,708
$
17,600
the accompanying notes to
consolidated financial statements are an integral part of this statement.
consolidated statement of changes
in stockholders equity and comprehensive income
3m company and subsidiaries
(dollars in millions,
except per share amounts)
total
common
stock and
capital
in excess
of par
retained
earnings
treasury
stock
unearned
compensation
accumulated
other
comprehensive
income
(loss)
balance at
december 31, 2001
$
$
$
11,914
$
(4,633
)
$
(286
)
$
(1,205
)
net income
1,974
1,974
cumulative
translation adjustment  net of $14 million tax benefit
minimum pension
liability adjustment  net of $666 million tax benefit
(1,056
)
(1,056
)
debt and equity
securities, unrealized loss  net of $6 million tax benefit
(11
)
(11
)
derivative
financial instruments, unrealized loss  net of $28 million tax benefit
(48
)
(48
)
total
comprehensive income
1,153
dividends paid
($1.24 per share)
(968
)
(968
)
amortization of
unearned compensation
reacquired stock
(15.8 million shares)
(942
)
(942
)
issuances
pursuant to stock option and benefit plans (13.6 million shares)
(172
)
issuances
pursuant to acquisitions, (0.6 million shares)
balance at
december 31, 2002
5,993
12,748
(4,767
)
(258
)
(2,026
)
net income
2,403
2,403
cumulative
translation adjustment  net of $16 million tax benefit
minimum pension
liability adjustment  net of $84 million tax benefit
(173
)
(173
)
debt and equity
securities, unrealized gain  net of $1 million tax provision
derivative
financial instruments  unrealized loss  net of $3 million tax benefit
(6
)
(6
)
total
comprehensive income
2,875
dividends paid
($1.32 per share)
(1,034
)
(1,034
)
amortization of
unearned compensation
reacquired stock
(9.7 million shares)
(685
)
(685
)
issuances
pursuant to stock option and benefit plans (13.4 million shares)
(107
)
balance at
december 31, 2003
7,885
14,010
(4,641
)
(226
)
(1,554
)
net income
2,990
2,990
cumulative
translation adjustment  net of $7 million tax benefit
minimum pension
liability adjustment  net of $731 million tax provision
1,193
1,193
debt and equity
securities
derivative
financial instruments  unrealized gain  net of $3 million tax provision
total
comprehensive income
4,676
dividends paid
($1.44 per share)
(1,125
)
(1,125
)
amortization of
unearned compensation
reacquired stock
(22.0 million shares)
(1,791
)
(1,791
)
issuances
pursuant to stock option and benefit plans (10.9 million shares)
(226
)
issuances
pursuant to acquisitions (0.5 million shares)
balance at
december 31, 2004
$
10,378
$
$
15,649
$
(5,503
)
$
(196
)
$
the
accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of
this statement.
consolidated statement of cash
flows
3m company and subsidiaries
years ended december 31
(dollars in millions)
cash
flows from operating activities
net income
$
2,990
$
2,403
$
1,974
adjustments to
reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities
depreciation and
amortization
company pension
contributions
(591
)
(749
)
(1,086
)
deferred income
tax provision
changes in
assets and liabilities
accounts
receivable
inventories
other current
assets
(45
)
(187
)
other assets
net of amortization
(59
)
(54
)
accrued income
taxes
(11
)
accounts payable
other current
liabilities
(47
)
(171
)
other
liabilities
other  net
(14
)
net cash
provided by operating activities
4,282
3,773
2,992
cash
flows from investing activities
purchases of
property, plant and equipment (pp&e)
(937
)
(677
)
(763
)
proceeds from
sale of pp&e and other assets
acquisitions,
net of cash acquired
(73
)
(439
)
(1,258
)
purchases of
investments
(10
)
(16
)
(7
)
proceeds from
sale of investments
net cash used in
investing activities
(938
)
(969
)
(1,927
)
cash
flows from financing activities
change in
short-term debt  net
(215
)
(204
)
repayment of
debt (maturities greater than 90 days)
(868
)
(719
)
(497
)
proceeds from
debt (maturities greater than 90 days)
1,146
purchases of
treasury stock
(1,791
)
(685
)
(942
)
reissuances of
treasury stock
dividends paid
to stockholders
(1,125
)
(1,034
)
(968
)
distributions to
minority interests
(11
)
(13
)
(78
)
other  net
(4
)
(10
)
net cash used in
financing activities
(2,534
)
(1,627
)
(1,021
)
effect of
exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(42
)
net increase in
cash and cash equivalents
1,218
cash and cash
equivalents at beginning of year
1,836
cash and cash
equivalents at end of year
$
2,757
$
1,836
$
the
accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part of
this statement.
notes to consolidated financial
statements
note 1. significant accounting policies
consolidation:
3m is a diversified global manufacturer, technology innovator and marketer of a
wide variety of products. all significant subsidiaries are consolidated. all
significant intercompany transactions are eliminated. as used herein, the term
3m or company refers to 3m company and subsidiaries unless the context
indicates otherwise.
foreign currency translation:
local currencies generally are considered the functional currencies outside the
united states. assets and liabilities for operations in local-currency
environments are translated at year-end exchange rates. income and expense
items are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
cumulative translation adjustments are recorded as a component of accumulated
other comprehensive income in stockholders equity.
reclassifications: certain
prior period balance sheet amounts have been reclassified to conform with the
current year presentation.
use of estimates:
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with u.s. generally
accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial
statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the
reporting period. actual results could differ from these estimates.
cash and cash equivalents:
cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and temporary investments with
maturities of three months or less when purchased.
investments:
investments primarily include the cash surrender value of life insurance
policies, real estate not used in the business, venture capital and
equity-method investments. unrealized gains and losses relating to investments
classified as available-for-sale are recorded as a component of accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss) in stockholders equity.
inventories:
inventories are stated at lower of cost or market, with cost generally
determined on a first-in, first-out basis.
property, plant and equipment:
property, plant and equipment, including capitalized interest and internal
engineering costs, are recorded at cost. depreciation of property, plant and
equipment generally is computed using the straight-line method based on the
estimated useful lives of the assets. the estimated useful lives of buildings
and improvements primarily range from 10 to 40 years, with the majority in the
range of 20 to 40 years. machinery and equipment estimated useful lives
primarily range from three to 15 years, with the majority in the range of five
to 10 years. fully depreciated assets are retained in property and accumulated
depreciation accounts until disposal. upon disposal, assets and related
accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and the net amount, less
proceeds from disposal, is charged or credited to operations. property, plant
and equipment amounts are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (asset group) may
not be recoverable. an impairment loss would be recognized when the carrying
amount of an asset exceeds the estimated undiscounted future cash flows
expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. the
amount of the impairment loss to be recorded is calculated by the excess of the
assets carrying value over its fair value. fair value is generally determined
using a discounted cash flow analysis.
goodwill:
goodwill is the excess of cost of an acquired entity over the
amounts assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination.
goodwill is not amortized. goodwill is tested for impairment annually, and will
be tested for impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or
circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired.
impairment testing for goodwill is done at a reporting unit level. reporting
units are one level below the business segment level, but can be combined when
reporting units within the same segment have similar economic characteristics.
3m has 18 reporting units at december 31, 2004. the majority of goodwill
relates to and is assigned directly to a specific reporting unit. an impairment
loss generally would be recognized when the carrying amount of the reporting
units net assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. the
estimated fair value of a reporting unit is determined using earnings for the
reporting unit multiplied by a price/earnings ratio for comparable industry
groups, or by using a discounted cash flow analysis. the company completed its
assessment of any potential impairment upon adoption of this standard and
performs annual assessments. the company completed its annual goodwill
impairment test in the fourth quarter of 2004 and determined that no goodwill
was impaired.
intangible
assets: intangible assets include patents, tradenames and
other intangible assets acquired from an independent party. intangible assets
with an indefinite life, namely certain tradenames, are not amortized.
intangible assets with a definite life are amortized on a straight-line basis,
with estimated useful lives ranging from two to 20 years. indefinite-lived
intangible assets are tested for impairment annually, and will be tested for
impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that
would indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired. intangible assets with
a definite life are tested for impairment whenever events or circumstances
indicate that a carrying amount of an asset (asset group) may not be
recoverable. the company has determined that no material impairments existed as
of december 31, 2004. an impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount
of an asset exceeds the estimated undiscounted cash flows used in determining
the fair value of the asset. the amount of the impairment loss to be recorded
is calculated by the excess of the assets carrying value over its fair value.
fair value is generally determined using a discounted cash flow analysis. costs
related to internally developed intangible assets are expensed as incurred.
revenue (sales) recognition:
the company sells a wide range of products to a diversified base of customers
around the world and has no material concentration of credit risk. revenue is
recognized when the risks and rewards of
ownership have substantively transferred to customers. this condition normally
is met when the product has been delivered or upon performance of services. the
company records estimated reductions to revenue for customer and distributor incentives,
such as rebates, at the time of the initial sale.
the majority of 3ms
sales agreements are for standard products and services with customer
acceptance occurring upon delivery of the product or performance of the
service. 3m also enters into agreements that contain multiple-elements (such as
equipment, installation and service) or non-standard terms and conditions. for
multiple-element arrangements, 3m recognizes revenue for delivered elements
when the delivered item has stand-alone value to the customer, fair values of
undelivered elements are known, customer acceptance has occurred, and there are
only customary refund or return rights related to the delivered elements. in
addition to the preceding conditions, equipment revenue is not recorded until
the installation has been completed if equipment acceptance is dependent upon
installation, or if installation is essential to the functionality of the
equipment. installation revenues are not recorded until installation has been
completed. for prepaid service contracts, sales revenue is recognized on a
straight-line basis over the term of the contract, unless historical evidence
indicates the costs are incurred on other than a straight-line basis. license
fee revenue is recognized as earned, with no revenue recognized until the
inception of the license term. on occasion, agreements will contain milestones,
or 3m will recognize revenue based on proportional performance. for these
agreements, and depending on the specifics, 3m may recognize revenue upon completion
of a substantive milestone, or in proportion to costs incurred.
accounts
receivable and allowances: trade accounts receivable are
recorded at the invoiced amount and do not bear interest. the company maintains
allowances for bad debts, cash discounts, product returns and various other
adjustments. the allowance for doubtful accounts and product returns are based
on the best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in existing
accounts receivable and anticipated sales returns. the company determines the
allowances based on historical write-off experience by industry and regional
economic data and historical sales returns. the company reviews the allowance
for doubtful accounts monthly. the company does not have any off-balance-sheet
credit exposure related to its customers.
advertising and merchandising:
these costs are charged to operations in the year incurred, and totaled $433
million in 2004, $405 million in 2003 and $372 million in 2002.
research, development and related
expenses: these costs are charged to operations in the year
incurred and are shown on a separate line of the consolidated statement of
income. research and development expenses, covering basic scientific research
and the application of scientific advances to the development of new and
improved products and their uses, totaled $759 million in 2004, $749 million in
2003 and $738 million in 2002. related expenses primarily include technical
support provided to customers for existing products by 3m laboratories.
internal-use software:
the company capitalizes direct costs of materials and services used in the
development of internal-use software. amounts capitalized are amortized on a
straight-line basis over a period of three to five years and are reported as a
component of machinery and equipment within property, plant and equipment.
environmental: environmental
expenditures relating to existing conditions caused by past operations that do
not contribute to current or future revenues are expensed. liabilities for
remediation costs are recorded on an undiscounted basis when they are probable
and reasonably estimable, generally no later than the completion of feasibility
studies or the companys commitment to a plan of action. environmental
expenditures for capital projects that contribute to current or future
operations generally are capitalized and depreciated over their estimated
useful lives.
income taxes:
the provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability
approach. under this approach, deferred income taxes represent the expected
future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts
and tax basis of assets and liabilities. the company records a valuation
allowance to reduce its deferred tax assets when uncertainty regarding their
reliability exists. as of december 31, 2004, no valuation allowances were
recorded.
earnings per
share: the difference in the weighted average
shares outstanding for calculating basic and diluted earnings per share is
attributable to the dilution associated with the companys stock-based
compensation plans. certain management stock ownership program average options
outstanding during the years 2004, 2003 and 2002 were not included in the
computation of diluted earnings per share because they would not have had a
dilutive effect (6.6 million average options for 2004, 6.4 million average
options for 2003 and 11.0 million average options for 2002). as discussed in
note 9 to the consolidated financial statements, the conditions for conversion
related to the companys $639 million in aggregate face amount of convertible
notes have never been met; accordingly, there was no impact on 3ms diluted
earnings per share. if the conditions for conversion are met, 3m may choose to
pay in cash and/or common stock; however, if this occurs, the company has the
intent and ability to settle this debt security in cash. the computations for basic and diluted
earnings per share for the years ended december 31 follow:
earnings per share computations
(amounts in millions, except
per share amounts)
numerator:
net income
$
2,990
$
2,403
$
1,974
denominator:
denominator for
weighted average common shares outstanding  basic
780.5
782.8
780.0
dilution
associated with the companys stock-based compensation plans
16.0
12.5
11.0
denominator for
weighted average common shares outstanding  diluted
796.5
795.3
791.0
earnings per
share  basic
$
3.83
$
3.07
$
2.53
earnings per
share  diluted
3.75
3.02
2.50
stock-based compensation:
the intrinsic value method is used as prescribed by accounting principles board
opinion no. 25, accounting for stock issued to employees, and generally no
compensation cost is recognized for either the general employees stock
purchase plan (gespp) or the management stock ownership program (msop). the
gespp is considered non-compensatory. in december 2002, the financial accounting
standards board (fasb) issued statement of financial accounting standards
(sfas) no. 148, accounting for stock-based compensation transition and
disclosure  an amendment of sfas no. 123. the company has adopted the
disclosure requirements of sfas no. 148. refer to notes 14 and 15 for
additional information concerning the gespp and msop and also refer to
additional discussion later in note 1 concerning the impact of sfas no. 123r.
pro forma amounts based on the options estimated black-scholes fair value, net
of tax, at the grant dates for awards under the companys stock-based
compensation plans for the years ended december 31 are as follows:
stock-based compensation
pro forma net income and earnings
per share
(millions, except per share
amounts)
net income, as
reported
$
2,990
$
2,403
$
1,974
add: stock-based
compensation expense included in net income, net of related tax effects
deduct: total
stock-based compensation expense determined under fair value, net of related
tax effects
(152
)
(120
)
(144
)
pro forma net
income
2,841
2,286
1,832
earnings per
share  basic
as reported
$
3.83
$
3.07
$
2.53
pro forma
3.64
2.92
2.35
earnings per
share  diluted
as reported
$
3.75
$
3.02
$
2.50
pro forma
3.56
2.88
2.32
comprehensive income:
total comprehensive income and the components of accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss) are presented in the consolidated statement of
changes in stockholders equity and comprehensive income. accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss) is composed of foreign currency translation effects
(including hedges of net investments in international companies), minimum
pension liability adjustments, unrealized gains and losses on
available-for-sale debt and equity securities, and unrealized gains and losses
on cash flow hedging instruments.
derivatives and hedging
activities: all derivative instruments are recorded on the
balance sheet at fair value. the company uses interest rate swaps, currency
swaps, and forward and option contracts to manage risks generally associated
with foreign exchange rate, interest rate and commodity market volatility. all
hedging instruments are designated and effective as hedges, in accordance with
u.s. generally accepted accounting principles. if the underlying hedged
transaction ceases to exist, all changes in fair value of the related
derivatives that have not been settled are recognized in current earnings.
instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting are marked to market with
changes recognized in current earnings. the company does not hold or issue
derivative financial instruments for trading purposes and is not a party to leveraged
derivatives.
new accounting pronouncements
in january 2003, the fasb
issued and subsequently revised fasb interpretation no. 46 (fin 46),
consolidation of variable interest entities.
this interpretation addresses the requirements for business enterprises
to consolidate related entities in which they are determined to be the primary
economic beneficiary as a result of their variable economic interests. the
interpretation provides guidance in evaluating multiple economic interests in
an entity and in determining the primary beneficiary. effective january 1,
2004, the company adopted fin 46. the company reviewed its major commercial
relationships and its overall economic interests with other companies,
consisting of related parties, contracted manufacturing vendors, companies in
which it has an equity position, and other suppliers to determine the extent of
its variable economic interests in these parties. as a result of this review,
3m identified several immaterial manufacturing-supplier arrangements that had
certain variable interest entity characteristics. 3m has concluded that it is
not the primary beneficiary in any of these relationships and, therefore, has
not consolidated any of these entities. 3m does not have any material exposure
to these entities that would require disclosure. the adoption of this standard
did not impact 3ms consolidated results of operations or financial condition.
on december 8, 2003, the
medicare prescription drug improvement and modernization act of 2003 (the
medicare act) was signed into law.refer to note 11 to the consolidated
financial statements for discussion of the medicare act.
in september 2004, the
fasbs emerging issues task force finalized eitf issue no. 04-08, the effect
of contingently convertible debt on diluted earnings per share that would
require the dilutive effect of shares from contingently convertible debt to be
included in the diluted earnings per share calculation regardless of whether
the contingency has been met. the company has $639 million in aggregate face
amount of 30-year zero coupon senior notes that are convertible into
approximately 6 million shares of common stock if certain conditions are met.
these conditions have never been met. the fasb is also in the process of
amending sfas no. 128, anticipated
to be issued in 2005,
which is expected to further address this and several other issues. unless the
company takes steps to modify certain terms of this debt security, eitf issue
no. 04-08 and proposed sfas no. 128r (when effective), would result in an
increase of approximately 6 million shares to diluted shares outstanding to
give effect to the contingent issuance of shares. also, using the if-converted
method, net income for the diluted earnings per share calculations would be
adjusted for interest expense associated with this debt instrument. eitf issue
no. 04-08 would have been effective beginning with the companys 2004 fourth
quarter. however, due to the fasbs delay in issuing sfas no. 128r and the
companys intent and ability to settle this debt security in cash versus the
issuance of stock, the impact of the additional diluted shares will not be
included in the diluted earnings per share calculation until sfas no. 128r is
effective. prior periods diluted shares outstanding and diluted earnings per
share amounts will be restated to present comparable information when sfas no.
128r is effective. the estimated annual reduction in 3ms diluted earnings per
share would have been approximately $.02 per share for total year 2004. because
the impact of this standard is ongoing, 3ms diluted shares outstanding and
diluted earnings per share amounts would be impacted until retirement or
modification of certain terms of this debt security.
in november2004,
the fasb issued sfas no.151, inventory costs  an amendment of arb
no.43, chapter4. sfas no.151 amends the guidance in
accounting research bulletin (arb) no.43, chapter4, inventory
pricing, to clarify the accounting for abnormal amounts of idle facility
expense, freight, handling costs, and wasted material (spoilage). among other
provisions, the new rule requires that items such as idle facility expense,
excessive spoilage, double freight, and rehandling costs be recognized as current-period
charges regardless of whether they meet the criterion of so abnormal as
stated in arb no.43. additionally, sfas no.151 requires that the
allocation of fixed production overheads to the costs of conversion be based on
the normal capacity of the production facilities. sfas no.151 is
effective for fiscal years beginning after june15, 2005, and is required
to be adopted by the company effective january 1, 2006. the company does not
expect sfas no.151 to have a material impact on 3ms consolidated results
of operations or financial condition.
in december2004,
the fasb issued sfas no.153, exchanges of nonmonetary assets  an
amendment of apb opinion no. 29. sfas no.153 eliminates the exception
from fair value measurement for nonmonetary exchanges of similar productive
assets in paragraph21(b) of apb opinion no.29, accounting for
nonmonetary transactions, and replaces it with an exception for exchanges that
do not have commercial substance. sfas no153 specifies that a nonmonetary
exchange has commercial substance if the future cash flows of the entity are
expected to change significantly as a result of the exchange. sfas no.153
is effective for the fiscal periods beginning after june15, 2005, and is
required to be adopted by the company effective january 1, 2006. the company
does not expect sfas no.153 to have a material impact on 3ms
consolidated results of operations or financial condition.
in december 2004, the
fasb issued sfas no. 123 (revised 2004), share-based payment. sfas no. 123r
supersedes apb opinion no. 25, which requires recognition of an expense when
goods or services are provided. sfas no. 123r requires the determination of the
fair value of the share-based compensation at the grant date and the
recognition of the related expense over the period in which the share-based
compensation vests. sfas no. 123r permits a prospective or two modified
versions of retrospective application under which financial statements for
prior periods are adjusted on a basis consistent with the pro forma disclosures
required for those periods by the original sfas no. 123. the company is
required to adopt the provisions of sfas no. 123r effective july 1, 2005, at
which time the company will begin recognizing an expense for unvested share-based
compensation that has been issued or will be issued after that date. under the
retroactive options, prior periods may be restated either as of the beginning
of the year of adoption, january 1, 2005 for the company, or for all periods
presented. the company has not yet finalized its decision concerning the
transition option it will utilize to adopt sfas no. 123r. the companys
management stock ownership program (msop) is a three-year plan that requires
shareholder approval at the may 2005 annual shareholder meeting. the company is
considering various changes that will be detailed in the companys definitive
proxy statement, but will not be finalized until approval has been granted by
the companys shareholders. the company does expect the impact of the adoption
of sfas no. 123r to be material, but due to potential changes in the msop,
future share-based compensation amounts may differ from the pro forma amounts
disclosed earlier in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
in december 2004,
thefasb issued fasb staff position (fsp) no.109-2, accounting and
disclosure guidance for the foreign earnings repatriation provision within the
american jobs creation act of 2004, which provides guidance under sfas
no.109, accounting for income taxes, with respect to recording the
potential impact of the repatriation provisions of the american jobs creation
act of 2004 (the jobs act) on enterprises income tax expense and deferred tax
liability. the jobs act was enacted on october22, 2004. the jobs act
creates a temporary incentive for u.s. corporations to repatriate accumulated
income earned abroad by providing an 85% dividends received deduction for
certain dividends from controlled foreign corporations. fsp no. 109-2 states
that
an enterprise is allowed
time beyond the financial reporting period of enactment to evaluate the effect
of the jobs act on its plan for reinvestment or repatriation of foreign
earnings for purposes of applying sfas no.109. the deduction is subject
to a number of limitations and uncertainty remains as to how to interpret
certain provisions in the act. as such, the company is not yet in a position to
decide whether, and to what extent, the company might repatriate foreign
earnings that have not yet been remitted to the u.s. and, as provided for in
fsp no. 109-2, the company has not adjusted its tax expense or deferred tax
liability to reflect the repatriation provisions of the jobs act. based on the
companys analysis to date, however, it is possible that the company will
repatriate an amount totaling between $800 million and $950 million, with the
respective tax liability ranging from $40 million to $50million. the
company expects to be in a position to finalize its assessment after issuance
of further regulatory guidance and passage of statutory technical corrections.
note 2. acquisitions and divestitures
year 2004 acquisitions:
in february 2004, 3m (industrial business) purchased
100 percent of the outstanding common shares of highjump software, inc., a u.s.
company that provides supply chain execution software and solutions. the total
purchase price of approximately $66 million included $23 million of cash paid
(net of cash acquired) plus 541,581 shares of 3m common stock. the 3m common
stock had a market value of $43 million at the acquisition measurement date and
was previously held as 3m treasury stock.
in march 2004, 3m (safety, security and protection
services business) purchased 91 percent of the outstanding shares of hornell
holding ab, a swedish company, for approximately $95 million, including
assumption of debt. this $95 million includes $57 million of cash paid (net of
cash acquired) and the acquisition of $38 million of debt, most of which has
been repaid. subsequently, 3m acquired all of the remaining outstanding shares
for approximately $6 million in cash. hornell holding ab is a global supplier
of personal protective equipment for welding applications.
in august 2004, 3m (health care business) purchased
100 percent of the outstanding shares of info-x inc., a u.s. company, for $17
million in cash (net of cash acquired). the acquired company provides coding
compliance software and data for health care organizations.
purchased identifiable
intangible assets for these acquisitions are being amortized on a straight-line
basis over lives ranging from two to 20 years (weighted-average life of 11
years). research and development charges from these acquisitions totaled $1
million. pro forma information related to these acquisitions is not included
because the impact of these acquisitions, either individually or in the
aggregate, on the companys consolidated results of operations is not
considered to be material.
in september 2004, 3m and corning incorporated reached
a settlement related to issues associated with 3ms 2002 acquisition of corning
precision lens, inc. (now called precision optics, inc.). in september 2004, 3m
received $30 million from corning related to this settlement.
the purchase price allocations and the resulting
impact on the consolidated balance sheet relating to all 2004 acquisitions
follow:
activity
asset (liability)
(millions)
highjump
software, inc.
hornell
holding ab
and
subsidiaries
info-x inc.
precision
optics, inc.
(2004
activity)
total
activity
accounts
receivable
$
$
$
$
$
inventories
other current
assets
property, plant
and equipment  net
purchased
intangible assets
(17
)
purchased
goodwill
(13
)
deferred tax
asset
accounts payable
and other current liabilities
(4
)
(8
)
(2
)
(14
)
interest bearing
debt
(38
)
(38
)
deferred revenue
(6
)
(3
)
(9
)
other long-term
liabilities
(5
)
(7
)
(2
)
(14
)
net assets
acquired
$
$
$
$
(30
)
$
supplemental
information:
cash paid/(received)
$
$
$
$
(30
)
$
less: cash
acquired
cash paid, net
of cash acquired
$
$
$
$
(30
)
$
non-cash (3m shares at fair value)
net assets acquired
$
$
$
$
(30
)
$
year 2003 acquisitions:
in january 2003, 3m
purchased an additional 25% interest in sumitomo 3m limited from nec
corporation for $377 million in cash. prior to this purchase, 3m controlled and
owned 50% of sumitomo 3m limited and fully consolidated both sumitomo 3m
limiteds balance sheet and results of operations, with a provision for the
minority interest that did not have participating rights. as a result of this
acquisition, 3m now owns 75% of sumitomo 3m limited. sumitomo electric industries,
ltd., a japanese corporation, owns the remaining 25% of sumitomo 3m limited.
because all business segments benefit from this combination, goodwill acquired
in this acquisition was allocated to 3ms seven business segments.
during the first quarter
of 2003, 3m (display and graphics business) finalized the purchase of corning
precision lens, inc. (precision optics, inc.), which was acquired in december
2002, exclusive of the settlement described previously under year 2004
acquisitions. the impacts of finalizing the purchase price allocation,
including a working capital adjustment and payment of direct acquisition
expenses, are shown in the business combination activity table that follows.
during the year ended
december 31, 2003, 3m entered into six additional business combinations for a
total purchase price of $49 million, net of cash acquired.
1) 3m (industrial
business) purchased 100% of the outstanding shares of solvay fluoropolymers,
inc. (sfi), previously a wholly owned subsidiary of solvay america, inc. sfi is
a manufacturer of fluoroplastic products.
2) 3m (display and
graphics business) purchased corning shanghai logistics company limited,
previously a wholly owned subsidiary of corning incorporated. this business is
involved in the distribution of lens systems for projection televisions.
3) 3m (safety, security
and protection services business) purchased 100% of the outstanding shares of
guardianet systems, inc., a software company.
4) 3m (electro and
communications business) purchased the outstanding minority interest of pouyet
communications, inc. (pci), an indian company. pci is a telecommunications
supplier.
5) 3m (health care
business) purchased 100% of the outstanding shares of vantage health limited, a
british company. vantage health limited develops health information systems
software.
6) 3m (health care business) purchased certain
tangible and intangible assets from astrazeneca s.p.a., an italian company.
astrazeneca s.p.a. is a research-based pharmaceuticals company.
the business combination
activity for the year ended december 31, 2003, is summarized in the following
table. purchased identifiable intangible assets of $12 million are being
amortized on a straight-line basis over lives ranging from 5 to 15 years
(weighted-average life of 11.3 years). there were no in-process research and
development charges associated with these acquisitions. pro forma information
related to these acquisitions is not included because the impact of these
acquisitions, either individually or in the aggregate, on the companys
consolidated results of operations is not considered to be material.
activity
asset (liability)
(millions)
sumitomo
3m limited
precision optics, inc.
(2003 activity)
aggregation of
remaining acquisitions
total
activity
accounts
receivable
$
$
$
$
inventory
other current
assets
investments
(15
)
(15
)
property, plant,
and equipment  net
(3
)
purchased
intangible assets
purchased
goodwill
deferred tax
asset
accounts payable
and other current liabilities
(6
)
(2
)
minority
interest liability
other long-term
liabilities
(97
)
(95
)
net assets
acquired
$
$
$
$
year 2002 acquisitions:
in december 2002, 3m
purchased 100% of the outstanding common shares of corning precision lens,
inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of corning incorporated, for $850 million in
cash. corning precision lens, inc. has become a wholly owned subsidiary of 3m,
operating under the name 3m precision optics, inc. the acquired company is a
manufacturer of lens systems for projection televisions, which will broaden
3ms technology position in the global display industry. the purchase agreement
between 3m and corning incorporated contained a contingency. this contingency
was based on the final working capital valuation of the assets purchased and
liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. this contingency was not booked
in 3ms balance sheet as of december 31, 2002, because the final amount of the
asset or liability was not known. this contingency was resolved in 2003 and is
described previously under year 2003 acquisitions.
in
december 2002, 3m purchased the 43% minority ownership of 3m inter-unitek gmbh.
3m paid $304 million in cash to the minority interest shareholders of 3m
inter-unitek gmbh. 3m inter-unitek gmbh is the parent company of 3m espe dental
ag.
during
the year ended december 31, 2002, 3m completed seven additional business
combinations for a total purchase price of $139 million, which was paid with
$104 million in cash, net of cash acquired, and $35 million of 3m common stock
(555,584 common shares, split-adjusted). a summary of these seven business
combinations follows:
1) 3m (industrial
business) purchased certain assets and specified liabilities of emtech emulsion
technologies, inc. and emtech manufacturing corporation. these companies are
involved in the manufacture and sale of durable film label materials.
2) 3m (industrial
business) purchased certain assets and specified liabilities of polymer
manufacturing, inc. this company, based in oxnard, california, is a
manufacturer of two-part polyurethane adhesives, plastic repair materials,
sealants and related accessories.
3) 3m (safety, security
and protection services business) purchased the shares of ait corporation. ait
corporation, based in ottawa, ontario, canada, is a manufacturer of travel id
security systems.
4) 3m (health care
business) purchased the shares of ruffing it. this company, based in germany,
develops quality assurance software for medical records.
5) 3m (health care
business) purchased from glaxosmithkline the right to manufacture and
distribute the migril product line in certain african nations. migril is an
over-the-counter treatment for migraine headaches.
6) 3m (industrial
business) purchased an 80% interest in certain assets of shanghai grinding
wheel works, a chinese company. these assets are being used to manufacture and
sell coated abrasive products.
7) 3m
(electro and communications business) purchased an additional 6% of quante ag
(a telecommunications supplier).
the business combination
activity for the year ended december 31, 2002, is summarized in the following
table. purchased identifiable intangible
assets of $45 million are being amortized on a straight-line basis over lives
ranging from two to 17 years (weighted-average life of 10.6 years). there were
no in-process research and development charges associated with these
acquisitions. pro forma information related to these acquisitions is not
included because the impact of these acquisitions, either individually or in
the aggregate, on the companys consolidated results of operations is not
considered to be material.
activity
asset (liability)
(millions)
precision
optics,
inc.
3m
inter-unitek
gmbh
aggregation
of remaining
acquisitions
total
activity
accounts
receivable
$
$
$
$
inventory
other current
assets
property, plant
and equipment  net
purchased
indefinite-lived intangible assets
purchased
identifiable intangible assets
purchased
goodwill
accounts payable
and other current liabilities
(23
)
(6
)
(29
)
interest bearing
debt
(4
)
(4
)
minority
interest liability
other long-term
liabilities
(2
)
(2
)
net assets
acquired
$
$
$
$
1,293
cash, net of
cash acquired
$
$
$
$
1,258
non-cash (3m
shares at fair value)
net assets
acquired
$
$
$
$
1,293
note
3.
goodwill and intangible assets
3m has 18 reporting units under the criteria set forth
by sfas no. 142. sfas no. 142 requires that goodwill be tested for impairment
at least annually and when reporting units are changed. the company completed
its annual goodwill impairment test in the fourth quarter of 2004 and
determined that no goodwill was impaired.
purchased
goodwill from acquisitions totaled $141 million in 2004, none of which is
deductible for tax purposes. goodwill was reduced by $13 million as a result of
the corning incorporated settlement. the increase in the goodwill balance in
2004 primarily relates to the 2004 business combinations previously discussed
and changes in foreign currency exchange rates during the period. the goodwill
balance by business segment follows:
goodwill
(millions)
dec. 31,
balance
acquisition
activity
translation
and other
dec. 31,
balance
health care
$
$
$
$
industrial
display and
graphics
(13
)
(5
)
consumer and
office
safety, security
and protection services
electro and
communications
transportation
total company
$
2,419
$
$
$
2,655
acquired intangible assets
the
carrying amount and accumulated amortization of acquired intangible assets as
of december 31 follow:
(millions)
patents
$
$
other
amortizable intangible assets
non-amortizable
intangible assets (tradenames)
total gross
carrying amount
accumulated
amortization  patents
(187
)
(153
)
accumulated
amortization  other
(97
)
(82
)
total
accumulated amortization
(284
)
(235
)
total intangible assets  net
$
$
amortization
expense for acquired intangible assets for the years ended december 31 follows:
(millions)
amortization
expense
$
$
$
expected
amortization expense for acquired intangible assets recorded as of december 31,
2004 follows:
(millions)
after
amortization
expense
$
$
$
$
$
$
the
preceding expected amortization expense is an estimate. actual amounts of
amortization expense may differ from estimated amounts due to additional
intangible asset acquisitions, changes in foreign currency exchange rates,
impairment of intangible assets, accelerated amortization of intangible assets
and other events.
note 4. 2001/2002 corporate restructuring program
during the first half of
2001, the company developed and announced a restructuring plan that
consolidated certain operations and streamlined the organization to increase
speed and productivity. in june 2001, the company completed the identification
of the significant actions to be taken and obtained approvals from the
appropriate level of management. in the fourth quarter of 2001, the company
obtained approvals for certain additional actions. these actions were
substantially completed by june 30, 2002.
during 2001, 3m incurred
$569 million of pre-tax expenses principally related to the restructuring plan.
the 2001 charges related to employee severance and benefits ($472 million),
accelerated depreciation ($80 million) and other ($17 million). in the first
six months of 2002, 3m incurred $202 million of pre-tax expense relating to the
restructuring plan. the 2002 charges related to employee severance and benefits
($111 million), accelerated depreciation ($47million) and other ($44
million).
the severance charges
were taken in the quarter when management approved the plans and after
severance benefits had been communicated to the employees. the accelerated
depreciation (incremental charges resulting from shortened depreciable lives,
primarily related to downsizing or consolidating manufacturing operations)
related to assets included in property, plant and equipment. estimated salvage
values were based on estimates of proceeds upon sale of certain affected
assets. the charges related to other exit activities included incremental costs
and contractual obligations for items such as lease termination payments and
other facility exit costs (such as demolition of buildings, inventory
disposals, other) incurred as a direct result of this plan.
in connection with its
restructuring plan, the company eliminated a total of about 6,900 positions.
these positions represented a wide range of functions throughout the company.
of the 6,900 employment reductions, about 45% occurred in the united states,
30% in europe and the balance in other international areas. all business
segments were impacted directly and also indirectly through reduced allocations
of corporate staff service costs. in order to enhance segment comparability and
reflect managements focus on ongoing operations, these restructuring costs
were recorded in corporate and unallocated, not in the individual business
segments.
special termination
pension and medical benefits, aggregating $43 million in 2002 and $62 million
in 2001, were offered to eligible employees. certain pension and medical
benefits will generally be paid over their life expectancies. the company also recorded $3 million of
non-cash stock option expense in 2002 ($8 million in 2001) due to the
reclassification of
certain employees age 50 and older to retiree status, resulting in a
modification of their original stock option awards for accounting purposes. the
current liabilities and a portion of the non-current liabilities were funded
through cash provided by operations, while funding for certain long-term
special termination pension and medical liabilities are provided through
established pension and postretirement trust funds. the majority of the
long-term portion of the liability, primarily special termination pension and
medical liabilities, is reflected as a component of 3ms pension and medical
trust plans as a portion of the accumulated benefit obligation (abo). it is
estimated that 3ms benefit plans reflect approximately $24 million of
restructuring-related long-term liabilities that had not yet been paid out by
the trusts as of december 31, 2004. this amount is reduced gradually over time
as the trust funds make payments.
the restructuring plan
included actions in 25 locations in the united states, 27 in europe, eight in
the asia pacific area, 13 in latin america and four in canada. the company did
not discontinue any major product lines as a result of the restructuring plan.
the restructuring charges did not include any write-down of goodwill or other
intangible assets.
selected information
related to these charges follows:
2001/2002
corporate restructuring program
(millions)
employee
severance
and
benefits
accelerated
depreciation
other
total
charges
year 2001
charges
$
$
$
$
year 2002
charges
total charges
$
$
$
$
current
liability at december 31, 2000
$
$
$
$
2001 charges
2001 cash
payments
(155
)
(4
)
(159
)
2001 non-cash
and long-term portion of liability
(132
)
(80
)
(212
)
current
liability at december 31, 2001
$
$
$
$
2002 charges
2002 cash
payments
(267
)
(39
)
(306
)
reclassification from long-term portion of liability
2002 non-cash
(46
)
(47
)
(93
)
current
liability at december 31, 2002
$
$
$
$
2003 cash
payments
(29
)
(17
)
(46
)
current
liability at december 31, 2003
$
$
$
$
cash payments
(1
)
(1
)
(2
)
current
liability at december 31, 2004
$
$
$
$
note 5. supplemental balance sheet information
(millions)
accounts
receivable
accounts
receivable
$
2,875
$
2,813
allowances
(83
)
(99
)
accounts
receivable  net
$
2,792
$
2,714
inventories
finished goods
$
$
work in process
raw materials
total
inventories
$
1,897
$
1,816
other
current assets
product and
other insurance receivables
$
$
deferred income
taxes
prepaid expenses
and other
total other
current assets
$
1,274
$
1,354
investments
available-for-sale
(fair value)
$
$
equity-method
cash surrender
value of life insurance policies, real estate and other (cost, which
approximates fair value)
total
investments
$
$
property,
plant and equipment  at cost
land
$
$
buildings and
leasehold improvements
4,619
4,353
machinery and
equipment
10,876
10,851
construction in
progress
capital leases
gross property,
plant and equipment
16,290
15,841
accumulated
depreciation*
(10,579
)
(10,232
)
property, plant
and equipment  net
$
5,711
$
5,609
*includes
capital leases accumulated depreciation of $34 million for 2004 and $25 million
for 2003.
supplemental balance sheet information (continued)
(millions)
other
assets
product and
other insurance receivables
$
$
deferred income
taxes
other
total other
assets
$
$
other
current liabilities
accrued trade
payables
$
$
employee
benefits and withholdings
deferred income
property and
other taxes
product and
other claims
deferred income
taxes
other
total other
current liabilities
$
1,455
$
1,477
other
liabilities
non-funded
pension and postretirement benefits
$
$
employee
benefits
product and
other claims
deferred income
taxes
1,284
minority
interest in subsidiaries
deferred income
capital lease
obligations
other
total other
liabilities
$
3,532
$
2,898
accounts payable
(included as a separate line item on the consolidated balance sheet) includes
drafts payable on demand of $68 million at december 31, 2004, and $67 million
at december 31, 2003.
note 6. supplemental stockholders equity and
comprehensive income information
common
stock ($.01 par value per share) of 3.0 billion shares is authorized, with
944,033,056 shares issued. during the third quarter of 2003, $4 million was
transferred within stockholders equity from capital in excess of par value
to common stock in connection with the two-for-one split of the companys
common stock. treasury stock is reported at cost, with 170,514,775 shares at
december 31, 2004, 159,915,696 shares at december 31, 2003, and 163,641,694
shares at december 31, 2002. preferred stock, without par value, of 10 million
shares is authorized but unissued.
the components of the
ending balances of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) as of december
31 follow:
accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss)
(millions)
cumulative translation  net
$
$
(208
)
$
(858
)
minimum pension
liability adjustments  net
(110
)
(1,303
)
(1,130
)
debt and equity
securities, unrealized gain  net
cash flow
hedging instruments, unrealized gain (loss)  net
(42
)
(45
)
(39
)
total
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
$
$
(1,554
)
$
(2,026
)
the minimum pension
liability adjustment is calculated on an annual basis. if the accumulated
benefit obligation (abo) exceeds the fair value of pension assets, the employer
must recognize a liability that is at least equal to the unfunded abo. for the
year ended december31, 2004, the change in the minimum pension liability
within accumulated other comprehensive income increased stockholders equity by
$1.193billion (after-tax). this increase was primarily the result of the
assets being above the accumulated benefit obligation for the u.s.
qualified plan, which
caused the minimum pension liability recorded for the years ended december 31,
2003 and 2002 to be reversed. in the fourth quarter of 2003, 3m recorded a
minimum pension liability adjustment within other comprehensive income of $173
million (net of tax), compared with $1.056 billion (net of tax) in the fourth
quarter of 2002.
income tax effects for
cumulative translation are not significant because no tax provision has been
made for the translation of foreign currency financial statements into u.s.
dollars. reclassification adjustments are made to avoid double counting in
comprehensive income items that are also recorded as part of net income. a
summary of these reclassification adjustments follows:
reclassification adjustments to
comprehensive income
(millions)
gains on sale of
equity securities, net of tax provision of $1 million for 2004 and $2 million
for 2002
$
$
$
write-down of
equity securities, net of tax benefit of $3 million for 2002
(5
)
cash flow
hedging instruments, gains (losses)  net of tax benefit of $32 million for
2004, $44 million for 2003 and $18 million for 2002
(51
)
(96
)
(30
)
note 7. supplemental cash flow information
(millions)
cash income tax
payments
$
1,109
$
$
cash interest
payments
capitalized
interest
individual amounts on the
consolidated statement of cash flows exclude the effects of acquisitions,
divestitures and exchange rate impacts, which are presented separately.
in 2004, 3m purchased 100
percent of the outstanding common shares of highjump software, inc., for
approximately $66 million, which included $23 million of cash paid (net of cash
acquired) plus 3m common stock that had a fair market value of $43 million.
dividends declared, but not paid at december 31, 2004, of $34 million were
payable to minority interests in consolidated subsidiaries. in 2003, capital
lease obligations of approximately $70 million were incurred, primarily related
to a lease for a building in the united kingdom (refer to note 12 to the
consolidated financial statements for more information on capital leases). in
2002, 3m purchased certain assets and specified liabilities of emtech emulsion
technologies, inc. and emtech manufacturing corporation in exchange for shares
of 3m common stock that had a fair market value of $35million.
note 8. income taxes
income before income taxes and minority interest
(millions)
united states
$
2,192
$
1,848
$
1,725
international
2,363
1,809
1,280
total
$
4,555
$
3,657
$
3,005
provision for income taxes
(millions)
currently
payable
federal
$
$
$
state
(61
)
international
deferred
federal
state
(27
)
international
(26
)
total
$
1,503
$
1,202
$
components of deferred tax assets and liabilities
(millions)
accruals not
currently deductible
employee benefit
costs
$
$
product and
other claims
pension costs
(530
)
product and
other insurance receivables
(323
)
(242
)
accelerated
depreciation
(614
)
(601
)
other
net deferred tax
asset (liability)
$
(958
)
$
reconciliation of effective income tax rate
statutory u.s.
tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
state income
taxes  net of federal benefit
1.1
1.0
1.0
international
income taxes  net
(1.7
)
(1.4
)
(2.5
)
foreign export
sales benefit
(1.0
)
(0.9
)
(0.5
)
u.s. business
credits
(0.4
)
(0.5
)
(0.7
)
all other  net
(0.3
)
(0.2
)
effective
worldwide tax rate
33.0
%
32.9
%
32.1
%
in
the third quarter of 2004, the company made a $300 million tax deductible
contribution to its u.s. qualified pension plan compared with a $600 million
tax deductible contribution in 2003 and a $789 million tax deductible
contribution in 2002. the company also made additional contributions to certain
international pension plans in 2004, 2003 and 2002. the current income tax
provision includes a benefit for the pension contributions; the deferred tax
provision includes a cost for the related temporary difference. also in 2004,
the company reversed a majority of the minimum pension liability, which was
initially recorded in 2002. the change in the year-end deferred tax balance
includes the effect of reversing this minimum pension liability in addition to
the annual provision for deferred income tax expense.
annual
tax provisions include amounts considered sufficient to pay assessments that
may result from examination of prior year tax returns; however, the amount
ultimately paid upon resolution of issues may differ materially from the amount
accrued.
as
a result of certain employment commitments and capital investments made by 3m,
income from manufacturing activities in certain countries is subject to reduced
tax rates or, in some cases, is exempt from tax for years through 2012. the
income tax benefits attributable to the tax status of these subsidiaries are
estimated to be $32 million (4cents per diluted share) in 2004, $34
million (4cents per diluted share) in 2003 and $27 million (3 cents per
diluted share) in 2002.
on october 22, 2004, the
president signed the american jobs creation act of 2004 (the jobs act). the
jobs act provides a deduction for income from qualified domestic production
activities, which will be phased in from 2005 through 2010. in return, the act
also provides for a two-year phase-out of the existing extra-territorial income
exclusion (eti) for foreign sales that was viewed to be inconsistent with
international trade protocols by the european union. uncertainty remains as to
how to interpret numerous provisions in the jobs act. at this time, the company
does not expect the net effect of the phase-out of the eti and the phase-in of
this new deduction to materially impact the effective tax rate for 2005 and
2006.
under the guidance in
fasb staff position no. fas 109-1, application of sfas no. 109, accounting for
income taxes, to the tax deduction on qualified production activities provided
by the american jobs creation act of 2004, the deduction will be treated as a
special deduction as described in sfas no. 109. as such, the special
deduction has no effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities existing at the
enactment date. rather, the impact of this deduction will be reported in the
period in which the deduction is claimed on the companys tax return.
in addition to the
deduction for income from qualified domestic production activities, the jobs
act also creates a temporary incentive for u.s. corporations to repatriate
accumulated income earned abroad by providing an 85 percent dividends received
deduction for certain dividends from controlled foreign corporations. the
deduction is subject to a number of limitations and uncertainty remains as to
how to interpret certain provisions in the jobs act. as such, the company is
not yet in a position to decide whether, and to what extent, it might
repatriate foreign earnings that have not yet been remitted to the u.s. based
on the companys analysis to date, however, it is possible that the company
will repatriate an amount totaling between $800 million and $950 million, with
the respective tax liability ranging from $40 million to $50 million. the
company expects to be in a position to finalize its assessment after issuance
of further regulatory guidance and passage of statutory technical corrections.
as of december 31, 2004,
approximately $5.6 billion of unremitted earnings attributable to international
companies was considered to be indefinitely invested. the companys intention
is to reinvest the indefinitely invested earnings permanently or to repatriate
the earnings when it is tax effective to do so. it is not practicable to
determine the amount of incremental taxes that might arise were these earnings
to be remitted. however, the company believes that u.s. foreign tax credits
would largely eliminate any u.s. taxes and offset any foreign withholding taxes
due on remittance. provisions are made for estimated u.s. and foreign incomes
taxes, less available tax credits and deductions, which may be incurred on the
remittance of the companys share of subsidiaries undistributed earnings not
deemed to be permanently reinvested. the company is in the process of
evaluating its position with respect to the indefinite investment of foreign
earnings to take into account the possible election of the repatriation provisions
contained in the jobs act. therefore, the $5.6 billion of unremitted earnings
noted above includes earnings that may be remitted as part of the jobs act. the
status of the companys evaluation of these provisions is described above.
note 9. long-term
debt and short-term borrowings
long-term debt and
short-term borrowings as of december31 consisted of the following (with
interest rates as of december31, 2004):
long-term debt
(millions)
currency/
fixed vs.
floating
effective
interest
rate*
maturity
date
convertible note
usd fixed
0.50
%
$
$
medium-term
notes
usd floating
2.38
%
dealer
remarketable securities
usd fixed
5.67
%
6.375% note
usd fixed
6.38
%
esop debt
guarantee
usd fixed
5.62
%
2005-2009
floating rate
note
usd floating
2.17
%
floating rate
note
usd floating
2.12
%
other borrowings
various
2.30
%
after 2009
total long-term
debt
$
2,132
$
2,471
less: current
portion of long-term debt
1,405
long-term debt
$
$
1,735
short-term borrowings and
current portion of long-term debt
(millions)
effective
interest rate*
current portion
of long-term debt
2.53
%
$
1,405
$
u.s. dollar
commercial paper
2.23
%
non-u.s. dollar
commercial paper
other borrowings
5.95
%
total short-term
borrowings and current portion of long-term debt
$
2,094
$
1,202
weighted-average effective interest rate*
total
excluding esop debt
at december 31
short-term
2.46
%
2.74
%
2.40
%
2.65
%
long-term
3.82
%
2.20
%
3.30
%
1.74
%
* debt tables reflect the
effects of interest rate swaps at december 31; weighted-average effective
interest rate table reflects the combined effects of interest rate and currency
swaps at december 31.
maturities
of long-term debt for the five years subsequent to december31, 2004 are
as follows (in millions):
thereafter
total
$
1,405
$
$
$
$
$
$
2,132
long-term debt payments
due in 2005 include $350 million of dealer remarketable securities (final
maturity 2010), $62 million of medium-term notes (final maturity 2044), and
$556 million of convertible notes (final maturity 2032). these securities are
classified as current portion of long-term debt as the result of put provisions
associated with these debt instruments. in addition, payments due in 2005
include $400 million in medium-term notes and $37million related to the
esop.
the esop debt is serviced
by dividends on stock held by the esop and by company contributions. these
contributions are not reported as interest expense, but are reported as an
employee benefit expense in the consolidated statement of income. other
borrowings includes debt held by 3ms international companies and floating rate
notes in the united states, with the long-term portion of this debt primarily
comprised of u.s. dollar floating rate debt. at december 31, 2004, available
short-term lines of credit globally totaled about $618 million, of which $88
million was utilized. the company also has uncommitted lines of credit outside
the united states totaling $637 million. debt covenants do not restrict the
payment of dividends.
in september 2003, the
company filed a shelf registration statement with the securities and exchange
commission relating to the potential offering of debt securities of up to $1.5
billion. this shelf registration became effective in october 2003. in december
2003, the company established under the shelf a medium-term notes program
through which up to $1.5 billion of medium-term notes may be offered. 3m plans
to use the net proceeds from issuances of debt securities under this
registration for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of debt;
investments in or extensions of credit to 3m subsidiaries; or the financing of
possible acquisitions or business expansion. at december 31, 2004, $62 million
of medium-term notes had been issued under the medium-term notes program. the
medium-term notes program and shelf registration have remaining capacity of
approximately $1.438 billion.
on
november 15, 2002, 3m sold $639 million in aggregate face amount of 30-year
zero coupon senior notes (the convertible notes) that are convertible into
shares of 3m common stock. the gross proceeds from the offering, to be used for
general corporate purposes, were $550 million ($540 million net of issuance
costs). the book value of the convertible notes at december 31, 2004, was $556
million. on february 14, 2003, 3m registered these convertible notes in a
registration statement filed with the securities and exchange commission. the
terms of the convertible notes include a yield to maturity of .50% and an
initial conversion premium of 40% over the $65.00 (split-adjusted) closing
price of 3m common stock on november 14, 2002. if certain conditions for
conversion (relating to the closing common stock prices of 3m exceeding the
conversion trigger price for specified periods) are met, holders may convert
each of the 30-year zero-coupon senior notes into 9.4602 shares of 3m common
stock in any calendar quarter commencing after march 31, 2003. the conversion
trigger price for the fourth quarter of 2004 was $119.40 per share. if the
conditions for conversion are met, and 3m elects not to settle in cash, the
30-year zero-coupon senior notes will be convertible in the aggregate into
approximately 6.0 million shares of 3m common stock. 3m may redeem the 30-year
zero-coupon senior notes at any time in whole or in part, beginning november
21, 2007, at the greater of the accreted conversion price or the current market
price. holders of the 30-year zero-coupon senior notes have the option to
require 3m to purchase their notes at accreted value on november 21 in the
years 2005, 2007, 2012, 2017, 2022 and 2027. 3m may choose to pay the
redemption purchase price in cash and/or common stock; however, if redemption
occurs, the company has the intent and ability to settle this debt security in
cash. debt issuance costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over a
three-year period beginning in november 2002. the conditions for conversion
have never been met; accordingly, there was no impact on 3ms diluted earnings
per share. for a discussion of accounting pronouncements that will affect accounting
treatment for the convertible note, refer to note 1 to the consolidated
financial statements for discussion of eitf issue no. 04-08, the effect of
contingently convertible debt on diluted earnings per share and proposed sfas
no. 128r, earnings per share.
in december 2000, the
company issued $350 million of dealer remarketable debt securities, which are
classified as current portion of long-term debt. the remarketable securities
can be remarketed annually, at the option of the dealer, for a year each time,
with a final maturity date of december 2010. in december 2004, the companys
dealer remarketable securities were remarketed for one year. they were reissued
with a fixed coupon rate of 5.67%.
note 10. derivatives and other financial instruments
the
company uses interest rate swaps, currency swaps, and forward and option
contracts to manage risks generally associated with foreign exchange rate,
interest rate and commodity market volatility. the information that follows
explains the various types of derivatives and financial instruments, and
includes a table that recaps net investment hedging and cash flow hedging
amounts.
foreign currency forward and
option contracts: the company enters into foreign exchange
forward contracts, options and swaps to hedge against the effect of exchange
rate fluctuations on cash flows denominated in foreign currencies and certain
intercompany financing transactions. these transactions are designated as cash
flow hedges. at december 31, 2004, the company had various open foreign
exchange forward and option contracts, the majority of which had maturities of
one year or less. the amounts at risk are not material because the company has
the ability to generate offsetting foreign currency cash flows. the settlement
or extension of these derivatives will result in reclassifications to earnings
in the period during which the hedged transactions affect earnings (from other
comprehensive income). the maximum length of time over which 3m is hedging its
exposure to the variability in future cash flows for a majority of the
forecasted transactions, excluding those forecasted transactions related to the
payment of variable interest on existing financial instruments, is 12 months.
during the second quarter of 2002, the company converted a foreign-currency
based pricing contract into a dollar-based pricing contract. this resulted in
the discontinuance of certain foreign currency cash flow hedges. the company
recognized a $10 million pre-tax loss (recorded in cost of sales) related to
the discontinuance of these contracts in 2002. hedge ineffectiveness was not
material for the years 2004, 2003 and 2002.
interest rate and currency swaps:
the company manages interest expense using a mix of fixed and floating rate
debt. to help manage borrowing costs, the company may enter into interest rate
swaps. under these arrangements, the company agrees to exchange, at specified
intervals, the difference between fixed and floating interest amounts calculated
by reference to an agreed-upon notional principal amount. the company uses
interest rate and currency swaps to manage interest rate risk related to
borrowings.
at december 31, 2004, the
company had interest rate swaps with a fair value of $3 million ($21 million at
december 31, 2003) designated as fair value hedges of underlying fixed rate
obligations. the mark-to-market of these fair value hedges is recorded as gains
or losses in interest expense and is offset by the gain or loss on the underlying
debt instrument that is also recorded in interest expense. all existing fair
value hedges are 100% effective and, thus, there is no impact on earnings due
to hedge ineffectiveness.
as circumstances warrant,
the company also uses cross-currency interest rate swaps to hedge foreign
currency and interest rates. as part of this strategy, in september 2003, the company entered into a three-year combined interest
rate and currency swap with a notional amount of $300 million. this transaction
is a partial hedge of 3ms net investment in 3ms japanese subsidiaries. this
swap converts a variable rate u.s. dollar exposure to a variable rate
yen-denominated exposure.
net investment hedging:
as circumstances warrant, the company uses foreign currency debt and forwards
to hedge portions of the companys net investments in foreign operations. for
hedges that meet the effectiveness requirements, the net gains or losses are
recorded in cumulative translation within other comprehensive income, with any
ineffectiveness recorded in cost of sales. hedge ineffectiveness was not
material in 2004, 2003 and 2002.
commodity price management: the
company manages commodity price risks through negotiated supply contracts,
price protection swaps and forward physical contracts. the company uses
commodity price swaps as cash flow hedges of forecasted transactions to manage
price volatility. the related mark-to-market gain or loss on qualifying hedges
is included in other comprehensive income to the extent effective (typically
100% effective), and reclassified into cost of sales in the period during which
the hedged transaction affects earnings. 3m has hedged its exposure to the
variability of future cash flows for certain forecasted transactions through
2005. no significant commodity cash flow hedges were discontinued during the
years 2004, 2003 and 2002.
net investment hedging and cash
flow hedging: amounts recorded in cumulative translation related to net investment
hedging, and cash flow hedging instrument disclosures follow. reclassification
adjustments are made to avoid double counting in comprehensive income items
that are also included as part of net income. the amount of the
reclassification adjustment recognized in other comprehensive income is equal
to, but opposite in sign from, the amount of the realized gain or loss in net
income.
derivatives
net of tax
twelve months ended
december 31
(millions)
unrealized
gain/(loss) recorded in cumulative translation
net investment
hedging
$
$
$
(17
)
cash
flow hedging instruments balance and activity
beginning
balance
$
(45
)
$
(39
)
$
net unrealized
holding gain/(loss)
(48
)
(102
)
(78
)
reclassification
adjustment
total activity
(6
)
(48
)
ending balance
$
(42
)*
$
(45
)
$
(39
)
tax expense or
benefit (cash flow hedging instruments)
net unrealized
holding gain/(loss)
$
$
$
reclassification
adjustment
(32
)
(44
)
(18
)
*
based on exchange rates at december 31, 2004, the company expects to reclassify
to earnings over the next 12 months a majority of the cash flow hedging
instruments after-tax loss of $42 million (with the impact largely offset by
foreign currency cash flows from underlying hedged items).
currency
effects: 3m estimates that year-on-year currency effects,
including hedging impacts, increased net income by $181 million in 2004 and $73
million in 2003, and reduced net income by $35 million in 2002. this estimate
includes the effect of translating profits from local currencies into u.s.
dollars; the impact of currency fluctuations on the transfer of goods between
3m operations in the united states and abroad; and transaction gains and
losses, including derivative instruments designed to reduce foreign currency
exchange rate risks. 3m estimates that year-on-year derivative and other
transaction gains and losses increased net income by $48 million in 2004,
benefiting from lower year-on-year hedging losses. 3m estimates that
year-on-year derivative and other transaction gains and losses decreased net
income by $73 million in 2003 and $25 million in 2002.
credit risk:
the company is exposed to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by
counterparties in interest rate swaps, currency swaps, and option and foreign
exchange contracts. however, the companys risk is limited to the fair value of
the instruments. the company actively monitors its exposure to credit risk
through the use of credit approvals and credit limits, and by selecting major
international banks and financial institutions as counterparties. the company
does not anticipate nonperformance by any of these counterparties.
fair value of financial
instruments: at
december 31, 2004 and 2003, the companys financial instruments included cash
and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, investments, accounts payable,
borrowing, and derivative contracts. the fair values of cash and cash
equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and short-term borrowings
and current portion of long-term debt (except the $350 million dealer
remarketable security and convertible note) approximated carrying values
because of the short-term nature of these instruments. available-for-sale
investments and derivative contracts are reported at fair values. fair values
for investments held at cost are not readily available, but are estimated to
approximate fair value. the carrying amounts and estimated fair values of other
financial instruments based on third-party quotes as of december 31 follow:
financial instruments carrying
amounts and estimated fair values
carrying
fair
carrying
fair
(millions)
amount
value
amount
value
dealer remarketable
securities
$
$
$
$
convertible note
long-term debt
(excluding convertible note in 2003)
1,182
1,219
note 11. pension and postretirement benefit plans
3m
has various company-sponsored retirement plans covering substantially all u.s.
employees and many employees outside the united states. pension benefits
associated with these plans are generally based on each participants years of
service, compensation, and age at retirement or termination. in addition to
providing pension benefits, the company provides certain postretirement health
care and life insurance benefits for substantially all of its u.s. employees
who reach retirement age while employed by the company. most international employees
and retirees are covered by government health care programs. the cost of
company-provided postretirement health care plans for international employees
is not material and is combined with u.s. amounts.
on december 8, 2003, the
medicare prescription drug improvement and modernization act of 2003 (the
medicare act) was signed into law.the act expands medicare to include
coverage for prescription drugs.3m sponsors medical programs, including
prescription drug coverage for u.s. retirees.on may 19, 2004, the fasb
issued fsp no. 106-2, accounting and disclosure requirements related to the
medicare prescription drug, improvement and modernization act of 2003, which
requires current recognition of the federal subsidy that employers may receive
for providing drug coverage to retirees.fsp no. 106-2 was effective for
the company july 1, 2004.the company remeasured its plans assets and
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (apbo) as of june 30, 2004 to
include the effects of the medicare act.the medicare act reduced the apbo
by $240 million, which was partially offset by an increase to the apbo of $170
million as a result of the plan remeasurement.the net impact to the apbo
was a reduction of $70 million.the remeasurement, including the impact of
the medicare act, reduced expense by $8 million for the second half of 2004.
the
companys pension funding policy is to deposit with independent trustees
amounts allowable by law. trust funds and deposits with insurance companies are
maintained to provide pension benefits to plan participants and their
beneficiaries. there are no plan assets in the non-qualified plan due to its
nature. for its u.s. postretirement plan, the company has set aside amounts at
least equal to annual benefit payments with an independent trustee.
as previously disclosed
in the companys june 30, 2004 and september 30, 2004 form 10-qs, in 2004, the
companys u.s. plan measurement date was changed from september 30 to december
31. information
presented in the tables
for u.s. plans for 2004 reflects a measurement date of december 31, 2004 and
september 30 for 2003 and 2002. the primary reasons for this change include
consistency between the u.s. and international dates, the increased clarity
that results from having the same measurement and balance sheet dates, and
administrative simplification. this change did not have a material impact on
the determination of periodic pension cost or pension obligations.
following
is a summary of the funded status of the plans as of the plan measurement
dates:
qualified and non-qualified pension benefits
united states
international
(millions)
projected
benefit obligation
$
8,949
$
8,270
$
3,896
$
3,350
accumulated
benefit obligation
8,331
7,708
3,375
2,891
plan assets
8,422
7,094
3,305
2,731
funded status
(527
)
(1,176
)
(591
)
(619
)
certain
international pension plans were underfunded as of december 31, 2004 and 2003.
the accumulated benefit obligations of these plans were $1.378 billion in 2004
and $764 million in 2003. the assets of these plans were $1.073 billion in 2004
and $402 million in 2003. the net underfunded amounts are included in current
and other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
following
is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of the benefit
obligation and the fair value of plan assets as of the plan measurement dates:
qualified and non-qualified
pension benefits
postretirement
benefits
united states
international
(millions)
reconciliation
of projected benefit obligation
beginning
balance
$
8,270
$
7,221
$
3,350
$
2,872
$
1,712
$
1,453
service cost
interest cost
participant
contributions
foreign exchange
rate changes
plan amendments
(16
)
(91
)
(102
)
actuarial (gain)
loss
benefit payments
(613
)*
(491
)
(118
)
(96
)
(185
)
(140
)
settlements,
curtailments, special termination benefits and other
(57
)
ending balance
$
8,949
$
8,270
$
3,896
$
3,350
$
1,792
$
1,712
reconciliation
of plan assets at fair value
beginning
balance
$
7,094
$
5,913
$
2,731
$
2,070
$
$
actual return on
plan assets
1,616
1,050
company
contributions
*
participant
contributions
foreign exchange
rate changes
benefit payments
(613
)*
(491
)
(118
)
(96
)
(185
)
(140
)
settlements,
curtailments, special termination benefits and other
(57
)
ending balance
$
8,422
$
7,094
$
3,305
$
2,731
$
1,133
$
* for the twelve months ended december 31, 2004, u.s. qualified and
non-qualified pension benefit payments totaled $494 million and u.s. company
contributions totaled $320 million.
qualified and non-qualified
pension benefits
postretirement
benefits
united states
international
(millions)
funded
status of plans
plan assets at
fair value less than benefit obligation
$
(527
)
$
(1,176
)
$
(591
)
$
(619
)
$
(659
)
$
(835
)
unrecognized
transition (asset) obligation
unrecognized
prior service cost (benefit)
(83
)
(69
)
(193
)
(233
)
unrecognized net
actuarial (gain) loss
2,121
2,648
1,023
1,051
adjustment for
fourth quarter
(1
)
net amount
recognized
$
1,683
$
1,571
$
$
$
$
amounts
recognized in the consolidated balance sheet as of december 31
prepaid benefit
cost
$
1,851
$
$
$
$
$
accrued
liabilities
(309
)
(615
)
(388
)
(436
)
(76
)
(40
)
intangible
assets
accumulated
other comprehensive income  pre-tax
2,086
net amount
recognized
$
1,683
$
1,571
$
$
$
$
components of net
periodic benefit cost and other supplemental information for the year ended
december 31 follow:
benefit
plan information
qualified and non-qualified
pension benefits
postretirement
benefits
united states
international
(millions)
service cost
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return
on plan assets
(627
)
(621
)
(606
)
(202
)
(179
)
(154
)
(87
)
(78
)
(71
)
amortization of
transition (asset) obligation
amortization of
prior service cost (benefit)
(2
)
(39
)
(32
)
(11
)
recognized net
actuarial (gain) loss
net periodic
benefit cost
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
settlements, curtailments
and special termination benefits
net periodic
benefit cost after settlements, curtailments and special termination benefits
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
qualified and non-qualified
pension benefits
postretirement
benefits
weighted average assumptions
used
united states
international
to determine benefit
obligations
discount rate
5.75
%
6.00
%
6.75
%
4.88
%
4.95
%
4.78
%
5.75
%
6.00
%
6.75
%
compensation
rate increase
4.30
%
4.30
%
4.60
%
3.55
%
3.46
%
3.58
%
4.30
%
4.30
%
4.60
%
weighted average assumptions
used
to determine net cost for years ended
discount rate
6.00
%
6.75
%
7.25
%
4.95
%
4.78
%
5.23
%
6.00
%
6.75
%
7.25
%
expected return
on assets
9.00
%
9.00
%
9.00
%
7.09
%
7.27
%
7.25
%
9.39
%
9.42
%
9.48
%
compensation
rate increase
4.30
%
4.60
%
4.60
%
3.46
%
3.58
%
4.02
%
4.30
%
4.60
%
4.60
%
assumed health care trend rates
health care cost
trend rate assumed for next year
10.00
%
10.00
%
rate that the
cost trend rate is assumed to decline to (ultimate trend rate)
5.00
%
5.00
%
year that the
rate reaches the ultimate trend
assumed
health care trend rates have a significant effect on the amounts reported for
the health care plans. a one percentage point change in assumed health cost
trend rates would have the following effects:
health care cost
(millions)
one percentage
point increase
one percentage
point decrease
effect on total
of service and interest cost
$
$
(18
)
effect on
postretirement benefit obligation
(169
)
3ms
investment strategy for its pension and postretirement plans is to manage the
plans on a going-concern basis. the primary goal of the funds is to meet the
obligations as required. the secondary goal is to earn the highest rate of
return possible, without jeopardizing its primary goal, and without subjecting
the company to an undue amount of contribution rate volatility. fund returns
are used to help finance present and future obligations to the extent possible
within actuarially determined funding limits and tax-determined asset limits,
thus reducing the level of contributions 3m must make.
3m
does not buy or sell any of its own stock as a direct investment for its
pension and other postretirement benefit funds. however, due to external
investment management of the funds, the plans may indirectly buy, sell or hold
3m stock. the aggregate amount of the shares would not be considered to be
material relative to the aggregate fund percentages.
for the u.s. pension
plan, the companys assumption for the expected return on plan assets was 9.0%
in 2004. in developing the expected long-term rate of return assumption, the
company is provided projected returns by asset class from its pension
investment advisors. projected returns are based primarily on broad, publicly
traded equity and fixed-income indices and forward-looking estimates of active
investment management. the companys expected long-term rate of return on u.s.
plan assets is based on an asset allocation assumption of 44% u.s. and 15%
international equities, with an expected long-term rate of return of 7.5% for
both u.s. and international equities; 13% private equities with an expected
long-term rate of return of 12.5%; 28% fixed-income securities with an expected
long-term rate of return of 5.0%; and an additional rate of return of 1.5% from
active investment management. these assumptions result in a 9.0% weighted
average rate of return on an annualized basis. the plan assets earned a rate of
return in excess of 13% and 18% in 2004 and 2003, respectively, and
substantially less than 9% in 2002. the average annual actual return on the
plan assets over the past 10 and 25 years has been 11.7% and 12.5%,
respectively. the company is lowering the 2005 expected return on plan assets
by 0.25 percentage points to 8.75%.
the
u.s. plans asset allocation by asset category as of plan measurement dates
follows:
target
allocation
percentage
of plan assets
asset category
u.s. qualified
pension plan
domestic equity
%
%
%
international
equity
fixed income
private equity
cash
total
%
%
%
postretirement
benefits measurement
domestic equity
%
%
%
international
equity
fixed income
private equity
cash
total
%
%
%
while
the target asset allocations do not have a percentage allocated to cash, the
plans will always have some cash due to cash flows. as of september 30, 2003,
the plans had more cash than typically would be held due to third quarter cash
contributions to the plans. the preceding postretirement allocation represents
a weighted-average allocation for u.s. plans.
the
international plans weighted-average asset allocation as of december 31, 2004
follows:
asset category
percentage
of plan assets
international
pension plans
domestic equity
%
foreign equity
domestic fixed
income
foreign fixed
income
insurance
real estate
cash
total
%
the
preceding asset allocations for international plans represent the top six
countries by projected benefit obligation. these countries represent
approximately 90% of the total international projected benefit obligation. the
other countries asset allocations would not have a significant impact on the
information presented.
3m made a third quarter 2004 special pension
contribution of $300 million to its u.s. qualified pension plan. also, in the
third quarter of 2004, 3m made a plan design change to its sumitomo 3m japanese
pension plan that changed the defined benefit plan to a hybrid defined contribution
and cash balance plan. prior to implementation of the plan design change,
japanese pension valuation methods required 3m to bring the plan to fully
funded status. this required 3m to make a third quarter 2004 special pension
contribution of $155 million. the plan design change reduced the liability by
approximately $100 million. in addition, during the second half of 2005, 3m
intends to transfer a portion of its sumitomo 3m japanese pension liabilities
and assets to the government, as allowed by a japanese government program. this
program would allow 3m to transfer approximately $150 million in pension
liabilities and $80 million in pension assets to the japanese government.
in
2005, the company expects to contribute an amount in the range of $100 million
to $400 million to its u.s. and international pension plans, and approximately
$150 million to its post-retirement plans. the company does not have a required
minimum pension contribution obligation for its u.s. plans in 2005. therefore,
the amount of the anticipated discretionary contribution could vary
significantly depending on the u.s. plans funding status as of the 2005
measurement date and the anticipated tax deductibility of the contribution.
the
following estimated benefit payments are payable from the plans to 2004 plan
participants:
qualified and non-qualified
pension benefits
postretirement
benefits
medicare subsidy
receipts
(millions)
united states
international
2005 benefit
payments
$
$
$
$
2006 benefit
payments
2007 benefit
payments
2008 benefit
payments
2009 benefit
payments
following five
years
3,007
note 12. commitments and contingencies
capital
and operating leases:
rental expense under
operating leases was $181 million in 2004, $162 million in 2003 and $137
million in 2002. it is 3ms practice to secure renewal rights for leases,
thereby giving 3m the right, but not the obligation, to maintain a presence in
a leased facility. 3ms primary capital lease, effective in april 2003,
involves a building in the united kingdom (with a lease term of 22 years). during
the second quarter of 2003, 3m recorded a capital lease asset and obligation of
approximately 33.5 million united kingdom pounds (approximately $64 million at
december 31, 2004 exchange rates). minimum lease payments under capital and
operating leases with non-cancelable terms in excess of one year as of december
31, 2004, were as follows:
(millions)
capital
leases
operating
leases
$
$
after 2009
total
$
less: amounts
representing interest
present value of
future minimum lease payments
less: current
obligations under capital leases
long-term
obligations under capital leases
$
warranties/guarantees:
3ms accrued product warranty liabilities, recorded on
the consolidated balance sheet as part of current and long-term liabilities,
are estimated at approximately $22 million. 3m does not consider this amount to
be material. the fair value of 3m guarantees of loans with third parties and
other guarantee arrangements are not material.
related party activity:
purchases from related
parties (largely related to companies in which 3m has an equity interest)
totaled approximately $124 million in 2004 ($113 million in 2003 and $87
million in 2002). receivables due from related parties (largely related to
receivables from employees for relocation and other ordinary business expense
advances) totaled approximately $34 million in 2004 ($44 million in 2003 and
$25 million in 2002). 3m sales to related parties totaled approximately $91
million in 2004 ($96 million in 2003; not material in 2002). indebtedness to 3m
from related parties was not material in 2004, 2003 and 2002.
legal proceedings:
discussion of legal
matters is incorporated by reference from part i, item 3, legal proceedings, of
this document, and should be considered an integral part of the consolidated
financial statements and notes.
note 13. employee savings and stock ownership plans
the company sponsors employee
savings plans under section 401(k) of the internal revenue code. these plans
are offered to substantially all regular u.s. employees. employee contributions
of up to 6% of compensation are matched at rates ranging from 35% to 50%, with
additional company contributions depending upon company performance. all
company contributions initially are invested in 3m common stock, with employee
contributions invested in a number of investment funds pursuant to their
elections. vested employees may sell up to 50% of their 3m shares and diversify
into other investment options.
the company maintains an
employee stock ownership plan (esop). this plan was established in 1989 as a
cost-effective way of funding the majority of the companys contributions under
401(k) employee savings plans. total esop shares are considered to be shares
outstanding for earnings per share calculations.
dividends on shares held
by the esop are paid to the esop trust and, together with company
contributions, are used by the esop to repay principal and interest on the
outstanding notes. the tax benefit related to dividends paid on unallocated
shares was charged directly to equity and totaled approximately $4 million in
2004, $5 million in 2003 and $6 million in 2002. over the life of the notes,
shares are released for allocation to participants based on the ratio of the
current years debt service to the remaining debt service prior to the current
payment.
the
esop has been the primary funding source for the companys employee savings
plans. as permitted by aicpa statement of position 93-6, employers accounting
for employee stock ownership plans, the company has elected to continue its
practices, which are based on statement of position 76-3, accounting practices
for certain employee stock ownership plans and subsequent consensus of the
eitf of the fasb. accordingly, the debt of the esop is recorded as debt, and
shares pledged as collateral are reported as unearned compensation in the consolidated
balance sheet and consolidated statement of changes in stockholders equity and
comprehensive income. unearned compensation is reduced symmetrically as the
esop makes principal payments on the debt. expenses related to the esop include
total debt service on the notes, less dividends. the company contributes
treasury shares, accounted for at fair value, to employee savings plans to
cover obligations not funded by the esop (reported as an employee benefit
expense).
employee savings and stock ownership
plans
(millions)
dividends on
shares held by the esop
$
$
$
company
contributions to the esop
interest
incurred on esop notes
amounts reported
as an employee benefit expense:
expenses related
to esop debt service
expenses related
to treasury shares
esop debt shares
allocated
16,200,282
15,494,346
14,815,180
committed to be
released
705,068
546,798
758,374
unreleased
6,219,328
7,799,513
9,010,504
total esop debt
shares
23,124,678
23,840,657
24,584,058
note 14. general employees stock purchase plan (gespp)
in
may 1997, shareholders approved 30 million shares for issuance under the
companys gespp. substantially all employees are eligible to participate in the
plan. participants are granted options at 85% of market value at the date of
grant. there are no gespp shares under option at the beginning or end of each
year because options are granted on the first business day and exercised on the
last business day of the same month.
general employees stock purchase plan
shares
exercise
price*
shares
exercise
price*
shares
exercise
price*
options granted
1,701,874
$
69.65
1,812,055
$
57.18
1,865,911
$
51.49
options
exercised
(1,701,874
)
69.65
(1,812,055
)
57.18
(1,865,911
)
51.49
shares available
for grant  december 31
13,751,060
15,452,934
17,264,989
*weighted average
the weighted
average fair value per option granted during 2004, 2003 and 2002 was $12.29,
$10.09 and $9.09, respectively. the fair value of gespp options was based on
the 15% purchase price discount.
note 15. management stock ownership program (msop)
in may 2002, shareholders
approved 45.4 million shares for issuance under the msop in the form of
management stock options, restricted stock and stock appreciation rights. under
the plan, the company has principally issued management stock options that are
granted at market value at the date of grant. these options generally are
exercisable one year after the date of grant and expire 10 years from the date
of grant. thus, outstanding shares under option include grants from previous
plans. there were approximately 14,600 participants in the plan at december 31,
2004.
management stock ownership
program
shares
exercise
price*
shares
exercise
price*
shares
exercise
price*
under option
january 1
73,629,275
$
52.42
71,187,226
$
48.78
69,100,376
$
44.06
granted
annual
12,499,425
84.39
12,571,075
61.91
12,472,134
64.43
progressive
(reload)
892,425
83.10
1,048,236
66.86
826,092
61.25
exercised
(8,686,381
)
44.81
(10,942,261
)
41.26
(11,011,778
)
37.57
canceled
(40,990
)
79.85
(235,001
)
39.29
(199,598
)
64.50
december 31
78,293,754
$
58.70
73,629,275
$
52.42
71,187,226
$
48.78
options exercisable december 31
65,471,418
$
53.91
60,663,659
$
50.36
58,045,582
$
46.13
shares available
for grant december 31
7,869,168
20,410,498
32,758,572
*weighted average
msop options outstanding and
exercisable at december 31, 2004
options outstanding
options exercisable
range of
exercise
prices
shares
remaining
contractual
life (months)*
exercise
price*
shares
exercise
price*
$28.64-43.35
11,223,646
$
37.70
11,203,330
$
37.70
43.43-58.62
29,296,613
51.29
28,909,689
51.29
58.63-64.50
23,877,013
63.10
23,841,701
63.10
64.65-89.15
13,896,482
83.75
1,516,698
79.00
*weighted average
for annual and
progressive (reload) options, the weighted average fair value at date of grant
was calculated utilizing the black-scholes option-pricing model and the
assumptions that follow. the tax benefit charged directly to equity for
employee stock options was $114 million in 2004, $95 million in 2003 and $77
million in 2002. refer to note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for
the impact of stock-based compensation on pro forma net income and earnings per
share.
msop assumptions
annual
progressive (reload)
exercise price
$
84.39
$
61.91
$
64.50
$
83.10
$
66.86
$
61.25
risk-free
interest rate
4.1
%
2.6
%
4.6
%
2.7
%
1.8
%
2.6
%
dividend yield
(2004, 2003)/growth rate (2002)
2.2
%
2.1
%
3.2
%
2.2
%
2.2
%
3.2
%
volatility
23.8
%
23.8
%
25.0
%
21.6
%
23.7
%
24.1
%
expected life
(months)
black-scholes
fair value
$
20.30
$
12.75
$
16.76
$
12.42
$
9.44
$
8.91
note 16. business segments
3ms businesses are
organized, managed and internally reported as seven segments based on
differences in products, technologies and services. these segments have
worldwide responsibility for virtually all of the companys product lines. 3m is
not dependent on any single product or market. transactions among reportable segments
are recorded at cost. 3m is an integrated enterprise characterized by
substantial intersegment cooperation, cost allocations and inventory transfers.
therefore, management does not represent that these segments, if operated
independently, would report the operating income and other financial
information shown. the allocations resulting from the shared utilization of
assets are not necessarily indicative of the underlying activity for segment
assets, depreciation and amortization, and capital expenditures.
business
segment products
business segment
major products
health care
medical and surgical
supplies, skin health and infection prevention products, pharmaceuticals,
drug delivery systems, dental and orthodontic products, health information
systems, microbiology products, and closures for disposable diapers
industrial
tapes, coated and
nonwoven abrasives, adhesives, specialty materials, and supply chain
execution software solutions
display and graphics
optical films and lens
solutions for electronic displays, touch screens and touch monitors,
reflective sheeting for transportation safety, and commercial graphics
systems
consumer and office
sponges, scouring pads,
high performance cloths, consumer and office tapes, repositionable notes,
carpet and fabric protectors, construction and home improvement/home care
products, visual systems and consumer health care products
safety,
security and protection services
personal protection
products, safety and security products, energy control products, commercial
cleaning and protection products, floor matting, and roofing granules for
asphalt shingles
electro and
communications
packaging and
interconnection devices, insulating and splicing solutions for the
electronics, telecommunications and electrical industries
transportation
automotive components,
coated and nonwoven abrasives, tapes, abrasion-resistant films, structural
adhesives, specialty materials for the transportation industry, and paint
finishing and detailing products
business segment information
(millions)
net
sales
operating
income
assets
depr.
and
amort.
capital
expenditures
health care
$
4,230
$
1,123
$
2,636
$
$
3,995
1,027
2,544
3,560
2,409
industrial
3,792
2,771
3,354
2,655
3,147
2,685
display and
graphics
3,406
1,131
2,647
2,962
2,570
2,228
2,476
consumer and
office
2,861
1,468
2,607
1,378
2,444
1,354
safety, security
and
2,125
1,317
protection
services
1,928
1,139
1,686
1,097
electro and communications
1,876
1,481
1,818
1,568
1,831
1,633
transportation
1,683
1,538
1,388
corporate and
(89
)
7,501
unallocated
(198
)
4,874
(247
)
2,829
total company
$
20,011
$
4,578
$
20,708
$
$
18,232
3,713
17,600
16,332
3,046
15,329
segment assets for the
seven operating business segments (excluding corporate and unallocated)
primarily include accounts receivable; inventory; property, plant and equipment
net; goodwill and intangible assets;
and other miscellaneous assets. assets included in corporate and unallocated
principally are cash and cash equivalents; insurance receivables; deferred
income taxes; certain investments and other assets, including prepaid pension
assets; and certain unallocated property, plant and equipment. corporate and
unallocated assets increased approximately $2.6 billion in 2004, primarily due
to increases in prepaid pension assets ($2.0 billion) and increases in cash and
cash equivalents ($0.9 billion), with partial offsets in other asset accounts.
corporate and unallocated assets increased approximately $2.0 billion in 2003
due to increases in cash and cash equivalents ($1.2 billion), increases in
other current assets and other assets primarily related to higher insurance
receivables and prepaid items ($500 million), and goodwill increases related to
the 2003 acquisition of an additional 25% of sumitomo 3m ($300million).
for management reporting purposes, corporate goodwill (which at december 31,
2004, totaled approximately $360 million), is not allocated to the seven
operating business segments. in note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements, corporate goodwill has been allocated to the respective market
segments as required by sfas no. 142 for impairment testing.
corporate and unallocated
operating income principally includes corporate investment gains and losses,
certain derivative gains and losses, insurance-related gains and losses,
certain litigation expenses, corporate restructuring program charges and other
miscellaneous items. because this category includes a variety of miscellaneous
items, it is subject to fluctuation on a quarterly and annual basis. in 2004,
corporate and unallocated operating income includes increases of $40 million in
the respirator mask/asbestos litigation reserves, partially offset by a $20
million increase in the associated receivables resulting in a net cost of $20
million, and also includes a $6 million increase in implant litigation reserves
and a $10million decrease in implant receivables resulting in a net cost
of $16 million. in 2003, this includes a pre-tax charge of $93million
recorded during the first quarter related to an adverse ruling associated with
a lawsuit filed against 3m in 1997 by lepages inc. corporate and unallocated
operating income in 2003 also includes increases of $231 million in the
respirator mask/asbestos litigation reserves, partially offset by a $205
million increase in the associated receivables, resulting in a net cost of
$26million. in 2002, corporate and unallocated operating income includes
charges of $202 million related to the 2001/2002 corporate restructuring
program. depreciation and amortization of $954 million included accelerated
depreciation (shortened lives) of $47 million related to the restructuring plan
(recorded in corporate and unallocated).
note 17. geographic areas
geographic area
information, which the company uses as a secondary performance measure to
manage its businesses, follows. export sales and certain income and expense
items are reported within the geographic area where the final sales to 3m
customers are made.
geographic area information
(millions)
united
states
europe
and
middle
east
asia
pacific
latin
america,
africa
and
canada
other
unallocated
total
company
net sales to
customers
$
7,878
$
5,070
$
5,168
$
1,844
$
$
20,011
7,581
4,624
4,335
1,651
18,232
7,426
4,035
3,431
1,392
16,332
operating income
$
1,200
$
$
1,874
$
$
$
4,578
1,213
1,373
(109
)
3,713
1,180
1,009
(218
)
3,046
property, plant
and
$
3,290
$
1,284
$
$
$
$
5,711
equipment  net
3,342
1,231
5,609
3,523
1,136
5,621
in 2003, operating income
for other unallocated includes pre-tax charges of $93 million related to an
adverse ruling in a lawsuit filed against 3m in 1997 by lepages inc. in 2002,
operating income for other unallocated includes losses totaling $202 million
related to the 2001/2002 corporate restructuring program.
note 18. quarterly data (unaudited)
(millions, except per-share amounts)
first
quarter
second
quarter
third
quarter
fourth
quarter
year
net sales
$
4,939
$
5,012
$
4,969
$
5,091
$
20,011
4,318
4,580
4,616
4,718
18,232
cost of sales
$
2,436
$
2,452
$
2,457
$
2,613
$
9,958
2,211
2,323
2,322
2,429
9,285
net income
$
$
$
$
$
2,990
2,403
earnings per
share  basic
$
.92
$
.99
$
.99
$
.93
$
3.83
.64
.79
.85
.79
3.07
earnings per
share  diluted
$
.90
$
.97
$
.97
$
.91
$
3.75
.63
.78
.83
.77
3.02
gross margin is
calculated as net sales less cost of sales. an adverse ruling in a lawsuit
filed against 3m in 1997 by lepages inc. decreased net income for the first
quarter of 2003 by $58 million, or 8cents per diluted share (7cents
per diluted share for total year 2003).
item 9. changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure.
none.
item 9a. controls
and procedures.
a. the company
carried out an evaluation, under the supervision and with the participation of
its management, including the chief executive officer and chief financial
officer, of the effectiveness of the design and operation of the companys
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in the exchange act rule 13a-15(e)) as of the end
of the period covered by this report. based upon that evaluation, the chief
executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that the companys
disclosure controls and procedures are effective.
b. the
companys management is responsible for establishing and maintaining an adequate
system of internal control over financial reporting, as defined in the exchange
act rule 13a-15(f). the management conducted an assessment of the companys
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework established by
the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission in internal control  integrated framework.
based on the assessment, the management concluded that, as of december 31,
2004, the companys internal control over financial reporting is effective. managements
assessment of the effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting as of december 31, 2004, has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public accounting firm,
as stated in their report which is included herein.
c. there was no significant change in the companys
internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the companys
most recently completed fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the companys internal control over financial
reporting.
item 9b. other
information.
none.
part iii
documents
incorporated by reference
in response to part iii,
items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14, parts of the companys definitive proxy statement
(to be filed pursuant to regulation 14a within 120 days after registrants
fiscal year end of december 31, 2004) for its annual meeting to be held on may
10, 2005, are incorporated by reference in this form 10-k.
item 10. directors
and executive officers of the registrant. the information relating to directors and nominees of 3m is set forth
under the caption proposal no. 1  election of directors in 3ms proxy
statement for its 2005 annual meeting of stockholders (3m proxy statement)
and is incorporated by reference herein. information about executive officers
is included in item 1 of this annual report on form 10-k.
code of ethics. all of our employees, including our
chief executive officer and chief financial officer, are required to abide by
3ms long-standing business conduct policies to ensure that our business is
conducted in a consistently legal and ethical manner. 3m has posted the text of
such code of ethics on its website (http://www.3m.com/businessconduct). at the same
website, any future amendments to the code of ethics will also be posted. any
person may request a copy of the code of ethics, at no cost, by writing to us
at the following address:
3m company
3m center, building 220-11w-02
st. paul, mn 55144-1000
attention: director, business conduct and compliance
item 11. executive
compensation. the
information relating to executive compensation is set forth under the captions
summary compensation table, option grants in last fiscal year, aggregated
option exercises in last fiscal year and fiscal year-end option values,
long-term incentive plan awards table, employment contracts, termination of
employment and change-in-control arrangements, retirement benefits, and
director compensation and stock ownership guidelines in 3ms proxy statement
and such information is incorporated by reference herein.
item 12. security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management. the information relating to security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management is set forth under the
caption beneficial ownership table in 3ms proxy statement and such
information is incorporated by reference herein.
equity compensation plans
information follows:
equity compensation plans
information
a
b
c
plan category
number of
securities to be
issued upon
exercise of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
weighted-
average exercise
price of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
securities reflected in
column (a)
equity
compensation plans approved by security holders
msop
78,293,754
$
58.70
7,869,168
gespp
13,751,060
non-employee directors
560,733
subtotal
78,293,754
$
58.70
22,180,961
equity
compensation plans not approved by security holders
total
78,293,754
$
58.70
22,180,961
item 13. certain
relationships and related transactions.
no
matters require disclosure.
item 14. principal accounting fees and services. the information relating to principal
accounting fees and services is set forth under the caption independent
auditors fees in 3ms proxy statement and such information is incorporated by
reference herein.
part iv
item 15. exhibits,
financial statement schedules.
(a) (1) financial
statements. the consolidated financial statements filed as part of this report
are listed in the index to financial statements on page 37 as follows:
page number
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated statement
of income for the years ended december 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002
consolidated balance sheet
at december 31, 2004 and 2003
consolidated
statement of changes in stockholders equity and comprehensive income for the
years ended december 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002
consolidated
statement of cash flows for the years ended december 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002
notes to
consolidated financial statements
44  73
(a) (2) financial
statement schedules. financial statement schedules are omitted because of the
absence of the conditions under which they are required or because the required
information is included in the consolidated financial statements or the notes
thereto. the financial statements of unconsolidated subsidiaries are omitted
because, considered in the aggregate, they would not constitute a significant
subsidiary.
(a) (3) exhibits. the exhibits are either filed with
this report or incorporated by reference into this report. exhibit numbers 10.1
through 10.16 are management contracts or compensatory plans or arrangements.
see (b) exhibits below.
(b) exhibits.
index to exhibits:
(3) articles of
incorporation and by-laws
(3.1) certificate of incorporation, as amended as of
may 12, 2004, is incorporated by reference from the form 10-q for the quarter
ended june 30, 2004.
(3.2) bylaws, as amended as of november 11, 2002, are
incorporated by reference from the form 8-k dated december 9, 2002.
(4) instruments defining the rights of security
holders, including indentures:
(4.1) indenture, dated as of november 17, 2000,
between 3m and citibank, n.a. with respect to 3ms senior debt securities, is
incorporated by reference from the form 8-k dated december 7, 2000.
(4.2) indenture, dated as of november 21, 2002,
between 3m and citibank, n.a. with respect to liquid yield option notes zero
coupon senior debt securities, is incorporated by reference from registration
no. 333-103234 on form s-3 filed on february 14, 2003.
(4.3) except as set forth in the preceding exhibits
4.1 and 4.2, the instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt
securities of 3m have been omitted. we agree to furnish to the sec, upon
request, a copy of such instruments with respect to issuances of long-term debt
of 3m.
(10) material contracts and management
compensation plans and arrangements:
(10.1) 3m 2002
management stock ownership program is incorporated by reference from our proxy
statement for the 2002 annual meeting of stockholders.
(10.2) 3m 1997
management stock ownership program is incorporated by reference from our proxy
statement for the 1997 annual meeting of stockholders.
(10.3) 3m 1992
management stock ownership program is incorporated by reference from our proxy
statement for the 1992 annual meeting of stockholders.
(10.4) form of
award agreement for non-qualified stock options granted under the 2002
management stock ownership program.*
(10.5) 3m 1997
general employees stock purchase plan, as amended through november 8, 2004.*
(10.6) 3m vip
(voluntary investment plan) plus is incorporated by reference from registration
statement no. 333-73192 on form s-8, filed on november 13, 2001.
(10.7) 3m
deferred compensation plan, as amended through february 9, 2004, is
incorporated by reference from our form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2003.
(10.8) 3m executive profit sharing plan, as amended
through february 11, 2002, is incorporated by reference from our form 10-k for
the year ended december 31, 2003.
(10.9) 3m
performance unit plan, as amended through february 10, 2003 is incorporated by
reference from our form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2003.
(10.10) 3m
compensation plan for non-employee directors, as amended, through november 8,
2004.*
(10.11) 3m 1992 directors stock ownership program, as
amended through november 8, 2004.*
(10.12) 3m executive life insurance plan, as amended,
is incorporated by reference from our form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2003.
(10.13) summary
of personal financial planning services for 3m executives is incorporated by
reference from our form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2003.
(10.14) employment
agreement dated as of december 4, 2000, between 3m and w. james mcnerney, jr.
is incorporated by reference from our form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2000.
(10.15) employment agreement dated as of january 23,
2002, between 3m and patrick d. campbell is incorporated by reference from our
form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2001.
(10.16) employment
agreement dated as of november 19, 2002, between 3m and richard f. ziegler is
incorporated by reference from our form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2002.
*filed electronically
herewith.
filed electronically
herewith:
(12) calculation of ratio of earnings to fixed
charges.
(21) subsidiaries of the registrant.
(23) consent of independent registered public
accounting firm.
(24) power of attorney.
(31.1) certification of the chief executive officer
pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, 18 u.s.c. section
1350.
(31.2) certification of the chief financial officer
pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, 18 u.s.c. section 1350.
(32.1) certification of the chief executive officer
pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, 18 u.s.c. section
1350.
(32.2) certification of the chief financial officer
pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, 18 u.s.c. section
1350.
signatures
pursuant to the
requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
3m company
by
/s/ patrick d. campbell
patrick d.
campbell,
senior vice
president and chief financial officer
(principal
financial and accounting officer)
february 23,
pursuant to the
requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities indicated on february 23, 2005.
signature
title
w. james mcnerney, jr.
chairman of the board
and chief executive officer (principal executive officer and director)
linda g. alvarado
director
edward a. brennan
director
vance d. coffman
director
michael l. eskew
director
edward m. liddy
director
robert s. morrison
director
aulana l. peters
director
rozanne l. ridgway
director
kevin w. sharer
director
louis w. sullivan
director
patrick d. campbell, by
signing his name hereto, does hereby sign this document pursuant to powers of
attorney duly executed by the other persons named, filed with the securities
and exchange commission on behalf of such other persons, all in the capacities
and on the date stated, such persons constituting a majority of the directors
of the company.
by
/s/ patrick d. campbell
patrick d.
campbell, attorney-in-fact
