10-k
v86195e10vk.htm
the walt disney company form 10-k 9/30/2002
the walt disney company form 10-k 9/30/2002
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of
the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended september30, 2002
commission file number1-11605
incorporated in delaware
500 south buena vista street, burbank, california 91521
(818) 560-1000
i.r.s. employer identification no.
95-4545390
securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
name of each exchange
title of each class
on which registered
common stock, $.01 par value
new york stock exchange
pacific stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to
section12(g) of the act: none.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months, and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yes
no
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to rule 405 of regulations-k is
not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.
[]
as of november26, 2002, the aggregate
market value of common stock held by non-affiliates (based on
the closing price on such date as reported on the new york stock
exchange-composite transactions) was $38.8billion. all
executive officers and directors of the registrant and all
persons filing a schedule13d with the securities and
exchange commission in respect to registrants common stock
have been deemed, solely for the purpose of the foregoing
calculation, to be affiliates of the registrant.
there were 2,042,158,130shares of common
stock outstanding as of november26, 2002.
documents incorporated by reference
certain information required for partiii of
this report is incorporated herein by reference to the proxy
statement for the 2003 annual meeting of the companys
shareholders.
table of contents
[this page intentionally left blank]
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common stock and related stockholder matters
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
item 14. controls and procedures
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
signatures
certifications
certification pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
certification pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
report of independent accountants
consent of independent accountants
consolidated statements of income
consolidated balance sheets
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of stockholders equity
notes to consolidated financial statements
exhibit 10(e)
exhibit 21
table of contents
the walt disney company and
subsidiaries
table of contents
page
part i
item 1.
business
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
part ii
item 5.
market for the companys common stock and
related stockholder matters
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the company
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item 14.
controls and procedures
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules and
reports on form8-k
signatures
consolidated financial information
the walt disney company
table of contents
part i
item1.
business
the walt disney company, together with its
subsidiaries, is a diversified worldwide entertainment company
with operations in four business segments: media networks, parks
and resorts, studio entertainment and consumer products. for
convenience, the terms company and we
are used to refer collectively to the parent company and the
subsidiaries through which our various businesses are actually
conducted.
information on revenues, operating income,
identifiable assets and supplemental revenue of the
companys business segments appears in note1 to the
consolidated financial statements included in item8
hereof. the company employed approximately 112,000people
as of september30, 2002.
media networks
domestic broadcast television and radio
networks
the company operates the abctelevision
network, which as of september30, 2002 had
226primary affiliated stations operating under long-term
agreements reaching 99% of all u.s.television households.
the abctelevision network broadcasts programs in
dayparts as follows: monday through friday early
morning, daytime and late night, monday through sunday prime
time, news, children and sports.
we also operate the abcradio networks,
which provide programming to more than 4,600affiliated
radio stations reaching approximately 133million domestic
listeners weekly. the abcradio networks produce and
distribute to affiliates a variety of programs and formats,
including abcnews radio and other news network
programming, syndicated talk and music programs, abcsports
programming and 24-hour music formats. in addition, the
abcradio networks produce radio disney, a 24-hour music
and talk format intended to appeal to children and their
parents. radio disney is carried on 51stations, including
32 that are owned by the company, that cover more than
57percent of the u.s.market. abcradio networks
also produce the espnradio format, which is carried on
more than 700stations, including 215full-time (four
of which are owned by the company), making it the largest radio
sports network in the unitedstates.
generally, the television and radio networks pay
the cost of producing their own programs or acquiring broadcast
rights from other producers for network programming, and pay
varying amounts of compensation to affiliated stations for
broadcasting the programs and commercial announcements included
therein. network operations derive substantially all of their
revenues from the sale to advertisers of time in network
programs for commercial announcements. the ability to sell time
for commercial announcements and the rates received are
primarily dependent on the size and nature of the audience that
the network can deliver to the advertiser as well as overall
advertiser demand for time on network broadcasts.
domestic broadcast television and radio
stations
we own nine very high frequency(vhf)
television stations, five of which are located in the top ten
markets in the united states; one ultra high
frequency(uhf) television station; 44standard
amradio stations; and 18fmradio stations. our
television stations, all of which are affiliated with the
abctelevision network, reach 24% of the nations
television households, calculated using the multiple ownership
rules of the federal communications commission(fcc).
of the companys 40radio stations
located in the top 20u.s.advertising markets,
24carry predominantly locally originated music and talk
programming, 13carry the radio disney format and three
carry the espnradio format. almost all of the
companys radio stations in the non-top-20markets
carry the radio disney format. our radio stations reach
16million people weekly in the top 20united states
advertising markets.
markets, frequencies and other station details
are set forth in the following tables:
-1-
table of contents
television stations
expiration
television
date of fcc
market
station and market
channel
authorization
ranking(1)
wabc-tv (new york, ny)
jun. 1, 2007
kabc-tv (los angeles, ca)
dec. 1, 2006
wls-tv (chicago, il)
dec. 1, 2005
wpvi-tv (philadelphia, pa)
aug. 1, 2007
kgo-tv (san francisco, ca)
dec. 1, 2006
ktrk-tv (houston, tx)
aug. 1, 2006
wtvd-tv (raleigh-durham, nc)
dec. 1, 2004
kfsn-tv (fresno, ca)
dec. 1, 2006
wjrt-tv (flint, mi)
oct. 1, 2005
wtvg-tv (toledo, oh)
oct. 1, 2005
radio stations
frequency
expiration
radio
am-kilohertz
date of fcc
market
station and market
fm-megahertz
authorization
ranking(2)
wabc (new york, ny)
770 k
jun. 1, 2006
kabc (los angeles, ca)
790 k
dec. 1, 2005
kspn (los angeles, ca)
1110k
dec. 1, 2005
kdis (los angeles, ca)
710 k
dec. 1, 2005
wls (chicago, il)
890 k
dec. 1, 2004
wmvp (chicago, il)
1000 k
dec. 1, 2004
wrdz (chicago, il)
1300 k
dec. 1, 2004
kgo (san francisco, ca)
810 k
dec. 1, 2005
ksfo (san francisco, ca)
560 k
dec. 1, 2005
kmky (san francisco, ca)
1310 k
dec. 1, 2005
wbap (dallas-fort worth, tx)
820 k
aug. 1, 2005
kmki (dallas-fort worth, tx)
620 k
aug. 1, 2005
wwjz (philadelphia, pa)
640 k
jun. 1, 2006
wmal (washington, d.c.)
630 k
oct. 1, 2003
wmki (boston, ma)
1260 k
apr. 1, 2006
kmic (houston, tx)
1590 k
aug. 1, 2005
wjr (detroit, mi)
760 k
oct. 1, 2004
wdwd (atlanta, ga)
590 k
apr. 1, 2004
wmym (miami, fl)
990 k
feb. 1, 2004
kkdz (seattle, wa)
1250 k
feb. 1, 2006
kmik (phoenix, az)
1580 k
oct 1, 2005
kdiz (minneapolis, mn)
1440 k
apr. 1, 2005
wsdz (st. louis, mo)
1260 k
dec. 1, 2004
wwmi (tampa, fl)
1380 k
feb. 1, 2004
kadz (denver, co)
1550 k
apr. 1, 2005
kddz (denver, co)
1690 k
apr. 1, 2005
weae (pittsburgh, pa)
1250 k
aug. 1, 2006
wwmk (cleveland, oh)
1260 k
oct. 1, 2004
kiid (sacramento, ca)
1470 k
dec. 1, 2005
kphn (kansas city, mo)
1190 k
feb. 1, 2005
wddz (providence, ri)
1450 k
apr. 1, 2006
wgfy (charlotte, nc)
1480 k
oct. 1, 2003
-2-
table of contents
frequency
expiration
radio
am-kilohertz
date of fcc
market
station and market
fm-megahertz
authorization
ranking(2)
whkt (norfolk, va)
1650k
oct. 1, 2003
wpmh (norfolk, va)
1010k
oct. 1, 2003
wdyz (orlando, fl)
990 k
feb. 1, 2004
wmne (w. palm beach, fl)
1600 k
feb. 1, 2004
wdzk (hartford, ct)
1550 k
apr. 1, 2006
wbwl (jacksonville, fl)
600 k
feb. 1, 2004
wdrd (louisville, ky)
680 k
aug. 1, 2004
wdzy (richmond, va)
1290 k
apr. 1, 2006
wddy (albany, ny)
1460 k
june1, 2006
wfro (fremont, oh)
900 k
oct. 1, 2004
kqam (wichita, ks)
1480 k
june1, 2004
wfdf (flint, mi)
910 k
oct. 1, 2004
wplj (fm) (new york, ny)
95.5 m
jun. 1, 2006
klos (fm) (los angeles, ca)
95.5 m
dec. 1, 2005
wzzn (fm) (chicago, il)
94.7 m
dec. 1, 2004
kmeo (fm) (dallas-fort worth, tx)
96.7 m
aug. 1, 2005
kscs (fm) (dallas-fort worth, tx)
96.3 m
aug. 1, 2005
kesn (fm) (dallas-fort worth, tx)
103.3 m
aug. 1, 2005
wrqx (fm) (washington, d.c.)
107.3 m
oct. 1, 2003
wjzw (fm) (washington, d.c.)
105.9 m
oct. 1, 2003
wdvd(fm) (detroit, mi)
96.3 m
oct. 1, 2004
wdrq (fm) (detroit, mi)
93.1 m
oct. 1, 2004
wkhx (fm) (atlanta, ga)
101.5 m
apr. 1, 2004
wyay (fm) (atlanta, ga)
106.7 m
apr. 1, 2004
kqrs (fm) (minneapolis-st.paul, mn)
92.5 m
apr. 1, 2005
kxxr (fm) (minneapolis-st.paul, mn)
93.7 m
apr. 1, 2005
wgvx (fm) (minneapolis-st.paul, mn)
105.1 m
apr. 1, 2005
wgvy (fm) (minneapolis-st.paul, mn)
105.3 m
apr. 1, 2005
wgvz (fm) (minneapolis-st.paul, mn)
105.7 m
apr. 1, 2005
wqua (fm) (mobile, al)
102.1 m
apr. 1, 2004
(1)
based on nielsen media research, u.s. television
household estimates, january1, 2002
(2)
based on 2002 arbitron radio market rank
cable/ satellite networks and international
broadcast operations
our cable/satellite and international broadcast
operations are principally involved in the distribution of
television programming, the licensing and financing of
programming to domestic and international markets and investing
in foreign television broadcasting, production and distribution
entities. the company owns disney channel, toon disney, soapnet,
abc family, which includes 76% of fox kids europe, 80% of espn,
inc., 37.5% of the a&e television networks, 50% of lifetime
entertainment services and 39.6% of e! entertainment television,
and has various other international investments.
disney channel, which has approximately
80million domestic subscribers, is a cable and satellite
television service. new shows developed for initial exhibition
on disney channel include comedy, adventure, animated and
educational series, as well as original movies and
documentaries. the balance of the programming consists of
products acquired from third parties and products from our owned
theatrical film and television programming library.
-3-
table of contents
disney channel also reaches more than
18million subscribers outside of the united states of
america via its international operations. programming consists
primarily of the companys theatrical film and television
programming library, as well as products acquired from third
parties and locally produced programming. the disney channels in
taiwan and the u.k. premiered in 1995, followed by the launch of
the disney channels in australia and malaysia in 1996, france
and the middle east in 1997, spain and italy in 1998 and germany
in 1999. in 2000, regional disney channels were launched for
both latin america and asia, with feed extensions in asia now
covering malaysia, brunei, the philippines, singapore and
recently indonesia and south korea. channels in brazil and
portugal were launched in 2001 and disney channel launches in
scandinavia and japan are planned for 2003. we continue to
explore the development of the disney channel in other countries
around the world.
toon disney is intended to appeal to children and
features an array of family-friendly, predominantly animated
programming from third parties and the disney library. toon
disney reaches more than 34million homes. it began
carrying national advertising in 2000.
soapnet was launched in january 2000 and reaches
more than 25million homes. soapnet offers a wide variety
of soap opera and related programming 24hours a day,
sevendays a week. soapnets primetime schedule
features same-day repeat telecasts of the top-rated abc daytime
series all my children, general hospital, one life to live
and port charles. the service also airs the popular
classic ryans hope and serial dramas such as
knots landing, falcon crest, hotel and the colbys,
as well as an original soap news series, soapcenter, and
the daily soap talk show, soap talk. soapnet began
carrying national advertising in 2001.
on october24, 2001, the company acquired
fox family worldwide, inc. which was renamed abc family
worldwide, inc. abc family operates the abc family channel, a
television programming service that currently reaches
approximately 85million cable and satellite television
subscribers throughout the united states; fox kids europe, which
reaches more than 31million subscribers across europe and
fox kids channel in latin america, which reaches more than 13
million subscribers. the company has a 76% interest in fox kids
europe.
espn, inc. operates six domestic television
sports networks: espn, reaching over 87million households;
espn2, approaching 85million homes; espn classic, at
47million homes; espnews, reaching 38million
households; espn now, with news and scheduling information; and
espn today, an interactive television sports channel. espn, inc.
owns, has equity interests in, or has distribution agreements
with 25international networks, reaching more than
119million households outside the united states in more
than 140countries and territories. espn, inc., owns 100%
of espn do brazil and espn sur in argentina, a 50% equity
interest in the espn star sports joint venture, which delivers
sports programming throughout most of asia, and a 29.92% equity
interest in netstar, which owns the sports network,
lerseau des sports, espn classic canada, discovery
canada and wtsn, among other media properties in canada. espn,
inc. also holds a 70% interest in espn classic europe, which
launched its service in france and italy during 2002 and holds a
19.99% interest in sports-i espn in japan. espn also has several
other brand extensions, including espn.com, the leading internet
sports content provider; espn regional television; espn radio,
distributed through the abc radio networks; espn the magazine;
sportsticker, the leading supplier of real-time sports news and
scores; b.a.s.s., the largest bass fishing organization in the
world; and the espn zone, sports-themed dining and entertainment
facilities managed by disney regional entertainment, included in
the parks and resorts segment.
lifetime entertainment services owns lifetime
television, which reaches nearly 86million subscribers and
is devoted to womens lifestyle programming. during 1998,
lifetime launched the lifetime entertainment services, a 24-hour
digital channel that is in over 27million homes. lifetime
televisions sister channel lifetime real women is expected
to be available in 5million homes by december31,
2002.
-4-
table of contents
the a&e television networks are television
programming services devoted to cultural and entertainment
programming. a&e reaches more than 86million
subscribers. the history channel, which is owned by a&e,
reaches approximately 82million subscribers. the networks
also include history international, a network that provides
viewers with a window into non-u.s. perspectives, and the
biography channel, launched in 1998, which is dedicated to
exploration of the lives of exceptional people.
e! entertainment television is a television
programming service that reaches over 79million cable
subscribers and is devoted to the world of entertainment.
e!entertainment television also launched a new channel,
style., in 1998, a 24-hour television service devoted to style,
beauty and home design, which reaches approximately
24million subscribers with commitments to reach more than
40million subscribers by 2004.
the companys share of the financial results
of the cable/ satellite and international broadcast services,
other than disney channel, espn, inc., toon disney, soapnet and
abc family channel, is reported under the heading equity
in the income of investees in the companys
consolidated statements of income.
television production and
distribution
we also develop, produce and distribute
television programming to global broadcasters and cable and
satellite operators, including the major television networks,
disney channel and other cable and satellite networks, under the
buena vista television, buena vista production, touchstone
television and walt disney television labels. program
development is carried out in collaboration with a number of
independent writers, producers and creative teams, with a focus
on the development, production and distribution of half-hour
comedies and one-hour dramas for network prime-time broadcast.
the one-hour drama alias and the half-hour comedies my
wife and kids, according to jim and scrubs (for nbc)
were all renewed for the 2002/2003 television season. new
prime-time series that premiered in the fall of 2002 included
half-hour comedies 8 simple rules for dating my teenage
daughter, less than perfect and life with bonnie and
the one-hour drama mds. planned midseason shows include
half-hour comedies lost at home and regular joe,
one-hour dramas veritas and miracles, and the
late-night series the jimmy kimmel show expected to
premiere in january 2003. for the abc family channel, the
company produces two successful childrens programs:
power rangers wild force, the latest version of the
popular power rangers franchise, and digimon.
the company is also producing original television
movies for the wonderful world of disney, which abc airs
on sunday evenings, as well as for the abc family channel.
we also produce a variety of prime-time specials
for exhibition on network television, as well as live-action
syndicated programming, which includes live! with regis and
kelly and the wayne brady show, daily talk shows,
ebert& roeper, a weekly motion picture review
program, and game shows such as who wants to be a
millionaire.
we also license and syndicate our television
properties in foreign television markets.
internet
the internet operations of the media networks
groups develop, publish and distribute content for online
services intended to appeal to broad consumer interest in
sports, news, family and entertainment. internet web sites and
products include abc.com, abcnews.com, enhanced tv, espn.com,
disney.com, familyfun.com and movies.com. the companys
internet operations derive revenue from a combination of
advertising and sponsorships, subscription services and
e-commerce.
disney.com offers family entertainment content
and services relating to many of the companys businesses,
such as walt disney pictures and radio disney. disney mobile
distributes disney content to wireless devices and mobile
phones. during fiscal 2002, disney mobile distribution was
expanded to include 15markets globally.
-5-
table of contents
familyfun.com is an online parenting resource,
combining editorial content with interactive elements such as
chats and bulletin boards focused on practical advice and ideas
for fun family activities.
espn.com delivers comprehensive sports news and
information to millions of fans each month. espn.com averages
more than 11million unique users a month.
abc.com, launched in january 2000, is the
official web site of the abc television network, while
abcnews.com draws on the knowledge and expertise of abc news
correspondents throughout the world. in 2002, abcnews.com
launched new subscription broadband services that provide
on-demand access to leading abc news shows, such as world
news tonight with peter jennings and nightline, among
other content.
enhanced tv provides interactive television
programming and advertising services during abc and espn
telecasts, such as monday night football and sunday
night football, respectively.
movies.com was launched in may 2000 as a web site
for movie lovers, providing dedicated pages that include plot
overviews, projected release dates, detailed cast and credits,
production rumors, news updates and links to related official
fan sites for major film productions.
competition
the abc television network, disney channel, espn,
abc family channel and our other broadcast and cable/ satellite
services compete for viewers primarily with other television
networks, independent television stations and other video media
such as cable and satellite television programming services,
videocassettes and dvds. in the sale of advertising time, the
broadcasting operations compete with other television networks,
independent television stations, suppliers of cable/ satellite
services and other advertising media such as newspapers,
magazines, billboards and the internet. the abc radio networks
likewise compete with other radio networks and radio programming
services, independent radio stations and other advertising media.
the companys television and radio stations
are in competition with other television and radio stations,
cable and satellite television programming services,
videocassettes, dvds and other advertising media such as
newspapers, magazines, billboards and the internet. competition
occurs primarily in individual market areas. a television
station in one market does not compete directly with other
stations in other market areas.
the growth in the cable/ satellite
industrys share of viewers has resulted in increased
competitive pressures for advertising revenues. in addition,
sports and other programming costs have increased due to
increased competition. the companys cable/ satellite
networks also face competition for carriage by cable and
satellite service operators and distributors.
internationally, espns services face
significant competition from locally based competitors, which
often have greater financial resources and occasionally
competitive regulatory advantages.
the internet properties are in competition for
users and advertising revenues with other sports, news, family
and entertainment internet web sites, as well as internet web
portals.
federal regulation
television and radio broadcasting are subject to
the jurisdiction of the fcc under the communications act of
1934, as amended. the communications act empowers the fcc, among
other things, to issue, renew, revoke or modify broadcasting
licenses, determine the location of stations, regulate the
equipment used by stations, adopt regulations necessary to carry
out the provisions of the communications act and impose
penalties for violation of its regulations. fcc regulations also
restrict the ownership of stations and cable/ satellite
operations in certain circumstances, and regulate the practices
of network broadcasters, cable and satellite operators and
distributors and competing services.
-6-
table of contents
federal laws and fcc regulations are subject to
change, and we generally cannot predict whether new legislation
or regulations, or a change in the extent of application or
enforcement of current laws and regulations, would have an
adverse impact on the companys operations.
parks and resorts
the company operates the walt disney world resort
and disney cruise line in florida, the disneyland resort in
california, espn zone facilities in several states and anaheim
sports in california. the company also licenses the operations
of the tokyo disneyland resort in japan, and licenses and
manages the disneyland resort paris in france.
walt disney world resort
the walt disney world resort is located
15miles southwest of orlando, florida on approximately
30,500 acres of land owned by company subsidiaries. the resort
includes four theme parks (the magic kingdom, epcot, disney-mgm
studios and disneys animal kingdom); hotels; vacation
ownership units; a retail, dining and entertainment complex; a
sports complex; conference centers; campgrounds; golf courses;
water parks and other recreational facilities designed to
attract visitors for an extended stay.
the entire walt disney world destination resort
is marketed through a variety of national, international and
local advertising and promotional activities. several
attractions in each of the theme parks are sponsored by other
corporations through long-term participation agreements.
magic
kingdom the magic kingdom,
which opened in 1971, consists of main street, usa and six
principal areas: adventureland, fantasyland, frontierland,
liberty square, mickeys toontown fair and tomorrowland.
these areas feature themed rides and attractions, restaurants,
refreshment areas and merchandise shops.
epcot
epcot, which opened in 1982, consists of two major themed areas:
future world and world showcase. future world dramatizes certain
historical developments and addresses the challenges facing the
world today through major pavilions devoted to high-tech
products of the future (innoventions), communication
and technological exhibitions (spaceship earth),
energy, transportation, imagination, life and health, the land
and seas. world showcase presents a community of nations
focusing on the culture, traditions and accomplishments of
people around the world. world showcase includes as a central
showpiece the american adventure, which highlights the history
of the american people. other nations represented are canada,
china, france, germany, italy, japan, mexico, morocco, norway
and the united kingdom. both areas feature themed rides and
attractions, restaurants and merchandise shops.
disney-mgm
studios the disney-mgm
studios, which opened in 1989, consists of a theme park, an
animation studio and a film and television production facility.
the park centers around hollywood as it was during the
1930s and 1940s and features disney animators at
work and a backstage tour of the film and television production
facilities in addition to other attractions, themed food service
and merchandise facilities. the production facility consists of
three sound stages, merchandise shops and a back lot area and
currently hosts both feature film and television productions.
disney-mgm studios also features fantasmic!, a night-time
entertainment spectacular.
disneys animal
kingdom disneys
animal kingdom, which opened in 1998, consists of a 145-foot
tree of life as the centerpiece surrounded by six themed areas:
dinolandu.s.a., africa, rafikis planet watch, asia,
discovery island and camp minnie mickey. each themed
area contains adventure attractions, entertainment shows,
restaurants and merchandise shops. the park features more than
200species of animals and 4,000 varieties of trees and
plants on more than 500acres of land.
-7-
table of contents
resort
facilities as of
september30, 2002, the company owned and operated
12resort hotels and a complex of villas and suites at the
waltdisney world resort, with a total of approximately
19,200rooms and 318,000square feet of conference
meeting space. in addition, disneys fort wilderness
camping and recreational area offers approximately
800campsites and 400wilderness homes. currently
under development is disneys pop century resort, which
will include buildings themed to different decades, from the
1900s to the1990s.
the disney vacation club offers ownership
interests in several resort facilities, including 531units
at disneys old key west resort, 383units at
disneys boardwalk resort, 136units at disneys
wilderness lodge and 208units at disneys beach club,
all of which are located at the walt disney world resort, as
well as a 175-unit resort in vero beach, florida, and a 102-unit
resort on hilton head island, south carolina. a 184-unit
expansion adjacent to the disney institute at walt disney world
is scheduled to open in 2004. available units at each facility
are intended to be sold under a vacation ownership plan and
operated partially as rental property.
recreational amenities and activities available
at the resort include five championship golf courses, miniature
golf courses, full-service spas, tennis, sailing, water skiing,
swimming, horseback riding and a number of other noncompetitive
sports and leisure time activities. the resort also operates two
water parks: blizzard beach and typhoon lagoon.
we have also developed a 120-acre retail, dining
and entertainment complex known as downtown disney, which
consists of the marketplace, pleasure island and west side. in
addition to more than 20specialty retail shops and
restaurants, the downtown disney marketplace is home to the
50,000-square-foot world of disney retail store featuring
disney-branded merchandise. pleasure island, an entertainment
center adjacent to the downtown disney marketplace, includes
restaurants, night clubs and shopping facilities. downtown
disney west side is situated on 66acres on the west side
of pleasure island and includes a disneyquest facility, cirque
du soleil and several participant retail, dining and
entertainment operations.
disneys wide world of sports, which opened
in 1997, is a sports complex on approximately 200acres
providing professional caliber training and competition,
festival and tournament events and interactive sports
activities. the complexs venues accommodate more than
30different sporting events, including baseball, tennis,
basketball, softball, track and field, football and soccer. its
9,000-seat stadium is the spring training site for major league
baseballs atlanta braves and home to the orlando rays
minor league baseball team. the amateur athletic union hosts
more than 30championship events per year at the facility.
at the downtown disney marketplace hotel plaza,
seven independently operated hotels are situated on property
leased from the company. these hotels have a capacity of
approximately 3,700rooms. additionally, two hotels, the
walt disney world swan and the walt disney world dolphin, with
an aggregate capacity of approximately 2,300rooms, are
independently operated on property leased from the company near
epcot.
under continued development is celebration, an
innovative town that combines architecture, education, health
and technology in ways intended to promote a strong sense of
community. founded in 1994, celebration is home to more than
6,000residents, an osceola county public school, a health
facility, an 18-hole public golf course, park and recreation
areas and a downtown area featuring a variety of shops,
restaurants and the celebration hotel.
disneyland resort
the company owns 450acres and has under
long-term lease an additional 56acres of land in anaheim,
california. the disneyland resort includes two theme parks
(disneyland and disneys california adventure), three
hotels and a retail, dining and entertainment district designed
to attract visitors for an extended stay.
-8-
table of contents
the entire disneyland resort is marketed through
international, national and local advertising and promotional
activities as a destination resort. a number of the attractions
and restaurants at each of the theme parks are sponsored by
corporate participants.
disneyland
disneyland, which opened in 1955, consists of main street and
seven principal areas: adventureland, critter country,
fantasyland, frontierland, new orleans square, tomorrowland and
toontown. these areas feature themed rides and attractions,
restaurants, refreshment stands and merchandise shops.
disneys california
adventure disneys
california adventure which opened in 2001, celebrates and pays
tribute to the history, features and activities of the state of
california. the park is adjacent to disneyland and includes four
principal areas: golden state, hollywood pictures backlot,
paradise pier and the newly opened a bugs
land. a bugs land features five new
attractions for children and families. these areas include
rides, attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and
refreshment stands.
resort
facilities disneyland
resort includes three company-owned hotels: the 1,000-room
disneyland hotel, 500-room disneys paradise pier hotel and
disneys grand californian hotel, a deluxe 750-room hotel
located adjacent to disneys california adventure park.
as part of the expansion of the disneyland
resort, the company also built downtown disney, a themed 310,000
square foot outdoor complex of entertainment, dining and
shopping venues, located adjacent to disneyland park and
disneys california adventure.
tokyo disney resort
the company earns royalties on revenues generated
by the tokyo disney resort, which is owned and operated by
oriental land co., ltd. (olc), an unrelated japanese
corporation. the resort is located on approximately
494acres of land, six miles east of downtown tokyo, japan.
the resort includes two theme parks (tokyo disneyland and tokyo
disneysea); two disney-branded hotels; five independently
operated hotels; several merchandise shops; and ikspiari, a
retail, dining and entertainment complex. olc markets the tokyo
disney resort primarily through a variety of local, domestic and
international advertising and promotional activities. long-term
corporate partners sponsor many of the theme park attractions.
tokyo disneyland, which opened in 1983, was the
first disney theme park to open outside the unitedstates.
tokyo disneyland consists of main street and seven principal
areas: adventureland, critter country, fantasyland,
tomorrowland, toontown, westernland and world bazaar.
tokyo disneysea adjacent to tokyo disneyland,
opened in 2001. the park is divided into seven unique
ports of call, including mediterranean harbor,
american waterfront, port discovery, lost river delta, mermaid
lagoon, mysterious island and arabian coast. the recent resort
expansion also includes the addition of the 502-room hotel
miracosta, 504-room disney ambassador hotel, the disney resort
line monorail and the bon voyage merchandise location.
disneyland resort paris
disneyland resort paris is a 4,800acre
development located in marne-la-valle, approximately
20miles east of paris, france. euro disneys.c.a.
(euro disney) and its subsidiaries operate the disneyland resort
paris, which includes the disneyland park; the walt disney
studios park; seven themed hotels with approximately
5,800rooms; two convention centers; the disney village, a
shopping, dining and entertainment center; and a 27-hole golf
facility.
disneyland park, which opened in 1992, consists
of main street and four principal areas: adventureland,
discoveryland, fantasyland and frontierland. these areas include
themed rides, attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops
and refreshment stands.
-9-
table of contents
walt disney studios park opened in march 2002
adjacent to disneyland park. the new park takes guests into the
worlds of cinema, animation and television and includes four
principal themed areas: front lot, animation courtyard,
production courtyard and backlot. these areas each include
themed rides, attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops
and refreshment stands.
development of the site also continues with the
valdeurope project, a newly constructed city being
built near disneyland resort paris. the city of
valdeurope includes a new town center, which
consists of an international shopping center; a newly opened
150room hotel; office, commercial and residential space;
and a regional train station. these newly constructed businesses
are operated by third parties on land leased or purchased from
euro disney. in addition, agreements have been signed with third
party developers to provide approximately 2,250additional
on-site hotel rooms and/or time share units over the next three
years, 1,450 of which are scheduled to open in 2003.
of the 4,800acres comprising the site,
2,100acres have been developed to date. the project is
being developed pursuant to a 1987 master agreement between
french governmental authorities and euro disney, a publicly held
french company in which the company currently holds a 39% equity
interest and which is managed by a subsidiary of the company.
the company earns royalties on revenues generated by the
disneyland resort paris theme parks and receives management fees
from euro disney, which are both reported as revenues in the
companys consolidated statements of income. the financial
results of the companys investment in euro disney are
reported under the heading equity in the income of
investees in the companys consolidated statements of
income.
hong kong disneyland
in 1999, the company and the government of the
hong kong special administrative region signed a master project
agreement for the development and operation of hong kong
disneyland. phasei of the development, which will be
located on 309acres of land on lantau island, includes the
hong kong disneyland theme park and one or more hotels. subject
to the governments completion of reclamation and
infrastructure by specified target dates, hong kong disneyland
is currently targeted to open in 2005/2006. the master project
agreement permits further phased buildout of the development
under certain circumstances.
construction and operation of the project will be
the responsibility of hongkong international theme parks
limited, an entity in which the hong kong government owns a 57%
interest and a subsidiary of the company owns the remaining 43%.
a separate hong kong subsidiary of the company is responsible
for managing hong kong disneyland. based on the current exchange
rate between the hong kong and u.s.dollars, the
companys equity contribution obligation is limited to
u.s.$315million, payable over the next five years.
as of september30, 2002 the company had contributed
u.s.$26million of this amount. once hong kong
disneyland commences operations, company subsidiaries will be
entitled to receive management fees and royalties from project
operations in addition to the companys equity interest.
disney cruise line
disney cruise line, which is operated out of port
canaveral, florida, is a cruise vacation line that includes two
85,000-ton ships, the disney magic and its sister ship
the disney wonder. both ships cater to children, families
and adults, with distinctly themed areas and activities for each
group. each ship features 877staterooms, 73% of which are
outside staterooms providing guests with ocean views. each
cruise vacation includes a visit to disneys castaway cay,
a 1,000-acre private bahamian island. the company
packages3, 4 and 7day cruise vacations with visits
to the walt disney world resort and also offers cruise-only
options.
disney regional entertainment
through the disney regional entertainment group,
the company has built on the popularity of the espn brand with
the espn zone concept, which combines three interactive areas
under one roof
-10-
table of contents
for a complete sports and entertainment
experience: the studio grill, offering dining in an espn studio
environment; the screening room, offering fans any game on the
air in an exciting sports viewing environment; and the sports
arena, challenging fans with a variety of interactive and
competitive attractions. the company currently operates eight
espn zone restaurants.
walt disney imagineering
walt disney imagineering provides master
planning, real estate development, attraction and show design,
engineering support, production support, project management and
other development services, including research and development
for the companys operations.
anaheim sports, inc.
a company subsidiary owns and operates a national
hockey league franchise, the mighty ducks of anaheim. in
addition, a company subsidiary owns anaheim angelsl.p.,
the holder of the 2002world champion anaheim angels major
league baseball franchise. anaheim sports, inc. provides
management services to the mighty ducks and the anaheim angels.
competition
all of the theme parks and the associated resort
facilities are operated on a year-round basis. historically, the
theme parks and resort business experience fluctuations in park
attendance and resort occupancy resulting from the nature of
vacation travel. peak attendance and resort occupancy generally
occur during the summer months when school vacations occur and
during early-winter and spring holiday periods.
the companys theme parks and resorts
compete with all other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism
and recreational activities. the profitability of the
leisure-time industry is influenced by various factors that are
not directly controllable, such as economic conditions including
business cycle and exchange rate fluctuations, travel industry
trends, amount of available leisure time, oil and transportation
prices and weather patterns. as a result, the companys
theme park and resort operations were adversely affected during
fiscal 2002 by significant reductions in domestic and
international travel.
studio entertainment
the studio entertainment segment produces
live-action and animated motion pictures, television animation
programs, musical recordings and live stage plays. the company
is an industry leader in producing and acquiring live-action and
animated motion pictures for distribution to the theatrical,
television and home video/ dvd markets, and produces original
animated television programming for the domestic and
international television markets. films and characters are also
often promoted through the release of audiocassettes and compact
discs. the company is also engaged directly in the home video
and television distribution of its film and television library.
theatrical films
walt disney pictures and television, a subsidiary
of the company, produces and acquires live-action motion
pictures that are distributed primarily under the walt disney
pictures and touchstone pictures banners. another subsidiary,
miramax film corp., acquires and produces motion pictures that
are distributed under the miramax and dimension banners. the
company also produces and distributes animated motion pictures
under the banner walt disney pictures, and co-finances and
distributes animated motion pictures developed in conjunction
with pixar,inc.
during fiscal 2003, we expect to distribute
approximately 24feature films under the walt disney
pictures and touchstone pictures banners and approximately
31films under the miramax and dimension banners. these
expected releases include several live-action family films and
full-length animated films, including the large format cinema
re-release of the lion king, with the remainder
-11-
table of contents
targeted to teenagers, families and/or adults. in
addition, the company periodically reissues previously released
animated films. as of september30, 2002, under the walt
disney pictures, touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures,
miramax and dimension banners, the company had released
750full-length live-action features (primarily color),
62full-length animated color features, and approximately
532cartoon shorts and 64live action shorts.
we distribute and market our filmed products
principally through our own distribution and marketing companies
in the unitedstates and major foreign markets.
home entertainment
we distribute home entertainment releases from
each of our motion picture banners in the domestic market. in
the international market, we distribute both directly and
through foreign distribution companies. in addition, we develop,
acquire and produce original programming for direct-to-video
release. as of september30, 2002, under the banners walt
disney pictures, touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures,
miramax and dimension, 940produced and acquired titles,
including 760live action titles and 180cartoon
shorts and animated features, were available to the domestic
home entertainment marketplace and 1,641produced and
acquired titles, including 1,145live action titles and
496cartoon shorts and animated features, were available to
the international home entertainment market.
television production and
distribution
the company develops, produces and distributes
animated television programming to global broadcasters,
including the major television networks, the disney channel and
other cable broadcasters, under the walt disney television and
buena vista television labels.
the 2002/2003 saturday morning television season
returns under the new name abc kids on abc. abc
kids, formally disneys one saturday morning, is
a line-up of animated series that includes disneys
recess and disneys teamo supremo.
disneys fillmore and disneys kim possible
premiered in september 2002. additionally, the company
produces first-run animated programming for upn and for
syndication. series airing on upn include disneys
recess, disneys the legend of tarzan and disney/
pixars buzz lightyear of star command.
we also license our theatrical and television
animation film library to the domestic television syndication
market. major packages of the companys feature films and
animated television programming have been licensed for broadcast
over several years.
the company also licenses its theatrical and
animated television properties in a number of foreign television
markets. in addition, we syndicate certain of our television
programs abroad, including the disney club, a weekly series
produced for foreign markets.
the company has licensed to the encore pay
television services, over a multi-year period, exclusive
domestic pay television rights to certain films released under
the walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures, hollywood
pictures, miramax and dimension banners. the company has also
entered into multi-year output deals with directv and
indemand for pay-per-view exhibition. in addition, the
company has licensed exclusive domestic pay television rights to
certain films released under the dimension banner to the
showtime pay television services over a multi-year period.
audio products and music publishing
walt disney records produces and distributes
compact discs, audiocassettes and records, consisting primarily
of soundtracks for animated films and read-along products,
directed at the childrens market in the united states and
licenses the creation of similar products throughout the rest of
the world. in addition, walt disney records and music publishing
commission new music for the companys motion pictures and
television programs, and records the songs and licenses the song
-12-
table of contents
copyrights created for the company to others for
printed music, records, audiovisual devices and public
performances.
domestic retail sales of compact discs,
audiocassettes and records are the largest source of
music-related revenues.
our hollywood records subsidiary develops,
produces and markets recordings from new talent across the
spectrum of popular music, as well as soundtracks from certain
live-action motion pictures. we also own the nashville-based
music label lyric street records.
buena vista theatrical group
the buena vista theatrical group includes both
disney theatrical productions and disney live family
entertainment.
disney theatricals live stage musicals are
produced for stages on broadway and around the world. the
company generally produces shows in the united states, the
united kingdom and australia and licenses shows to local
producers in other foreign territories.
disneys beauty and the beast, which
has been seen by 22million people in 12countries,
entered its ninth year on broadway and surpassed grease
to become the eighth longest running show in broadway
history.
during the year, the lion king celebrated
its 2,000th performance at broadways new amsterdam
theatre. the show is also running in tokyo, fukuoka, london,
toronto, los angeles and hamburg. a u.s.national tour
launched in april 2002, and to date has visited denver, houston,
ft.worth (tx), dallas and ft.lauderdale. during
2003, a second u.s.touring production is scheduled to open
in chicago in april, and a production is scheduled to open in
sydney in october.
der glockner von notre
dame, the world premiere of
disneys the hunchback of notre dame, ended a
three-year run in berlin in june2002.
elton john and tim rices aida
celebrated its 1,000th performance at broadways palace
theatre. the u.s.national tour and amsterdam production is
scheduled to be joined by a production in osaka in2003.
disney live family entertainment continued its
growth of disney on ice, with eight productions
performing for more than 10million guests in 2002, up from
8million in 2001. licensed to feld entertainment since
1981, disney on ice has brought the disney brand to local
communities in 47countries. the newest production,
disney on ice princess classics, opened in
september2002.
competition and intellectual property
protection
the success of the studio entertainment
operations is heavily dependent upon public taste, which is
unpredictable and subject to change. in addition, studio
entertainment operating results fluctuate due to the timing and
performance of releases in the theatrical, home entertainment
and television markets. release dates are determined by several
factors, including competition and the timing of vacation and
holiday periods.
the studio entertainment businesses compete with
all forms of entertainment. a significant number of companies
produce and/or distribute theatrical and television films,
exploit products in the home video/ dvd market, provide pay
television programming services and sponsor live theater. we
also compete to obtain creative and performing talents, story
properties, advertiser support, broadcast rights and market
share, which are essential to the success of all of our studio
entertainment businesses.
the companys ability to distribute and
exploit its motion picture and television programming is
affected by the strength and effectiveness of intellectual
property protections in both the unitedstates and abroad.
emerging technologies, regulatory limitations on intellectual
property
-13-
table of contents
protection, lack of enforcement of protective
laws in some jurisdictions and claims of intellectual property
infringement all create risks, and added costs, that can
adversely affect the operation and results of the companys
studio entertainment operations, despite the companys
strong efforts to protect its intellectual property rights
throughout the united states and other key markets. (in this
connection, please also note the discussion under consumer
products competition and intellectual property
protection below.)
consumer products
the consumer products segment licenses the
companys characters and other intellectual property to
manufacturers, retailers, show promoters and publishers
throughout the world. character merchandising and publications
licensing promotes the companys films and television
programs, as well as the companys other operations.
company subsidiaries also engage in retail, direct mail and
online distribution of products based on the companys
characters and films through the disney store, disney catalog
and disneystore.com, respectively; publish books, magazines and
comics worldwide; and produce and license computer software and
video games for the entertainment market.
character merchandise and publications
licensing
the companys worldwide licensing activities
generate royalties, which are usually based on a fixed
percentage of the wholesale or retail selling price of the
licensees products. the company licenses characters based
upon both traditional and newly created film, television and
other properties. character merchandise categories that have
been licensed include apparel, toys, gifts, home furnishings and
housewares, consumer electronics, stationery, sporting goods and
food, beverage and packaged goods. publication categories that
have been licensed include childrens books,
continuity-series books, book sets, art and picture books and
magazines.
in addition to receiving licensing fees, the
company is actively involved in the development and approval of
licensed merchandise and in the conceptualization, development,
writing and illustration of licensed publications. we
continually seek to create new characters to be used in licensed
products.
disney stores
the company markets disney-related products
directly through its retail facilities operated under the
disney store name. these facilities are generally
located in leading shopping malls and similar retail complexes.
the stores carry a wide variety of disney merchandise and
promote other businesses of the company. during fiscal 2002, we
opened one new store in each of the european, japanese and asia/
pacific regions and closed 90stores worldwide. the total
number of stores was 560 as of september30, 2002
(429stores domestically and 131stores
internationally). the company expects to close additional stores
in the future. in addition, the company sold 46 stores to
oriental landco., ltd., the owner and operator of the
tokyo disney resort, during the year, concurrently entering into
a license agreement pursuant to which a company subsidiary
receives royalties based on the sold stores performance.
books and magazines
the company publishes books in the united states
and europe for children and adults as part of disney publishing
worldwide and hyperion, respectively. the company also produces
several magazines, including family fun, disney adventures,
disney and discover, a general science magazine. the
company also holds a 50% equity interest in usweekly,
a weekly mass market magazine.
disney interactive
disney interactive develops, markets, licenses
and distributes globally a variety of interactive entertainment,
educational and sports computer software and video games.
-14-
table of contents
direct marketing
the direct marketing business operates the disney
catalog and disneystore.com, which market disney-themed
merchandise through the direct mail and online channels,
respectively. offerings include merchandise developed
exclusively for the disney catalog and disneystore.com as well
as products from disney store, other internal disney units and
disney licensees. the catalog and online site are integrated,
where appropriate, with disney store in product selection,
design and marketing efforts. the disney catalog also operates
its own retail outlet stores for the purpose of selling
overstock and other merchandise.
other activities
the company also produces and licenses its
animation cel art as well as produces, markets and distributes
other animation-related artwork and collectibles.
competition and intellectual property
protection
the company competes in its character
merchandising and other licensing, publishing, interactive and
retail activities with other licensors, publishers and retailers
of character, brand and celebrity names. although public
information is limited, we believe the company is the largest
worldwide licensor of character-based merchandise and
producer/distributor of childrens film-related products.
operating results for the licensing and retail distribution
business are influenced by seasonal consumer purchasing behavior
and by the timing and performance of animated theatrical
releases.
the companys licensing businesses, as well
as its studio entertainment and theme park and resort
operations, are affected by the companys ability to
exploit and protect its intellectual property, including
trademarks, trade names, copyrights, patents and trade secrets,
throughout the world. as a result, domestic and foreign laws
promoting or limiting intellectual property rights may have
significant impacts on some of the companys operations. in
the united states, for example, the 1998 sonny bono copyright
term extension act provided extended copyright protection for
certain older properties currently licensed or otherwise
exploited by the company, which otherwise might lose such
protection in the near future. the constitutionality of this act
has been challenged, however, and its validity is currently
under review by the u.s.supreme court. if the act is
overturned, the company would have shorter copyright protection
for its intellectual properties, although in many cases
trademark or other protections might still be available.
copyright and trademark protections are limited
or even unavailable in some foreign countries, and preventing
unauthorized use of the companys intellectual properties
can be difficult even in countries with substantial legal
protections. in addition, new technologies have facilitated
piracy of the companys copyrighted works, including motion
pictures, television programming and sound recordings, by such
means as internet peer-to-peer file sharing and personal video
recorders that permit ad stripping and the unauthorized copying
of motion pictures and television programs. the company devotes
significant resources to protecting its intellectual properties
in the united states and other key world markets.
in addition, the companys businesses that
rely on the exploitation of intellectual property are subject to
the risk of challenges by third parties claiming infringement of
their proprietary rights. irrespective of their validity, such
claims may result in substantial costs and diversion of
resources, which could have an adverse effect on our operations.
item 2.properties
the walt disney world resort, disneyland park and
other properties of the company and its subsidiaries are
described in item1 under the caption parks and resorts.
film library properties are described in item1 under
the caption studio entertainment. radio and television
stations owned by the company are described under the caption
media networks.
-15-
table of contents
a subsidiary of the company owns approximately
51acres of land and 1.9million square feet of
office, studio, and warehouse space in burbank, california, on
which the companys studios and executive and
administrative offices are located. the studio facilities are
used for the production of both live-action and animated motion
pictures and television products. in addition, company
subsidiaries lease approximately 1.1million square feet of
office and warehouse space and own one 400,000square foot
building in burbank, which are used for certain studio and
corporate activities.
a subsidiary of the company owns approximately
2.5million square feet of office and warehouse buildings
on approximately 115 acres in glendale, california. the
buildings are used for the companys operations and also
contain space leased to third parties. subsidiaries of the
company also lease approximately 316,000square feet of
office and warehouse space in glendale, which is used for the
companys operations.
a subsidiary of the company owns approximately
22acres of land in los angeles, california, on which
production, technical, and studio facilities are located. a
subsidiary of the company also has a long-term lease on a
theater in los angeles, and owns space adjacent to the theater.
the companys media networks segment
corporate offices and technical operations are located in
buildings owned by a subsidiary of the company in new york city,
totaling approximately 1.5million square feet. other
subsidiaries of the company also have long-term leases on a
theater in new york city which is used for the companys
live theatrical productions, and a studio facility in times
square which is used for television broadcasting. in addition,
subsidiaries of the company lease approximately 912,000 square
feet of office, studio, and warehouse space in new york city.
the companys 80%-owned subsidiary, espn, inc., owns espn
plaza in bristol, connecticut, from which it conducts its
technical operations. the company owns and leases other
broadcast studios, offices, and broadcast transmitter sites
elsewhere.
subsidiaries of the company lease space elsewhere
in the united states and canada, including retail space for the
disney stores and office and warehouse space for the
companys operations. the companys acquisition of fox
family worldwide, inc. in october 2001 included approximately
523,000 square feet of domestic owned and leased facilities.
a u.k. subsidiary of the company owns buildings
on a four-acre parcel under long-term lease in london, england.
the mixed-use development consists of office space occupied by
subsidiary operations and office and retail space leased by
third parties. in 2002, a subsidiary of the company disposed of
the non-disney-occupied sections of the parcel, including a
retail mall and a development site. company subsidiaries also
lease office and retail space in other parts of europe and in
asia, australia, and latin america.
item 3.legal proceedings
in re the walt disney company derivative
litigation. william and geraldine
brehm and 13other individuals filed an amended and
consolidated complaint on may28, 1997 in the delaware
court of chancery seeking, among other things, a declaratory
judgment against each of the companys directors as of
december 1996 that the companys 1995 employment agreement
with its former president, michaels. ovitz, was void, or
alternatively that mr.ovitzs termination should be
deemed a termination for cause and any severance
payments to him forfeited. on october8, 1998, the delaware
court of chancery dismissed all counts of the amended complaint.
plaintiffs appealed, and on february9, 2000, the supreme
court of delaware affirmed the dismissal but ruled also that
plaintiffs should be permitted to file an amended complaint in
accordance with the courts opinion. the plaintiffs filed
their amended complaint on january3, 2002. the
companys directors have moved to dismiss the amended
complaint.
similar or identical claims have also been filed
by the same plaintiffs (other than william and geraldine brehm)
in the superior court of the state of california, los angeles
county, beginning
-16-
table of contents
with a claim filed by richard and david kaplan on
january3, 1997. on may18, 1998, an additional claim
was filed in the same california court by dorothyl.
greenfield. on september25, 2001, ms.greenfield
sought leave to amend her claim, but withdrew her request to
amend on january3, 2002. all of the california claims have
been consolidated and stayed pending final resolution of the
delaware proceedings.
all pro sports camps, inc., nicholas stracick
and edward russell v. walt disney company, walt disney world
co., disney development company and stevenb.
wilson. on september16, 2002,
the company and the plaintiffs settled this previously reported
lawsuit, which the plaintiffs brought in 1997 in the circuit
court for orange county, florida.
stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney
company. in this lawsuit, filed on
february27, 1991 and pending in the los angeles county
superior court, the plaintiff claims that a company subsidiary
defrauded it and breached a 1983 licensing agreement with
respect to certain winnie the pooh properties, by failing to
account for and pay royalties on revenues earned from the sale
of winnie the pooh movies on videocassette and from the
exploitation of winnie the pooh merchandising rights. the
plaintiff seeks damages for the licensees alleged breaches
as well as confirmation of the plaintiffs interpretation
of the licensing agreement with respect to future activities.
the plaintiff also seeks the right to terminate the agreement on
the basis of the alleged breaches. the company disputes that the
plaintiff is entitled to any damages or other relief of any
kind, including termination of the licensing agreement. the
claim is currently scheduled for trial in march 2003. if each of
the plaintiffs claims were to be confirmed in a final
judgment, damages as argued by the plaintiff could total as much
as several hundred million dollars and adversely impact the
value to the company of any future exploitation of the licensed
rights. however, given the number of outstanding issues and the
uncertainty of their ultimate disposition, management is unable
to predict the magnitude of any potential determination of the
plaintiffs claims.
milne and disney enterprises, inc. v. stephen
slesinger, inc. on november5,
2002, clare milne, the granddaughter of a.a.milne,
author of the winnie the pooh books, and the companys
subsidiary disney enterprises, inc. filed a complaint against
stephen slesinger, inc. (ssi) in the united states
district court for the central district of california. on
november4, 2002, ms.milne served notices to ssi and
the companys subsidiary terminating
a.a.milnes prior grant of rights to winnie the
pooh, effective november5, 2004, and granted all of those
rights to the companys subsidiary. in their lawsuit,
ms.milne and the companys subsidiary seek a
declaratory judgment, under united states copyright law, that
ms.milnes termination notices were valid; that
ssis rights to winnie the pooh in the united states will
terminate effective november5, 2004; that upon termination
of ssis rights in the united states, the 1983 licensing
agreement that is the subject of the stephen slesinger, inc.
v. the walt disney company lawsuit will terminate by
operation of law; and that, as of november5, 2004, ssi
will be entitled to no further royalties for uses of winnie the
pooh.
kohn v. the walt disney company et
al. on august15, 2002, aaron
kohn filed a class action lawsuit against the company, its chief
executive officer and its chief financial officer in the united
states district court for the central district of california on
behalf of a putative class consisting of purchasers of the
companys common stock between august15, 1997 and
may15, 2002. subsequently, at least nine substantially
identical lawsuits were also filed in the same court, each
alleging that the defendants violated federal securities laws by
not disclosing the pendency and potential implications of the
stephen slesinger, inc. lawsuit described above prior to
the companys filing of its quarterly report on
form10-q in may 2002. the plaintiffs claim that this
alleged nondisclosure constituted a fraud on the market that
artificially inflated the companys stock price, and
contend that a decline in the stock price resulted from the may
2002 disclosure. the plaintiffs seek compensatory damages and/or
rescission for themselves and all members of their defined
class. several of the plaintiffs have filed motions asking the
court to appoint lead plaintiffs and counsel, and to consolidate
the related actions into a single case.
-17-
table of contents
management believes that it is not currently
possible to estimate the impact, if any, that the ultimate
resolution of these matters will have on the companys
results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
the company, together with, in some instances,
certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant or
co-defendant in various other legal actions involving copyright,
breach of contract and various other claims incident to the
conduct of its businesses. management does not expect the
company to suffer any material liability by reason of such
actions.
sec proceeding. in
august 2002, the company filed an amendment to the
companys form10-k for fiscal year 2001 reporting the
employment of relatives of certain company directors by company
subsidiaries and, in one case, an entity in which the company
has an indirect 50% interest. the company has been notified by
the u.s. securities and exchange commission that the commission
is conducting an investigation into the amendment and related
matters.
item 4.submission of matters to a vote
of security holders
no matters were submitted to a vote of
shareholders during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year
covered by this report.
executive officers of the company
the executive officers of the company are elected
each year at the organizational meeting of the board of
directors, which follows the annual meeting of the shareholders,
and at other meetings as appropriate. each of the executive
officers has been employed by the company in the position or
positions indicated in the list and pertinent notes below.
messrs.eisner and disney have been employed by the company
as executive officers for more than five years.
at september30, 2002, the executive
officers of the company were as follows:
executive
name
age
title
officer since
michael d. eisner
chairman of the board and chief executive officer
roy e. disney
vice chairman of the board
robert a. iger
president and chief operating officer1
thomas o. staggs
senior executive vice president and chief
financial officer2
peter e. murphy
senior executive vice president and chief
strategic officer3
louis m. meisinger
executive vice president and general
counsel4
mr.iger was appointed to his present
position in january 2000, having served (from february 1999
until january 2000) as president of walt disney international
and chairman of the abc group. mr.iger previously held a
number of increasingly responsible positions at abc, inc. and
its predecessor capital cities/ abc, inc., culminating in
service as president and chief operating officer of abc, inc.
from 1994 to 1999.
mr.staggs joined the companys
strategic planning operation in 1990 and was named senior vice
president-strategic planning and development of the company in
1995. in may 1998, he was named executive vice president and
chief financial officer. in october 1999, mr.staggs was
promoted to senior executive vice president. mr.staggs is
also a member of the supervisory board of euro disney s.c.a. and
chairman of the supervisory board of fox kids europe n.v., a
subsidiary of the company whose shares are publicly traded in
europe.
mr.murphy joined the companys
strategic planning operation in 1988 and was named senior vice
president-strategic planning and development of the company in
1995. from august 1997
-18-
table of contents
to may 1998 he served as chief financial officer
of abc, inc. in may 1998 he was named executive vice president
and chief strategic officer. in october 1999, mr.murphy
was promoted to senior executive vice president. mr.murphy
is also a member of the supervisory board of fox kids europe n.v.
mr.meisinger was named executive vice
president and general counsel of the company in july 1998. prior
to joining the company, he was a senior partner with the law
firm of troop, meisinger, steuber & pasich in los angeles,
california, a firm he co-founded in 1975. mr.meisinger
specialized in the litigation of complex entertainment,
commercial and securities matters.
-19-
table of contents
part ii
item5.
market for the companys common stock and
related stockholder matters
the companys common stock is listed on the
new york and pacific stock exchanges under the ticker
symboldis.
on march20, 2001, the company converted all
of its outstanding internet group common stock (nyse
symboldig) into disney common stock. each outstanding
share of internet group common stock was converted into 0.19353
of a share of disney common stock, resulting in the issuance of
approximately 8.6million shares of disney common stock.
the following sets forth the high and low composite closing
sales prices for the fiscal periods indicated.
sales price
high
low
4th quarter
$
19.79
$
13.77
3rd quarter
25.00
18.90
2nd quarter
24.51
20.50
1st quarter
22.54
17.90
4th quarter
$
28.74
$
16.98
3rd quarter
34.50
27.10
2nd quarter
33.38
26.91
1st quarter
41.38
26.44
the company declared a dividend of $0.21 per
disney share on december3, 2002 related to fiscal 2002,
and a dividend of $0.21 per disney share on november27,
2001, with respect to fiscal 2001.
as of september30, 2002, the approximate
number of record holders of common stock was 995,000.
-20-
table of contents
item6.
selected financial data
(in millions, except per share data)
2002(1)
2001(2)
2000(3)
1999(4)
1998(5)
statements of income
revenues
$
25,329
$
25,172
$
25,325
$
23,373
$
22,919
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes
1,236
1,300
1,850
per share
earnings (loss)per disney share:
diluted
$
0.60
$
(0.02
)
$
0.57
$
0.62
$
0.89
basic
0.61
(0.02
)
0.58
0.63
0.91
dividends
$
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.20
balance sheets
total assets
$
50,045
$
43,810
$
45,027
$
43,679
$
41,378
borrowings
14,130
9,769
9,461
11,693
11,685
stockholders equity
23,445
22,672
24,100
20,975
19,388
statements of cash flows
cash provided by operations
$
2,286
$
3,048
$
3,755
$
2,568
$
1,780
investing activities
(3,176
)
(2,015
)
(1,091
)
(2,290
)
(2,330
)
financing activities
1,511
(1,257
)
(2,236
)
(1)
the 2002 results include a $216million
pre-tax investment gain and a $34million pre-tax gain on
the sale of the disney stores in japan. these items had a $0.07
and $0.01 impact on diluted earnings per share, respectively.
see notes4 and3 to the consolidated financial
statements.
(2)
the 2001 results include cumulative effect of
accounting changes related to film and derivative accounting
changes totaling $228million and $50million,
respectively and restructuring charges of $1.5billion. see
notes2 and15 to the consolidated financial
statements. the diluted earnings per disney share impact of
these items were $0.11, $0.02 and $0.52, respectively.
(3)
the 2000 results include pre-tax gains of
$243million, $93million and $153million from
the sale of fairchild publications, eurosport and ultraseek,
respectively. see note3 to the consolidated financial
statements. the impact of income taxes substantially offset
certain of the gains. the diluted earnings per disney share
impact of these items were $0.00, $0.02 and $0.01, respectively.
the results also include a $92million restructuring and
impairment charge. the diluted earnings per disney share impact
of the charge was $0.01. see note15 to the consolidated
financial statements.
(4)
the 1999 results include a gain from the sale of
starwave corporation of $345million, equity in infoseek
loss of $322million and restructuring and impairment
charges of $172million. the diluted earnings per disney
share impact of these items were $0.10, ($0.09) and ($0.05),
respectively.
(5)
the 1998 results include restructuring and
impairment charges totaling $83million. the diluted
earnings per disney share impact of the charges was$0.03.
-21-
table of contents
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
consolidated results
(in millions, except per share data)
as-reported results of operations
revenues
$
25,329
$
25,172
$
25,325
costs and expenses
(22,924
)
(21,573
)
(21,567
)
amortization of intangible assets
(21
)
(767
)
(1,233
)
gain on sale of businesses
net interest expense and other
(453
)
(417
)
(497
)
equity in the income of investees
restructuring and impairment charges
(1,454
)
(92
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
2,190
1,283
2,633
income taxes
(853
)
(1,059
)
(1,606
)
minority interests
(101
)
(104
)
(107
)
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes
1,236
cumulative effect of accounting changes:
film accounting
(228
)
derivative accounting
(50
)
net income (loss)
$
1,236
$
(158
)
$
earnings (loss)attributed to disney common
stock(1)
$
1,236
$
(41
)
$
1,196
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting changes attributed to disney common
stock:(1)
diluted
$
0.60
$
0.11
$
0.57
basic
$
0.61
$
0.11
$
0.58
cumulative effect of accounting changes:
film accounting
$
$
(0.11
)
$
derivative accounting
(0.02
)
$
$
(0.13
)
$
earnings (loss)per share attributed to
disney common stock:(1)
diluted
$
0.60
$
(0.02
)
$
0.57
basic
$
0.61
$
(0.02
)
$
0.58
earnings attributed to disney common stock before
the cumulative effect of accounting changes adjusted for the
impact of sfas142 in fiscal 2001 and 2000(1)
$
1,236
$
$
2,157
earnings per share attributed to disney common
stock before the cumulative effect of accounting changes
adjusted for the impact of sfas142 in fiscal 2001 and
2000:(1)
diluted
$
0.60
$
0.42
$
1.03
basic
$
0.61
$
0.43
$
1.04
-22-
table of contents
as-reported results of operations
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding for the disney common stock:
diluted
2,044
2,100
2,103
basic
2,040
2,085
2,074
loss attributed to internet group common stock
n/a
$
(117
)
$
(276
)
loss per share attributed to internet group
common stock (basic and diluted)
n/a
$
(2.72
)
$
(6.18
)
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding for the internet group common stock
n/a
(1)
including disneys retained interest in the
internet group. disneys retained interest in the internet
group reflects 100% of internet group losses through
november17, 1999, approximately 72% for the period from
november18, 1999 through january28, 2001 (the last
date prior to the announcement of the conversion of the internet
group common stock) and 100% thereafter.
consolidated results
2002 vs. 2001
net income for the year was $1.2billion,
compared to a net loss of $158million in the prior-year
period. net income and earnings per share attributed to disney
common stock were $1.2billion and $0.60, respectively, for
the current year, compared to a net loss and loss per share of
$41million and $0.02 in the prior year. results for the
current year include a pre-tax gain ($216million or $0.07
per share) on the sale of the remaining shares of knight-ridder,
inc., a pre-tax gain on the sale of the disney store business in
japan ($34million or $0.01 per share), operations of abc
family acquired on october24, 2001, incremental interest
expense for borrowings related to that acquisition and the
cessation of amortization of goodwill and certain intangible
assets, due to the adoption of statement of financial standards
no.142, goodwill and other intangible assets
(sfas142) effective october1, 2001. the prior year
included restructuring and impairment charges ($1.5billion
or $0.52 per share) and the cumulative effect of accounting
changes ($278million or $0.13 per share). earnings and
earnings per share attributed to disney common stock before the
cumulative effect of accounting changes adjusted for the impact
of sfas142 for the prior-year were $891million and
$0.42, respectively.
excluding the year-over-year impact of the
non-recurring items discussed above, results for the year were
driven by lower segment operating income and equity in income of
investees and higher net interest expense and other. decreased
segment operating income reflected lower media networks and
parks and resorts results, partially offset by higher studio
entertainment results. lower equity in the income of investees
reflected the write-down of an investment in a latin american
cable operator, decreases at the cable investments resulting
from the soft advertising market and higher advertising costs at
lifetime television.
net interest expense and other is detailed below:
year ended september30,
interest expense
$
(723
)
$
(544
)
$
(599
)
interest income
investment income
net interest expense and other
$
(453
)
$
(417
)
$
(497
)
-23-
table of contents
interest expense increased to $723million
due to incremental borrowings in connection with the abc family
acquisition. higher interest expense was partially offset by
increased investment income due to the gain on the sale of
knight-ridder shares.
the effective tax rate decreased from 82.5% in
fiscal 2001 to 38.9% in fiscal 2002 due to nondeductible
impairment charges related to intangible assets taken in fiscal
2001, and the cessation of nondeductible amortization of
goodwill in fiscal 2002.
2001 vs. 2000
as-reported net loss was $158million
compared to net income of $920million in fiscal 2000. net
loss and loss per share attributed to disney common stock were
$41million and $0.02, respectively, compared to net income
and earnings per share attributed to disney common stock of
$1.2billion and $0.57, respectively, in the prior year.
as-reported net loss in fiscal 2001 includes charges from the
cumulative effect of accounting changes ($278million or
$0.13 per disney share) and restructuring and impairment charges
($1.5billion or $0.52 per disney share). as-reported
results also include pre-tax gains on the sale of infoseek japan
k.k. ($22million) in fiscal 2001, and fairchild
publications ($243million), ultraseek corporation
($153million) and eurosport ($93million) in fiscal
2000.
excluding the charges and gains mentioned above,
earnings per share attributed to disney common stock was $0.63
and $0.56 for the fiscal 2001 and 2000, respectively. results
for fiscal 2001 also reflected lower amortization of intangible
assets and net interest expense and other, and higher equity in
the income of investees, partially offset by decreased segment
operating income and higher corporate and unallocated shared
expenses. lower amortization of intangible assets reflected the
write-off of intangible assets associated with the closure of
the go.com portal business in the second quarter of fiscal 2001,
certain intangible assets becoming fully amortized in the first
quarter of fiscal 2001 and a reduction in intangible assets
related to the sale of fairchild publications, ultraseek and
eurosport in fiscal 2000. decreases in net interest expense and
other were due to lower interest rates and lower average debt
balances throughout most of fiscal 2001, partially offset by
increased investment income due to gains on the sale of certain
investments. higher equity in the income of investees reflected
improved results from cable equity investments including
lifetime television, the history channel and a&e television
and certain international cable equity investments, partially
offset by start-up losses incurred in connection with new
investments. decreased segment operating income reflected lower
media networks and parks and resorts results, partially offset
by improvements at studio entertainment and consumer products.
increased corporate and unallocated shared expenses were driven
by costs associated with several strategic initiatives designed
to improve overall company-wide efficiency and promote the
disney brand.
the effective tax rate increased from 61.0% in
fiscal 2000 to 82.5% in fiscal 2001 primarily due to
nondeductible impairment charges related to intangible assets
taken in fiscal 2001.
-24-
table of contents
restructuring and impairment charges
the company recorded restructuring and impairment
charges for the years ended september30, 2001 and 2000
summarized as follows (in millions):
go.com intangible assets impairment
$
$
go.com severance, fixed asset write-offs and other
investment impairments
workforce reduction and other
chicago disneyquest closure
asset impairment
disney store closures
total restructuring and impairment charges
$
1,454
$
the $111million of costs associated with
the workforce reduction consist primarily of severance costs and
write-offs of idled facilities. as of september30, 2002,
the company had substantially completed its workforce reduction.
pro forma results of operation
the company acquired fox family worldwide, inc.,
subsequently re-named abcfamily worldwide
(abcfamily) on october24, 2001. the acquisition
resulted in a $5.2billion increase in borrowings,
consisting of outstanding debt of abcfamily and new
short-and long-term debt issuances. pro forma net interest and
other has been adjusted as if these incremental borrowings had
been outstanding as of the beginning of fiscal 2001. in march
2001, the company closed the go.com portal business and
converted its internet group common stock into disney common
stock. additionally, on october1, 2001, the company
adopted sfas142, and accordingly no longer amortizes
substantially all of its intangible assets. to enhance
comparability, the unaudited pro forma information that follows
presents consolidated results of operations as if the
abcfamily acquisition, the conversion of the internet
group common stock, the closure of the go.com portal business
and the adoption of sfas142 (see notes3 and 6 to the
consolidated financial statements) had occurred at the beginning
of fiscal 2001. the unaudited pro forma information is not
necessarily reflective of the results of operations had these
events actually occurred at the beginning of fiscal 2001, nor is
it necessarily indicative of future results.
-25-
table of contents
management believes that pro forma operating
results provide additional information useful in analyzing the
underlying business results. however, pro forma operating
results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute
for, as-reported results of operations.
consolidated results
(unaudited; in millions, except per share data)
pro forma results of operations
% change
revenues
$
25,360
$
25,790
(2
)%
costs and expenses
(22,951
)
(21,982
)
(4
)%
amortization of intangible assets
(21
)
(23
)
%
gain on sale of business(1)
%
net interest expense and other
(465
)
(637
)
%
equity in the income of investees
(27
)%
restructuring and impairment charges
(576
)
n/m
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
2,182
2,904
(25
)%
income taxes
(850
)
(1,128
)
%
minority interests
(101
)
(103
)
%
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes
1,231
1,673
(26
)%
cumulative effect of accounting changes:
film accounting
(280
)
n/m
derivative accounting
(50
)
n/m
net income
$
1,231
$
1,343
(8
)%
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting changes (basic and diluted):(2)
$
0.60
$
0.80
(25
)%
earnings before the cumulative effect of
accounting changes, excluding investment gain in fiscal 2002,
restructuring and impairment charges and gain on the sale of
businesses
$
1,074
$
2,041
(47
)%
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting changes, excluding investment gain in fiscal 2002,
restructuring and impairment charges and gain on the sale of
businesses:
diluted
$
0.53
$
0.97
(45
)%
basic
$
0.53
$
0.98
(46
)%
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding:
diluted
2,044
2,104
basic
2,040
2,089
(1)
includes the gain on sale of the companys
disney store operations in japan in 2002 and the gain on sale of
infoseek japan k.k. in 2001.
(2)
the per share impacts of film and derivative
accounting changes for the year were $(0.13) and $(0.02),
respectively.
-26-
table of contents
the following table provides a reconciliation of
as-reported diluted earnings per share attributed to disney
common stock to pro forma earnings per share before the
cumulative effect of accounting changes, excluding investment
gain in fiscal 2002 and restructuring and impairment charges and
gains on the sale of business.
year ended
september 30,
(unaudited)
as-reported diluted earnings (loss)per
share attributed to disney common stock
$
0.60
$
(0.02
)
adjustment to exclude the cumulative effect of
accounting changes
0.13
adjustment to reflect the impact of the new
sfas142 accounting rules
0.31
as-reported diluted earnings per share attributed
to disney common stock before the cumulative effect of
accounting changes adjusted for the impact of sfas142 in
fiscal 2001
0.60
0.42
adjustment to attribute 100% of internet group
operating results to disney common stock (72% included in
as-reported amounts)
(0.06
)
adjustment to exclude go.com restructuring and
impairment charges
0.41
adjustment to exclude pre-closure go.com portal
operating results
0.04
adjustment to include abc family operations
(0.01
)
pro forma diluted earnings per share before the
cumulative effect of accounting changes
0.60
0.80
adjustment to exclude restructuring and
impairment charges
0.17
adjustment to exclude gain on the sale of business
(0.01
)
adjustment to exclude fiscal 2002 investment gain
(0.07
)
pro forma diluted earnings per share before the
cumulative effect of accounting changes, excluding investment
gain in fiscal 2002 and restructuring and impairment charges and
gain on the sale of businesses
$
0.53
$
0.97
the impact of the gain on sale of business on
fiscal 2001 and the 2002 pro forma impact of abcfamily
each had less than $0.01 impact.
earnings per share amounts for fiscal 2002 do not
add due to rounding.
business segment results
pro forma
as reported
(unaudited)
%
(in millions)
change
revenues:
media networks
$
9,733
$
9,569
$
9,836
$
9,763
$
10,157
(4
)%
parks and resorts
6,465
7,004
6,809
6,465
7,004
(8
)%
studio entertainment
6,691
6,009
5,918
6,691
6,009
%
consumer products
2,440
2,590
2,762
2,441
2,620
(7
)%
$
25,329
$
25,172
$
25,325
$
25,360
$
25,790
(2
)%
segment operating income:
media networks
$
$
1,758
$
1,985
$
$
1,949
(49
)%
parks and resorts
1,169
1,586
1,615
1,169
1,586
(26
)%
studio entertainment
%
consumer products
(6
)%
$
2,822
$
4,005
$
4,112
$
2,826
$
4,214
(33
)%
-27-
table of contents
the company evaluates the performance of its
operating segments based on segment operating income. the
following table reconciles segment operating income to income
before income taxes, minority interests and the cumulative
effect of accounting changes.
pro forma
as reported
(unaudited)
(in millions)
segment operating income
$
2,822
$
4,005
$
4,112
$
2,826
$
4,214
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
(417
)
(406
)
(354
)
(417
)
(406
)
amortization of intangible assets
(21
)
(767
)
(1,233
)
(21
)
(23
)
gain on sale of businesses
net interest expense and other
(453
)
(417
)
(497
)
(465
)
(637
)
equity in the income of investees
restructuring and impairment charges
(1,454
)
(92
)
(576
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
$
2,190
$
1,283
$
2,633
$
2,182
$
2,904
segment earnings before interest, income taxes,
depreciation and amortization (ebitda)is as follows:
pro forma
as reported
(unaudited)
(in millions)
media networks
$
1,166
$
1,934
$
2,154
$
1,171
$
2,134
parks and resorts
1,817
2,190
2,197
1,817
2,190
studio entertainment
consumer products
$
3,754
$
4,922
$
5,026
$
3,759
$
5,140
management believes that segment ebitda provides
additional information useful in analyzing the underlying
business results. however, segment ebitda is a non-gaap
financial metric and should be considered in addition to, not as
a substitute for, reported segment operating income.
media networks
the following table provides supplemental revenue
and segment operating income detail for the media networks
segment (in millions).
pro forma
(unaudited)
as reported
revenues:
broadcasting
$
5,064
$
5,945
$
6,327
cable networks
4,699
4,212
3,509
$
9,763
$
10,157
$
9,836
segment operating income:
broadcasting
$
(36
)
$
$
cable networks
1,026
1,166
1,015
$
$
1,949
$
1,985
-28-
table of contents
2002 vs. 2001
on a pro forma basis, revenues decreased 4%, or
$394million, to $9.8billion, reflecting a decrease
of 15%, or $881million, at broadcasting, partially offset
by an increase of 12%, or $487million, at the cable
networks. the decrease at broadcasting was driven by declines at
the abc television network and the companys owned
television stations due to lower ratings and lower advertising
rates. additionally, the prior year included revenues from a
non-recurring sale of a film library at abcfamily.
increases at the cable networks were driven by higher affiliate
revenues reflecting higher rates at espn and subscriber growth
at both espn and the international disney channels, partially
offset by lower advertising revenues due to the soft advertising
market and lower revenues from adelphia communications company
(adelphia) in the united states and kirchmedia&
company (kirch) in germany as a result of their financial
difficulties.
on a proforma basis, segment operating
income decreased 49%, or $959million, to
$1.0billion, driven by decreases of $819million at
broadcasting, primarily due to decreased revenues. cable
operating income decreased 12%, or $140million, as revenue
gains were more than offset by cost increases. costs and
expenses increased 7%, or $565million, driven by higher
sports programming costs at espn, principally for nfl
broadcasts, and increased advertising costs at the cable
networks, partially offset by lower costs at the internet group
and proceeds from an insurance settlement.
as-reported revenues increased 2%, or
$164million, to $9.7billion and segment operating
income decreased 44% to $1.0billion. as-reported amounts
include a partial period of abc family operations in the current
period and losses associated with the go.com portal (which was
closed on january29, 2001) in the prior-year period.
the company has various contractual commitments
for the purchase of broadcast rights for sports and other
programming, including the national football league (nfl),
national basketball association (nba), major league baseball
(mlb), national hockey league (nhl)and various college
football conference and bowl games. the costs of these contracts
have increased significantly in recent years. we have
implemented a variety of strategies, including marketing
efforts, to reduce the impact of the higher costs. the impact of
these contracts on the companys results over the remaining
term of the contracts is dependent upon a number of factors,
including the strength of advertising markets, effectiveness of
marketing efforts and the size of viewer audiences.
the costs of these contracts are charged to
expense based on the ratio of each periods gross revenues
to estimated total gross revenues over the remaining contract
period. the companys contract to broadcast the nfl is for
an eight year term commencing with the 1998 season. the initial
five year period is non-cancelable with the remaining three
years renewable at the option of the nfl. programming rights
costs for the initial five year period have been charged to
expense based upon the ratio of current periods gross
revenues to estimated total revenues for this period of time.
estimates of total gross revenues can change significantly and,
accordingly, they are reviewed periodically and amortization and
carrying amounts are adjusted, if necessary. such adjustments
could have a material effect on results of operations in future
periods.
-29-
table of contents
the company has investments in cable operations
that are accounted for as unconsolidated equity investments. the
table below presents operating income from cable television
activities, which comprise the cable networks and the
companys cable equity investments (in millions).
pro forma (unaudited)
% change
operating income:
cable networks
$
1,026
$
1,166
(12
)%
equity investments:
a&e television and lifetime television
(14
)%
other
(27
)%
operating income from cable television activities
1,764
2,055
(14
)%
partner share of operating income
(618
)
(712
)
%
disney share of operating income
$
1,146
$
1,343
(15
)%
note: operating income from cable television
activities presented in this table represents 100% of both the
companys owned cable businesses and its cable equity
investees. the disney share of operating income represents the
companys ownership interest in cable television operating
income. cable networks are reported in segment operating
income in the statements of income. equity investments are
reported in equity in the income of investees in the
statements of income.
we believe that operating income from cable
television activities provides additional information useful in
analyzing the underlying business results. however, operating
income from cable television activities is a non-gaap financial
metric and should be considered in addition to, not as a
substitute for, segment operating income.
the companys share of cable television
operating income decreased 15%, or $197million, to
$1.1billion. the decrease was driven by lower revenues due
to the weak advertising market at both espn and the cable equity
affiliates, higher sports programming costs at espn and higher
advertising expense at the cable equity affiliates, partially
offset by higher affiliate revenues at espn. additionally, the
current period reflects the write-down of an investment in a
latin american cable operator.
2001 vs. 2000
on an as-reported basis, revenues decreased 3%,
or $267million, to $9.6billion, driven by decreases
of $601million at broadcasting, partially offset by
increases of $334million at the cable networks. the
decrease at broadcasting was driven by lower ratings and the
soft advertising market at the abc television network and the
companys owned television stations and radio operations.
additionally, revenue declines at the television network
reflected lower sports advertising revenues due to abc airing
the super bowl in fiscal 2000. the increase at the cable
networks was driven by annual contractual rate adjustments at
espn combined with subscriber growth at espn, the disney channel
domestically and internationally, partially offset by the soft
advertising market during fiscal 2001. subscriber growth at the
disney channel reflected increasing satellite (dbs)and
digital subscribers and the continuing conversion of the disney
channel from a premium to a basic service.
segment operating income decreased 11%, or
$227million, to $1.8billion, driven by a decrease of
$275million at broadcasting resulting primarily from
decreased revenues and higher programming costs, partially
offset by an increase of $48million at the cable networks,
driven by revenue growth. costs and expenses decreased 1%, or
$40million for fiscal 2001, but increased as a percentage
of revenue. the company experienced higher programming costs at
espn, the primetime abc television network and the
companys owned television stations and radio operations
and start-up costs at the international disney channels, offset
by lower sports programming costs at the abc television network
due to higher costs for the super bowl and two additional
national football
-30-
table of contents
league (nfl)regular season games in fiscal
2000 and lower costs at the internet group due to the closure of
toysmart.com in fiscal 2000 and cost saving initiatives.
parks and resorts
2002 vs. 2001
revenues decreased 8%, or $539million, to
$6.5billion, driven primarily by decreases of
$496million at the walt disney world resort,
$40million at the disneyland resort and $24million
at disney cruise line, partially offset by increased royalties
of $52million from the tokyo disney resort. at the walt
disney world resort, decreased revenues reflected lower
attendance, guest spending and hotel occupancy driven by
decreases in international and domestic visitation resulting
from continued disruption in travel and tourism and softness in
the economy. at the disneyland resort, decreased revenues were
driven primarily by lower guest spending. lower guest spending
at both walt disney world and disneyland was driven by ticket
and other promotional programs as well as a higher mix of local
guests, who have higher annual pass usage and tend to spend less
per visit. the increased royalties at tokyo disney resort were
due to the opening of the tokyo disneysea theme park and the
tokyo disneysea hotel mira costa in the fourth quarter of the
prior year.
segment operating income decreased 26%, or
$417million, to $1.2billion, driven by revenue
declines at the walt disney world resort and disneyland resort,
partially offset by decreased costs and expenses and increased
royalties from the tokyo disney resort. costs and expenses,
which consist principally of labor, costs of merchandise, food
and beverages sold, depreciation, repairs and maintenance,
entertainment and marketing and sales expense, decreased 2%, or
$122million, driven primarily by volume decreases, reduced
marketing expenses and permanent cost reduction initiatives
across all segment businesses and the absence of pre-opening
costs for disneys california adventure. these cost
decreases were partially offset by higher employee benefit and
insurance costs.
2001 vs. 2000
revenues increased 3%, or $195million, to
$7.0billion, driven primarily by growth of
$278million at the disneyland resort, $44million
from disney cruise line and $20million in higher royalties
from tokyo disneyland, partially offset by a decrease of
$187million at the walt disney world resort. at the
disneyland resort, the opening of disneys california
adventure, downtown disney and disneys grand californian
hotel during the second quarter of fiscal 2001 drove increased
attendance, higher occupied room nights and increased guest
spending. at the walt disney world resort, decreased revenues
were driven by decreased attendance and lower occupied room
nights reflecting fiscal 2000 success of the millennium
celebration, partially offset by increased guest spending and
increased revenues at disney cruise line reflecting the strength
of the 7-day cruise package that was introduced in the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2000. both the disneyland resort and walt
disney world resort were impacted by park closures on
september11th and from lower attendance and hotel
occupancy due to cancellations and reduced travel during the
last three weeks of september2001.
segment operating income decreased 2%, or
$29million, to $1.6billion, driven by increased
costs at the disneyland resort, partially offset by revenue
growth at disneyland, continued growth at disney cruise line and
on going productivity improvements and cost reduction
initiatives at walt disney world. costs and expenses increased
4% or $224million. higher costs at the disneyland resort
were due to the opening of disneys california adventure,
downtown disney and disneys grand californian hotel.
studio entertainment
2002 vs. 2001
revenues increased 11%, or $682million, to
$6.7billion, driven by growth of $603million in
worldwide home entertainment and $76million in domestic
theatrical motion picture distribution,
-31-
table of contents
partially offset by a decline of $95million
in international theatrical motion picture distribution.
improvements in worldwide home entertainment revenues reflected
strong dvd and vhs sales driven by successful titles including
disney/ pixars monsters, inc., pearl harbor, snow white
and the seven dwarfs and cinderellaii: dreams come
true along with the success of miyazakis spirited
away in japan, which is distributed in certain markets by a
japanese subsidiary of the company. in domestic theatrical
motion picture distribution, revenue increases were driven by
the performance of monsters, inc., signs and
lilo& stitch. despite the success of
monsters, inc., decreased international theatrical motion
picture distribution revenues reflected stronger performance of
prior-year titles, which included pearl harbor, unbreakable
and dinosaur.
segment operating income increased 5%, or
$13million, to $273million, due to increases in
worldwide home entertainment, partially offset by a decline in
worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution. costs and
expenses, which consist primarily of production cost
amortization, distribution and selling expenses, product costs
and participation costs, increased 12%, or $669million,
driven by increases in worldwide home entertainment and
worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution. increased
costs in worldwide home entertainment reflected higher
marketing, distribution and participation costs due to
monsters, inc. and pearl harbor on dvd and vhs.
higher costs in worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution
reflected increased marketing and distribution costs and higher
participation costs for monsters, inc. and signs
and an aggregate $98million impairment write-down for
treasure planet, including a $74million reduction
in capitalized film production costs recorded after the film was
released on november27, 2002 (see note16 to the
consolidated financial statements).
2001 vs. 2000
revenues increased 2%, or $91million to,
$6.0billion, driven by growth of $312million in
worldwide home entertainment and $126million in stage
plays, partially offset by a decline of $306million in
worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution. improvements
in worldwide home entertainment revenues reflected strong dvd
and vhs performance driven by successful animated titles
including disney/ pixars toy story2, dinosaurs,
the emperors new groove and lady & the tramp ii
and stronger performing live-action titles including spy
kids, scary movie, gone in 60seconds and remember
the titans. growth in stage plays reflected performances of
the lion king in additional cities and improved
performance of aida. in worldwide theatrical motion
picture distribution, the success of pearl harbor, spy kids
and princess diaries, faced difficult comparisons to
fiscal 2000 titles, which included toy story2,
tarzan, dinosaur, scary movie and the sixth sense.
segment operating income increased
$134million, to $260million, due to increases in
worldwide home entertainment and stage plays. costs and expenses
decreased 1%, or $43million, driven by decreases in
worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution, partially
offset by increases in worldwide home entertainment. in
worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution, cost decreases
reflected lower distribution expenses and production costs
amortization in fiscal 2001 as well as higher participation
expenses in fiscal 2000, due to toy story2 and
the sixth sense. the increased costs in worldwide home
entertainment reflected higher distribution expense and
production costs amortization driven by an increase in vhs and
dvd unit sales and higher participation costs due to the success
of toy story2 in fiscal 2001. stage plays operating
expenses also increased due to more productions in
fiscal2001.
consumer products
2002 vs. 2001
on a pro forma basis, revenues decreased 7%, or
$179million, to $2.4billion, reflecting declines of
$81million in merchandise licensing, $63million at
disney interactive and $57million at the disney store,
partially offset by increases of $22million in publishing
operations. the decline in merchandise licensing reflected lower
guarantee payments in the current year and soft merchandise
licensing performance domestically and internationally. lower
revenues at disney interactive were due to
-32-
table of contents
weaker performing personal computer cd-rom and
video game titles. at the disney store, higher comparative store
sales were more than offset by lower revenues due to the sale of
the disney store business in japan during the third quarter of
the current year as well as the impact of store closures
domestically. higher publishing revenues were driven by the
successful releases during the current year including lucky
man: amemoir by michaelj. fox and hope
through heartsongs.
on a pro forma basis, segment operating income
decreased 6%, or $25million, to $394million,
primarily driven by declines in merchandise licensing and at
disney interactive, partially offset by increases at the disney
store and disney catalog. costs and expenses, which consist
primarily of labor, product costs, including product development
costs, distribution and selling expenses and leasehold expenses,
decreased 7% or $154million, primarily driven by lower
costs at the disney store due to the sale of the japan business,
closures of disney store locations domestically and lower
advertising costs. decreased costs also reflected lower disney
interactive sales volumes as well as cost reductions at the
disney catalog. these decreases were partially offset by volume
increases at the continuing disney stores and at publishing.
as-reported revenues decreased 6% to
$2.4billion and segment operating income decreased 2% to
$394million. as-reported amounts include abc family
operations commencing on the acquisition date, october24,
2001.
2001 vs. 2000
on an as-reported basis, revenues decreased 6%,
or $172million, to $2.6billion, primarily reflecting
declines of $157million at the disney stores, which were
driven by lower comparative store sales in north america and the
impact of the disposition of fairchild publications in the first
quarter of fiscal2000.
segment operating income increased 4%, or
$15million, to $401million, primarily driven by
benefits from cost reduction initiatives, partially offset by
declines at the disney stores in north america. costs and
expenses decreased 8% or $187million, primarily due to
lower sales volume at the disney stores in north america,
decreased catalog circulation and advertising costs and the
impact of cost reduction initiatives.
stock option accounting
the company has elected to continue using the
intrinsic-value method of accounting for stock-based awards
granted to employees until a uniform method of valuing and
expensing stock options is promulgated. accordingly, the company
has not recognized compensation expense for the fair value of
its stock-based awards to employees in its consolidated
statements of income. companies electing to remain with the
intrinsic-value method accounting in apb25 must make pro
forma disclosures, as if the fair value based method of
accounting had been applied.
the following table reflects pro forma net income
(loss)and earnings (loss)per share had the company
elected to record an expense for employee stock options pursuant
to the provisions of sfas123.
year ended
september 30,
(in millions, except for per share data)
net income (loss)attributed to disney
common stock:
as reported
$
1,236
$
(41
)
$
1,196
pro forma after option expense
(325
)
diluted earnings (loss)per share attributed
to disney common stock:
as reported
0.60
(0.02
)
0.57
pro forma after option expense
0.45
(0.15
)
0.46
-33-
table of contents
these pro forma amounts may not be representative
of future disclosures since the estimated fair value of stock
options is amortized to expense over the vesting period, and
additional options may be granted in future years.
fully diluted shares outstanding and diluted
earnings per share include the effect of in-the-money stock
options calculated based on the average share price for the
period. the dilution from employee options increases as the
companys share price increases, as shown below:
total
percentage of
hypothetical
disney
in-the-money
incremental
average shares
fy 2002
share price
options
diluted shares(1)
outstanding
eps impact(3)
$
20.40
24million
(2)
$
0.00
25.00
104million
8million
.39
%
0.00
30.00
135million
19million
.93
%
0.00
40.00
207million
43million
2.10
%
(0.01
)
50.00
216million
61million
2.98
%
(0.01
)
(1)
represents the incremental impact on fully
diluted shares outstanding assuming the average share prices
indicated, using the treasury stock method. under the treasury
stock method, the tax effected proceeds that would be received
from the exercise of all in-the-money options are assumed to be
used to repurchase shares.
(2)
fully diluted shares outstanding for the year
ended september30, 2002 total 2,044million and
include the dilutive impact of in-the-money options at the
average share price for the period of $20.40. at the average
share price of $20.40, the dilutive impact of in-the-money
options was 4million shares for the year.
(3)
based upon fiscal 2002 earnings of $1,236 million
or $0.60 per share.
liquidity and capital resources
cash provided by operations decreased 25%, or
$762million, to $2.3billion, reflecting lower pretax
income before non-cash charges and increased film and television
production spending and an increase in accounts receivable due
to the timing of home video releases, partially offset by lower
cash tax payments, and the timing of accounts payable and nfl
payments.
during the year, the company invested
$1.1billion in parks, resorts and other properties.
investments in parks, resorts and other properties by segment
are as follows (in millions):
year ended
september 30,
media networks
$
$
parks and resorts
1,278
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate and unallocated shared expenditures
$
1,086
$
1,795
corporate and unallocated shared capital
expenditures primarily include hardware and capitalized software
costs for new company wide finances and administrative systems.
lower spending was driven by decreased parks and
resorts capital expenditures reflecting the completion of
disneys california adventure which opened in february
2001, and certain other resort properties in florida.
-34-
table of contents
on october24, 2001, the company acquired
abc family for $5.2billion, funded with $2.9billion
of new long-term borrowings, plus the assumption of
$2.3billion of borrowings (of which $1.1billion was
subsequently repaid).
during the year, the company received proceeds
totaling $601million from the sale of investments,
primarily the remaining shares of knight-ridder, inc. that the
company received in connection with the disposition of certain
publishing assets in fiscal 1997. additionally, the company
received aggregate proceeds of $200million from the sale
of the disney store business in japan and the sale of certain
real estate properties in the u.k. and florida.
during fiscal 2001, the company invested
$480million to acquire the copyright for certain
intellectual property, radio station and publishing assets and
the rights to a music library. in fiscal 2001, investing
activities also included $137million of cash proceeds
generated primarily from the sale of infoseek japan, k.k.
additionally, cash proceeds from the sale of investments
resulted primarily from the sale of knight-ridder, inc. shares.
during fiscal 2000, investing activities included cash proceeds
from the sale of fairchild publications and eurosport. fiscal
2000 cash proceeds from the sale of investments were driven by
the sale of inktomi shares acquired through the disposition of
ultraseek.
during the year, the companys borrowing
activity was as follows (in millions):
additions
payments
total
commercial paper borrowings (net change for the
year)
$
$
(33
)
$
(33
)
us medium term notes and other usd denominated
debt
3,049
(986
)
2,063
european medium term notes
other
(76
)
(76
)
debt repaid in connection with the abc family
acquisition
(1,051
)
(1,051
)
$
4,038
$
(2,146
)
$
1,892
the borrowings issued have effective interest
rates, including the impact of cross-currency and interest rate
swaps, ranging from 2.2% to 7.0% and mature in fiscal 2005
through fiscal 2032. see note7 to the consolidated
financial statements for more detailed information regarding the
companys borrowings.
commercial paper borrowings outstanding as of
september30, 2002 totaled $721million, with
maturities of up to one year, supported by $4.5billion of
bank facilities, half scheduled to expire in 2003, and the other
half expiring in 2005. these bank facilities allow for
borrowings at libor-based rates plus a spread, depending upon
the companys public debt rating. as of september30,
2002, the company had not borrowed against these bank facilities.
the company has a u.s. shelf registration
statement which allows the company to borrow up to
$7.5billion of which $3.4billion is available at
september30, 2002. the company also has a euro medium-term
note program, which permits the issuance of up to approximately
$4billion of additional debt instruments, which has
$2.4billion of capacity at september30, 2002.
during fiscal 2001, the company acquired
approximately 63.9million shares of disney common stock
and 1.8million shares of internet group common stock for
approximately $1.1billion and $10million,
respectively. no shares were repurchased during the current
year. as of september30, 2002, the company was authorized
to purchase up to approximately 330million shares of
company common stock.
the company declared a dividend ($0.21 per disney
share) on december3, 2002 related to fiscal 2002, which
will be payable january9, 2003 to shareholders of record
on december13, 2002. the company paid a $434million
dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the first quarter of
fiscal 2000 applicable to fiscal 1999, paid a $438million
dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the first quarter
-35-
table of contents
of fiscal 2001 applicable to fiscal 2000 and paid
a $428million dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the
first quarter of the current year applicable to fiscal 2002. see
note 10 to the consolidated financial statements.
the company has a 39% interest in euro disney
s.c.a., which operates the disneyland resort paris. as of
september30, 2002, euro disney has drawn $61million
under a $164million line of credit with the company and it
is expected that euro disney will draw additional amounts under
the credit line during fiscal 2003. as of september30,
2002, euro disney had on a usgaap basis, total assets of
$3.0billion and total liabilities of $2.9billion,
including borrowings of $2.2billion.
total commitments to purchase broadcast
programming approximated $14.6billion at
september30, 2002, including approximately
$1.1billion for available programming. these amounts
include approximately $11.3billion related to sports
programming rights, including a six year agreement with the nba
to televise more than 100 regular and post-season games on the
abc television network and espn, an eight year contract for nfl
programming, which commenced with the 1998 season, multiple
contracts for college football programming, and two
sixyear contracts for mlb programming, which commenced in
fiscal 2000 and 2002, respectively.
contractual commitments relating to broadcast
programming rights are payable as follows (in millions):
$
4,198
3,107
2,882
2,296
1,128
thereafter
$
14,591
the company expects the abc television network,
espn and the companys television and radio stations to
continue to enter into programming commitments to purchase the
broadcast rights for various feature films, sports and other
programming.
over the past year, significant changes have
occurred in the commercial insurance market which are impacting
the cost and availability of the companys insurance
coverage. the company has successfully renewed all of our
significant policies in this current fiscal year, though the
premiums and deductibles have increased. during the third
quarter of the current year, the company established a wholly
owned captive insurance company to insure certain components of
loss exposure which were previously insured by third party
insurance companies. accordingly, the companys risk of
loss has increased.
as disclosed in the notes8 and 14 to the
consolidated financial statements, the company has exposure for
certain legal and tax matters. management believes that it is
currently not possible to estimate the impact, if any, that the
ultimate resolution of these matters will have on the
companys financial position or cash flows.
as disclosed in note 4 to the consolidated
financial statements, the companys investment portfolio
includes commercial aircraft leveraged lease investments made
between 1992 and 1994 totaling $289million, which are
diversified across three air carriers (united
airlines $114million, delta
airlines $119million, and fedex
$56million) and eleven aircraft. risk of loss under these
transactions is primarily related to the ability of the air
carriers to make underlying lease payments.
we continue to monitor our investment in
commercial aircraft leasing transactions given the current
status of the airline industry. we have, in particular, been
monitoring united airlines, which has indicated that if it does
not obtain significant concessions from each of its employee
unions,
-36-
table of contents
achieve cost savings in other operating areas of
the company and obtain a loan guarantee from the airline
transportation stabilization board, it will have to file for
bankruptcy protection. to date, all payments on these leases
have been made when due. the inability of any of the companies
to make their lease payments or the termination of our leases
through a bankruptcy proceeding could result in material charges
related to a write-down of some or all of our investment and
could accelerate income tax payments.
the company believes that its financial condition
is strong and that its cash, other liquid assets, operating cash
flows, access to debt and equity capital markets and borrowing
capacity, taken together, provide adequate resources to fund
ongoing operating requirements and future capital expenditures
related to the expansion of existing businesses and development
of new projects. however, the companys operating cash flow
and access to the capital markets can be impacted by
macroeconomic factors outside of its control. in addition to
macroeconomic factors, the companys borrowing costs can be
impacted by short-and long-term debt ratings assigned by
independent rating agencies, which are based, in significant
part, on the companys performance as measured by certain
credit measures such as interest coverage and leverage ratios.
on october4, 2002, standard & poors ratings
services lowered its long-term ratings on the company to bbb+
from a- and removed the companys ratings from creditwatch
where they were placed with negative implications on
august2, 2002. at the same time, the a-2 short-term
corporate credit rating, which was not on creditwatch, was
affirmed. the current outlook is stable. on october18,
2002, moodys investors service downgraded the
companys long-term debt rating to baa1 from a3, concluding
the review for possible downgrade that commenced on
august5, 2002. the companys short-term rating of p2
was affirmed and the outlook is stable.
other matters
accounting policies and estimates
we believe that the application of the following
accounting policies, which are important to our financial
position and results of operations, requires significant
judgments and estimates on the part of management. for a summary
of all of our accounting policies, including the accounting
policies discussed below, see note 2 of the consolidated
financial statements.
film and television revenues and
costs
we expense the cost of film and television
production and participations as well as multi-year sports
rights over the applicable product life cycle based upon the
ratio of the current periods gross revenues to the
estimated remaining total gross revenues. these estimates are
calculated on an individual production basis for film and
television and on an individual contract basis for sports
rights. estimates of total gross revenues can change due to a
variety of factors, including the level of market acceptance,
advertising rates and subscriber fees.
television network and station rights for
theatrical movies, series and other programs are charged to
expense based on the number of times the program is expected to
be shown. estimates of usage of television network and station
programming can change based on competition and audience
acceptance. accordingly, revenue estimates and planned usage are
reviewed periodically and are revised if necessary. a change in
revenue projections or planned usage could have an impact on our
results of operations.
costs of film and television productions and
programming costs are subject to valuation adjustments pursuant
to the applicable accounting rules. the values of the television
program licenses and rights are reviewed using a daypart
methodology. the companys dayparts are: early morning,
daytime, late night, prime time, news, children and sports. a
daypart is defined as an aggregation of programs broadcast
during a particular time of day or programs of a similar type.
estimated values are based upon assumptions about future demand
and market conditions. if actual demand or market
-37-
table of contents
conditions are less favorable than our
projections, potentially significant film, television or
programming cost write-downs may be required.
revenue recognition
the company has revenue recognition policies for
its various operating segments, which are appropriate to the
circumstances of each business. see note2 to the
consolidated financial statements for a summary of these revenue
recognition policies.
we record reductions to revenues for estimated
future returns of merchandise, primarily home video, dvd and
software products, and for customer programs and sales
incentives. these estimates are based upon historical return
experience, current economic trends and projections of customer
demand for and acceptance of our products. differences may
result in the amount and timing of our revenue for any period if
actual performance varies from our estimates.
goodwill, intangible assets, long-lived assets
and investments
effective october1, 2001, we adopted
sfas142, as described more fully in note2 of the
consolidated financial statements. sfas142 requires that
goodwill and other intangible assets be tested for impairment
within sixmonths of the date of adoption and then on a
periodic basis thereafter. during the first half of the current
fiscal year, we completed our impairment testing and determined
that there were no impairment losses related to goodwill and
other intangible assets. on october1, 2002, we updated our
impairment test and determined that there was no impairment. in
assessing the recoverability of goodwill and other intangible
assets, projections regarding estimated future cash flows and
other factors are made to determine the fair value of the
respective assets. if these estimates or related projections
change in the future, we may be required to record impairment
charges for these assets.
long-lived assets include certain long-term
investments. the fair value of the long-term investments is
dependent on the performance of the companies we invest in, as
well as volatility inherent in the external markets for these
investments. in assessing potential impairment for these
investments, we will consider these factors as well as
forecasted financial performance of our investees. if these
forecasts are not met, impairment charges may be required.
contingencies and litigation
we are currently involved in certain legal
proceedings and, as required, have accrued our estimate of the
probable costs for the resolution of these claims. this estimate
has been developed in consultation with outside counsel and is
based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a
combination of litigation and settlement strategies. it is
possible, however, that future results of operations for any
particular quarterly or annual period could be materially
affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of
our strategies related to these proceedings. see note 14 to the
consolidated financial statements for more detailed information
on litigation exposure.
income tax audits
as a matter of course, the company is regularly
audited by both federal, state and foreign tax authorities. from
time to time, these audits result in proposed assessments. among
current audits, the internal revenue service (irs)is in
the final stages of its examination of the companys
federal income tax returns for 1993 through 1995. in connection
with this examination, the irs has proposed assessments that
challenge certain of the companys tax positions which, if
upheld through the administrative and legal process, could have
a material impact on the companys earnings and cash flow.
the company believes that its tax positions comply with
applicable tax law and it intends to defend its positions
vigorously. the company believes it has adequately provided for
any reasonably foreseeable outcome related to these matters, and
it does not anticipate any material earnings impact from their
ultimate resolution. during 2002, the company negotiated the
settlement of a number of proposed assessments, and it continues
to pursue favorable settlement of the remaining items. see
-38-
table of contents
note 8 to the consolidated financial statements
for more detailed information on the companys income tax
exposure.
accounting changes
in july 2001, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.141, business
combinations (sfas141), which requires that all
business combinations initiated after june30, 2001 be
accounted for under the purchase method. sfas141
superseded apb opinion no.16, business combinations,
and statement of financial accounting standards no.38,
accounting for preacquisition contingencies of purchased
enterprises and is effective for all business combinations
initiated after june30, 2001.
effective october1, 2001, the company
adopted sfas142 which addresses the financial accounting
and reporting for acquired goodwill and other intangible assets.
as a result of adopting sfas142, goodwill and a
substantial amount of the companys intangible assets are
no longer amortized. pursuant to sfas142, intangible
assets must be periodically tested for impairment, and the new
standard provides six months to complete the impairment review.
during the second quarter of fiscal 2002, the company completed
its impairment review, which indicated that there was no
impairment. see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements.
the fasb also issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.143, accounting for obligations
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets
(sfas143) in august 2001, which establishes accounting
standards for the recognition and measurement of an asset
retirement obligation and its associated asset retirement cost.
the company expects that the provisions of sfas143 will
not have a material impact on its consolidated results of
operations and financial position upon adoption. the company
plans to adopt sfas143 effective october1, 2002.
the company adopted statement of financial
accounting standards no.144, accounting for the
impairment or disposal of long-lived assets (sfas144)
effective october1, 2001, which did not have a material
impact on the companys consolidated results of operations
and financial position. sfas144 establishes a single
accounting model for the impairment or disposal of long-lived
assets, including discontinued operations.
in june 2002, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.146, accounting for
costs associated with exit or disposal activities
(sfas146). sfas146 requires that a liability for
a cost associated with an exit or disposal activity be
recognized when the liability is incurred. sfas146
requires that the initial measurement of a liability be at fair
value. sfas146 will be effective for exit or disposal
activities that are initiated after december31, 2002 with
early adoption encouraged. the company plans to adopt
sfas146 effective october1, 2002 and does not expect
that the adoption will have a material impact on its
consolidated results of operations and financial position.
effective october1, 2000, the company
adopted aicpa statement of position no.00-2, accounting
by producers or distributors of films (sop00-2). the
companys results of operations and financial position
reflect the impact of the new standard commencing
october1, 2000 and the company recorded a one-time
after-tax charge of $228million, or $0.11 per share,
representing the cumulative effect of the adoption of
sop00-2 in its consolidated financial statements for the
year ended september30, 2001.
in june 1998, the financial accounting standards
board (fasb)issued statement of financial accounting
standards no.133 accounting for derivative instruments
and hedging activities (sfas133), subsequently amended
by sfasno.137 and sfasno.138.
sfas133 requires the company to record all derivatives on
the balance sheet at fair value. changes in derivative fair
values will either be recognized in earnings as offsets to the
changes in fair value of related hedged assets, liabilities and
firm commitments or, for forecasted transactions, deferred and
recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive
income (aoci)until the hedged transactions occur and are
-39-
table of contents
recognized in earnings. the ineffective portion
of a hedging derivatives change in fair value will be
immediately recognized in earnings.
as a result of adopting sfas133 as of
october1, 2000, and in accordance with the transition
provisions, the company recorded a one-time after-tax charge of
$50million, or $0.02 per share, in its consolidated
statements of income representing the cumulative effect of the
adoption and an after-tax unrealized gain of $60million to
aoci.
forward-looking statements
the private securities litigation reform act of
1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements made
by or on behalf of the company. we may from time to time make
written or oral statements that are forward-looking,
including statements contained in this report and other filings
with the securities and exchange commission and in reports to
our stockholders. such statements may, for example, express
expectations or projections about future actions that we may
take, including restructuring or strategic initiatives or about
developments beyond our control including changes in domestic or
global economic conditions. these statements are made on the
basis of managements views and assumptions as of the time
the statements are made. there can be no assurance, however,
that our expectations will necessarily come to pass.
factors that may affect forward-looking
statements. for an enterprise as large
and complex as the company, a wide range of factors could
materially affect future developments and performance, including
the following:
changes in company-wide or business-unit
strategies, which may result in changes in the types or mix of
businesses in which the company is involved or chooses to invest;
changes in u.s., global or regional economic
conditions, which may affect attendance and spending at the
companys parks and resorts, purchases of company-licensed
consumer products, the advertising market for broadcast and
cable television programming and the performance of the
companys theatrical and home entertainment releases;
changes in u.s. and global financial and equity
markets, including market disruptions and significant interest
rate fluctuations, which may impede the companys access
to, or increase the cost of, external financing for its
operations and investments;
increased competitive pressures, both
domestically and internationally, which may, among other things,
affect the performance of the companys parks and resorts
operations and lead to increased expenses in such areas as
television programming acquisition and motion picture production
and marketing;
legal and regulatory developments that may affect
particular business units, such as regulatory actions affecting
environmental activities, consumer products, theme park safety,
broadcasting or internet activities or the protection of
intellectual property; the imposition by foreign countries of
trade restrictions or motion picture or television content
requirements or quotas, and changes in international tax laws or
currency controls;
adverse weather conditions or natural disasters,
such as hurricanes and earthquakes, which may, among other
things, impair performance at the companys parks and
resorts;
technological developments that may affect the
distribution of the companys creative products or create
new risks to the companys ability to protect its
intellectual property;
labor disputes, which may lead to increased costs
or disruption of operations in any of the companys
business units;
changing public and consumer taste, which may
among other things, affect the companys entertainment,
broadcasting and consumer products businesses generally or the
companys
-40-
table of contents
parks and resorts operating specifically, or
result in increases in broadcasting losses or loss of
advertising revenue; and
international, political and military
developments that may affect among other things, travel and
leisure businesses generally or the companys parks and
resorts operations specifically, or result in increases in
broadcasting costs or loss of advertising revenue.
this list of factors that may affect future
performance and the accuracy of forward-looking statements is
illustrative, but by no means exhaustive. accordingly, all
forward-looking statements should be evaluated with the
understanding of their inherent uncertainty.
item 7a.market risk
the company is exposed to the impact of interest
rate changes, foreign currency fluctuations and changes in the
market values of its investments.
policies and procedures
in the normal course of business, the company
employs established policies and procedures to manage its
exposure to changes in interest rates, foreign currencies and
the fair market value of certain of its investments in debt and
equity securities using a variety of financial instruments.
our objective in managing exposure to interest
rate changes are to limit the impact of interest rate changes on
earnings and cash flows and to lower overall borrowing costs. to
achieve these objectives, we primarily use interest rate swaps
to manage net exposure to interest rate changes related to the
companys portfolio of borrowings. the company maintains
fixed rate debt as a percentage of its net debt between a
minimum and maximum percentage, which is set by policy.
our objective in managing exposure to foreign
currency fluctuations is to reduce earnings and cash flow
volatility in order to allow management to focus on core
business issues and challenges. accordingly, the company enters
into various contracts that change in value as foreign exchange
rates change to protect the value of its existing foreign
currency assets, liabilities, commitments and forecasted foreign
currency revenues. the company utilizes option strategies and
forward contracts that provide for the sale of foreign
currencies to hedge probable, but not firmly committed,
revenues. the company also uses forward contracts to hedge
foreign currency assets and liabilities in the same principal
currencies. the principal currencies hedged are european euro,
british pound, japanese yen and canadian dollar. by policy, the
company maintains hedge coverage between minimum and maximum
percentages of its forecasted foreign exchange exposures
generally for periods not to exceed five years. the gains and
losses on these contracts offset changes in the value of the
related exposures.
in addition, we use various financial instruments
to minimize the exposure to changes in fair market value of
certain investments in debt and equity securities.
it is the companys policy to enter into
foreign currency and interest rate transactions and other
financial instruments only to the extent considered necessary to
meet its objectives as stated above. the company does not enter
into these transactions for speculative purposes.
value at risk
the company utilizes a value-at-risk
(var)model to determine the maximum potential one-day loss
in the fair value of its interest rate, foreign exchange and
qualifying equity sensitive financial instruments. the var model
estimates were made assuming normal market conditions and a 95%
confidence level. various modeling techniques can be used in a
var computation. the companys computations are based on
the interrelationships between movements in various interest
rates, currencies and equity prices (a variance/
co-variance technique). these interrelationships were
determined by observing interest rate, foreign currency and
equity market changes over the preceding
-41-
table of contents
quarter for the calculation of var amounts at
year-end and over each of the four quarters for the calculation
of average var amounts during the year. the model includes all
of the companys debt as well as all interest rate and
foreign exchange derivative contracts and qualifying equity
investments. the values of foreign exchange options do not
change on a one-to-one basis with the underlying currencies, as
exchange rates vary. therefore, the hedge coverage assumed to be
obtained from each option has been adjusted to reflect its
respective sensitivity to changes in currency values. forecasted
transactions, firm commitments and receivables and accounts
payable denominated in foreign currencies, which certain of
these instruments are intended to hedge, were excluded from the
model.
the var model is a risk analysis tool and does
not purport to represent actual losses in fair value that will
be incurred by the company, nor does it consider the potential
effect of favorable changes in market factors. see note 13 to
the consolidated financial statements regarding the
companys financial instruments at september30, 2002
and 2001.
the estimated maximum potential one-day loss in
fair value, calculated using the var model, is as follows
(unaudited, in millions):
interest rate
currency
sensitive
sensitive
equity sensitive
financial
financial
financial
combined
instruments
instruments
instruments
portfolio
var as of september30, 2002
$
$
$
$
average var during the year ended
september30, 2002
$
$
$
$
highest var during the year ended
september30, 2002
$
$
$
$
lowest var during the year ended
september30, 2002
$
$
$
$
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary
data
see index to financial statements and
supplemental data on page54.
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants
on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
-42-
table of contents
part iii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the
company
information regarding directors appearing under
the caption election of directors in the
companys proxy statement for the 2003 annual meetings of
shareholders is hereby incorporated by reference.
information regarding executive officers is
included in parti of this form10-k as permitted by
general instructiong(3).
item11.
executive compensation
information appearing under the captions
how are directors compensated? and executive
compensation in the 2003 proxy statement is hereby
incorporated by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management
information setting forth the security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management appearing under the
caption stock ownership in the 2003 proxy statement
is hereby incorporated by reference.
item13.
certain relationships and related
transactions
during fiscal 2002, jennifer gold, a daughter of
director stanley gold, was employed by a company subsidiary as a
senior marketing manager. ms.gold was paid an aggregate
salary of $86,033 for her services during the year. director ray
watsons son david watson worked as executive director for
new media for a company subsidiary during the year, receiving an
aggregate salary of $155,917. ms.gold and mr.watson
are also eligible for a discretionary annual bonus, although
decisions with respect to bonuses for fiscal 2002 had yet not
been made as of the date of this report.
director john brysons wife, louise bryson,
serves as executive vice president affiliate sales
and marketing for lifetime entertainment television, a cable
television programming service in which the company has an
indirect 50%equity interest. ms.bryson received a
salary (including car allowance) of $386,483 for her services
with lifetime during fiscal 2002. she is also eligible for a
discretionary annual bonus, although as of the date of this
report, no bonus determination had been made by lifetime with
respect to ms.bryson. by agreement among the company,
lifetime and lifetimes other equity owner, the hearst
corporation, neither the company nor any of its employees or
affiliates participates in any decision making at lifetime with
respect to ms.brysons performance or compensation.
the company paid a net amount of $623,782 to air
shamrock, inc. as reimbursement for use of an air shamrock
aircraft for business travel during fiscal 2002 by vice chairman
roy disney during which he was frequently accompanied by other
company directors and/or employees. payment was based on an
independent evaluation obtained by the company of the average
incremental cost of operating that type of aircraft, plus an
allowance for incremental expenses, which together formed the
basis for an agreed maximum reimbursement rate. air shamrock is
owned by mr.disney and shamrock holdings, inc., of which
mr.disney is a director and which is wholly owned by
mr.disney and his children and trusts for their and his
grandchildrens benefit. director stanley gold is also a
director of air shamrock, inc. and president and chief executive
officer of shamrock holdings,inc.
company president robert igers
father-in-law, eugene bay, is a principal of eugene bay
associates, inc., a marketing company that has been retained by
the companys subsidiary espn,
-43-
table of contents
inc. since 1990 (prior to mr.igers
marriage to mr.bays daughter) to provide sports
marketing services. mr.bays company received a total
of $69,892 for services provided during fiscal 2002.
the companys disney vacation club
subsidiary paid director robert sterns firm, robert a.m.
stern associates, an aggregate of $45,294 in fees and expenses
during fiscal 2002 for architectural services originally
contracted for in a prior year. in addition,
mr.sterns firm received a total of $60,374 in fees
and expenses from euro disney s.c.a. during the year for
development services.
during fiscal 2002, the company paid the law firm
of verner, liipfert, bernhard, mcpherson& hand, of
which senator mitchell was chairman, a total of $442,872 in fees
and expenses for legal and regulatory services. of this total,
$363,055 related to work performed in fiscal 2001 or the first
quarter of 2002. no services were provided after may 2002. in
october 2002, verner, liipfert, bernhard, mcpherson&
hand merged with piper rudnick llp, and mr.mitchell
relinquished his position as chairman. the company is not
retaining piper rudnick llp for any further services.
the companys subsidiary abc,inc.
makes an office and secretarial services available to director
thomas murphy, who served as chairman of the board of capital
cities/ abc,inc. prior to its acquisition by the company
in 1996. abc,inc. also provides mr.murphy with a
leased car and a driver. the aggregate cost to the company of
the secretarial and transportation services in fiscal 2002 was
approximately $205,500, while mr.murphys office
represented an internal cost allocation of
approximately$62,500.
during fiscal 2002, the company made a
contribution of $5,000,000 through the performing arts center of
los angeles county to walt disney concert halli, a
california not-for-profit corporation. the contribution was the
fourth equal installment of a $25,000,000 pledge under a pledge
agreement, dated november26, 1997, for development of the
walt disney concert hall and the royo. and ednaf.
disney calarts theater in downtown los angeles, california.
director andrea van dekamp serves as chairman and chief
executive officer of the performing arts center, and was a
director of walt disney concert halli until november 2002.
ms.van dekamp was not a member of the companys
board of directors at the time of the companys pledge.
item14.
controls and procedures
we have established disclosure controls and
procedures to ensure that material information relating to the
company, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known
to the officers who certify the companys financial reports
and to other members of senior management and the board of
directors.
based on their evaluation as of a date within
90days of the filing date of this annual report on
form10-k, the principal executive officer and principal
financial officer of the walt disney company have concluded that
the walt disney companys disclosure controls and
procedures (as defined in rules13a-14[c]
and15d-14[c] under the securities exchange act of 1934)
are effective to ensure that the information required to be
disclosed by the walt disney company in reports that it files or
submits under the securities exchange act of 1934 is recorded,
processed, summarized and reported within the time periods
specified in sec rules and forms.
there were no significant changes in the walt
disney companys internal controls or in other factors that
could significantly affect those controls subsequent to the date
of their most recent evaluation.
-44-
table of contents
part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules and
reports on form8-k
(a)
exhibits and financial statements and schedules
(1)financial statements and schedules
see indices to financial
statements and supplemental data at page54.
(2)
exhibits
the documents set forth below are filed herewith
or incorporated herein by reference to the location indicated.
exhibit
location
3(a)
amended and restated certificate of incorporation
of the company
annexc to the joint proxy statement/
prospectus included in the registration statement on
forms-4 (no.333-88105) of the company, filed
sept.30, 1999
3(b)
bylaws of the company
exhibit3 to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended mar.30, 2000
4(a)
form of registration rights agreement entered
into or to be entered into with certain stockholders
exhibitb to exhibit2.1 to the current
report on form8-k of disney enterprises, inc.
(dei), dated july31, 1995
4(b)
five-year credit agreement, dated as of
mar.8, 2000
exhibit4(b) to the 2000 form10-k of
the company
4(c)
indenture, dated as of nov.30, 1990,
between dei and bankers trust company, as trustee
exhibit2 to the current report on
form8-k of dei, dated jan.14, 1991
4(d)
indenture, dated as of mar.7, 1996, between
the company and citibank, n.a., as trustee
exhibit4.1(a) to the current report on
form8-k of the company, dated mar.7, 1996
4(e)
senior debt securities indenture, dated as of
september24, 2001, between the company and wells fargo
bank, n.a., as trustee
exhibit4.1 to the current report on
form8-k of the company, dated september24, 2001
4(f)
other long-term borrowing instruments are omitted
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of regulations-k. the
company undertakes to furnish copies of such instruments to the
commission upon request
10(a)
(i)agreement on the creation and the
operation of euro disneyland en france, dated mar.25,
1987, and (ii)letter relating thereto of the chairman of
disney enterprises, inc., dated mar.24, 1987
exhibits10(b) and10(a), respectively,
to the current report on form8-k of dei, dated
apr.4, 1987
10(b)
composite limited recourse financing facility
agreement, dated as of apr.27, 1988, between dei and
tdlfunding company, as amended
exhibit10(b) to the 1997 form10-k of
the company
-45-
table of contents
exhibit
location
10(c)
employment agreement, dated june29, 2000,
between the company and michaeld. eisner
exhibit10(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended june30, 2000
10(d)
employment agreement, dated jan.24, 2000,
between the company and roberta. iger
exhibit10 to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended mar.30, 2000
10(e)
amendment, dated april15, 2002, to the
employment agreement between the company and roberta. iger
filed herewith
10(f)
form of indemnification agreement for certain
officers and directors
annexc to the proxy statement for the 1988
annual meeting of dei
10(g)
1995 stock option plan for non-employee directors
exhibit20 to the forms-8 registration
statement (no.33-57811) of dei, dated feb.23, 1995
10(h)
amended and restated 1990 stock incentive plan
and rules
appendixb-2 to the joint proxy statement/
prospectus included in the forms-4 registration statement
(no.33-64141) of dei, dated nov.13, 1995
10(i)
amended and restated 1995 stock incentive plan
and rules
exhibit4.3 to the forms-8
registration statement (no.333-74624) of the company,
dated december6, 2001
10(j)
(i)1987 stock incentive plan and rules and
(ii)1984 stock incentive plan and rules
exhibits1(a), 1(b), 2(a) and2(b),
respectively, to the prospectus contained in the forms-8
registration statement (no.33-26106) of dei, dated
dec.20, 1988
10(k)
contingent stock award rules under deis
1984 stock incentive plan
exhibit10(t) to the 1986 form10-k of
dei
10(l)
amendment, dated june26, 2000, to the
companys stock incentive plans
exhibit10(b) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended june30, 2000
10(m)
bonus performance plan for executive officers
exhibit10(1) to the 1998 form10-k of
the company
10(n)
2002 executive performance plan
annex1 to the proxy statement for the 2002
annual meeting of the company
10(o)
1997 non-employee directors stock and deferred
compensation plan
exhibit4.3 to the forms-8
registration statement (no.333-31012) of the company,
dated feb.24, 2000
10(p)
key employees deferred compensation and
retirement plan
exhibit10(p) to the 1997 form10-k of
the company
10(q)
group personal excess liability insurance plan
exhibit10(x) to the 1997 form10-k of
the company
10(r)
family income assurance plan (summary description)
exhibit10(y) to the 1997 form10-k of
the company
-46-
table of contents
exhibit
location
10(s)
employee stock option plan of capital cities/
abc,inc., as amended
exhibit10(f) to the 1992 form10-k of
capital cities/ abc,inc.
10(t)
1991 stock option plan of capital cities/
abc,inc., as amended
exhibit6(a)(i) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended mar.31, 1996
subsidiaries of the company
filed herewith
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
included herein at page55
(b)reports on form8-k
during the quarter, the company filed a current
report on form8-k, dated august9, 2002, with respect
to the filing with the securities and exchange commission of
sworn statements of the companys chief executive officer
and chief financial officer relating to the companys
filings with the commission.
-47-
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13
or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the walt disney company
(registrant)
date: december4, 2002
by: /s/ michael d. eisner
(michael d. eisner,
chairman of the board and chief executive officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
principal executive officer
/s/michael d. eisner
michael d. eisner
chairman of the board and
chief executive officer
december4, 2002
principal operating officer
/s/robert a. iger
(robert a. iger)
president and chief
operating officer
december4, 2002
principal financial and accounting
officers
/s/thomas o. staggs
(thomas o. staggs)
senior executive vice
president and chief
financial officer
december4, 2002
/s/john j. garand
(john j. garand)
executive vice president
planning and control
december4, 2002
directors
/s/reveta f. bowers
(reveta f. bowers)
director
december4, 2002
/s/john e. bryson
(john e. bryson)
director
december4, 2002
/s/roy e. disney
(roy e. disney)
director
december4, 2002
/s/michael d. eisner
(michael d. eisner)
director
december4, 2002
/s/judith l. estrin
(judith l. estrin)
director
december4, 2002
-48-
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/stanley p. gold
(stanley p. gold)
director
december4, 2002
/s/monica c. lozano
(monica c. lozano)
director
december4, 2002
/s/george j. mitchell
(george j. mitchell)
director
december4, 2002
/s/thomas s. murphy
(thomas s. murphy)
director
december4, 2002
/s/leo j. odonovan,
s.j.
(leo j. odonovan, s.j.)
director
december4, 2002
/s/sidney poitier
(sidney poitier)
director
december4, 2002
/s/robert a.m. stern
(robert a.m. stern)
director
december4, 2002
/s/andrea l. van de
kamp
(andrea l. van de kamp)
director
december4, 2002
/s/raymond l. watson
(raymond l. watson)
director
december4, 2002
/s/gary l. wilson
(gary l. wilson)
director
december4, 2002
-49-
table of contents
certifications
i, michael d. eisner, chairman of the board and
chief executive officer of the walt disney company (the
company), certify that:
1.i have reviewed
this annual report on form10-k of the company;
2.based on my
knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not
misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual
report;
3.based on my
knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this annual report, fairly present in
all material respects the financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the
periods presented in this annual report;
4.the
registrants other certifying officers and i are
responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls
and procedures (as defined in exchange act rules13a-14 and
15d-14) for the registrant and have:
a)designed such disclosure controls and
procedures to ensure that material information relating to the
registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made
known to us by others within those entities, particularly during
the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b)evaluated the effectiveness of the
registrants disclosure controls and procedures as of a
date within 90days prior to the filing date of this annual
report (the evaluation date); and
c)presented in this annual report our
conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls
and procedures based on our evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.the
registrants other certifying officers and i have
disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation, to the
registrants auditors and the audit committee of
registrants board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent functions):
a)all significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal controls which could adversely
affect the registrants ability to record, process,
summarize and report financial data and have identified for the
registrants auditors any material weaknesses in internal
controls; and
b)any fraud, whether or not material, that
involves management or other employees who have a significant
role in the registrants internal controls; and
6.the
registrants other certifying officers and i have indicated
in this annual report whether there were significant changes in
internal controls or in other factors that could significantly
affect internal controls subsequent to the date of our most
recent evaluation, including any corrective actions with regard
to significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
date: december4, 2002
by:/s/michael
d. eisner
michael d. eisner
chairman of the board
and chief executive officer
-50-
table of contents
certification pursuant to
18 u.s.c. section 1350,
as adopted pursuant to
section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
in connection with the quarterly report of the
walt disney company (the company) on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended september30, 2002 as filed with
the securities and exchange commission on the date hereof (the
report), i, michael d. eisner, chairman of the board
and chief executive officer of the company, certify, pursuant to
18 u.s.c. 1350, as adopted pursuant to 906 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, that:
1.the report fully
complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d), as
applicable, of the securities exchange act of 1934; and
2.the information
contained in the report fairly presents, in all material
respects, the financial condition and result of operations of
the company.
by:/s/michael
d. eisner
michael d. eisner
chairman of the board
and chief executive officer
december4, 2002
-51-
table of contents
certifications
i, thomas o. staggs, senior executive vice
president and chief financial officer of the walt disney company
(the company), certify that:
1.i have reviewed
this annual report on form10-k of the company;
2.based on my
knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not
misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual
report;
3.based on my
knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this annual report, fairly present in
all material respects the financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the
periods presented in this annual report;
4.the
registrants other certifying officers and i are
responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls
and procedures (as defined in exchange act rules13a-14 and
15d-14) for the registrant and have:
a)designed such disclosure controls and
procedures to ensure that material information relating to the
registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made
known to us by others within those entities, particularly during
the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b)evaluated the effectiveness of the
registrants disclosure controls and procedures as of a
date within 90days prior to the filing date of this annual
report (the evaluation date); and
c)presented in this annual report our
conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls
and procedures based on our evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.the
registrants other certifying officers and i have
disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation, to the
registrants auditors and the audit committee of
registrants board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent functions):
a)all significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal controls which could adversely
affect the registrants ability to record, process,
summarize and report financial data and have identified for the
registrants auditors any material weaknesses in internal
controls; and
b)any fraud, whether or not material, that
involves management or other employees who have a significant
role in the registrants internal controls; and
6.the
registrants other certifying officers and i have indicated
in this annual report whether there were significant changes in
internal controls or in other factors that could significantly
affect internal controls subsequent to the date of our most
recent evaluation, including any corrective actions with regard
to significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
date: december4, 2002
by:/s/thomas
o. staggs
thomas o. staggs
senior executive vice president
and chief financial officer
-52-
table of contents
certification pursuant to
18 u.s.c. section 1350,
as adopted pursuant to
section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
in connection with the quarterly report of the
walt disney company (the company) on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended september30, 2002 as filed with
the securities and exchange commission on the date hereof (the
report), i, thomas o. staggs, senior executive vice
president and chief financial officer of the company, certify,
pursuant to 18 u.s.c. 1350, as adopted pursuant to
906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, that:
1.the report fully
complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d), as
applicable, of the securities exchange act of 1934; and
2.the information
contained in the report fairly presents, in all material
respects, the financial condition and result of operations of
the company.
by:/s/thomas
o. staggs
thomas o. staggs
senior executive vice president
and chief financial officer
december4, 2002
-53-
table of contents
the walt disney company and
subsidiaries
index to financial statements and supplemental
data
page
report of independent accountants and consent of
independent accountants
consolidated financial statements of the walt
disney company and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of income for the years
ended september30, 2002, 2001 and 2000
consolidated balance sheets as of
september30, 2002 and 2001
consolidated statements of cash flows for the
years ended september30, 2002, 2001 and 2000
consolidated statements of stockholders
equity for the years ended september30, 2002, 2001 and 2000
notes to consolidated financial statements
quarterly financial summary (unaudited)
all schedules are omitted for the reason that
they are not applicable or the required information is included
in the financial statements or notes.
-54-
table of contents
report of independent accountants
to the board of directors and stockholders of the
walt disney company
in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets and the related consolidated statements of
income, stockholders equity, and cash flows present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
walt disney company and its subsidiaries (the company) at
september30, 2002 and 2001, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended september30, 2002, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america. these financial statements are the responsibility of
the companys management; our responsibility is to express
an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits. we
conducted our audits of these statements in accordance with
auditing standards generally accepted in the united states of
america, which require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
as discussed in note2, the company adopted
statement of financial accounting standards no.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets. accordingly, the
company ceased amortizing goodwill and indefinite lived
intangible assets as of october1, 2001.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
los angeles, california
november15, 2002,
except as to note16
which is dated
december3, 2002.
consent of independent accountants
we hereby consent to the incorporation by
reference in the registration statements on forms-8
(nos.33-26106, 33-35405, 33-39770, 33-57811, 333-91571,
333-31012 and 333-74624), forms-3 (333-67870) and
forms-3/a (333-52659 and 333-34167) of the walt disney
company of our report dated november15, 2002, except as to
note16 which is dated december3, 2002, related to
the consolidated financial statements of the walt disney company
which appears in this form10-k.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
los angeles, california
december3, 2002
-55-
table of contents
consolidated statements of income
(in millions, except per share data)
year ended september 30,
revenues
$
25,329
$
25,172
$
25,325
costs and expenses
(22,924
)
(21,573
)
(21,567
)
amortization of intangible assets
(21
)
(767
)
(1,233
)
gain on sale of businesses
net interest expense and other
(453
)
(417
)
(497
)
equity in the income of investees
restructuring and impairment charges
(1,454
)
(92
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
2,190
1,283
2,633
income taxes
(853
)
(1,059
)
(1,606
)
minority interests
(101
)
(104
)
(107
)
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes
1,236
cumulative effect of accounting changes:
film accounting
(228
)
derivative accounting
(50
)
net income (loss)
$
1,236
$
(158
)
$
earnings (loss)attributed to disney common
stock(1)
$
1,236
$
(41
)
$
1,196
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting changes attributed to disney common
stock:(1)
diluted
$
0.60
$
0.11
$
0.57
basic
$
0.61
$
0.11
$
0.58
cumulative effect of accounting changes per
disney share:
film accounting
$
$
(0.11
)
$
derivative accounting
(0.02
)
$
$
(0.13
)
$
earnings (loss)per share attributed to
disney common stock:(1)
diluted
$
0.60
$
(0.02
)
$
0.57
basic
$
0.61
$
(0.02
)
$
0.58
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding for the disney common stock:
diluted
2,044
2,100
2,103
basic
2,040
2,085
2,074
loss attributed to internet group common stock
n/a
$
(117
)
$
(276
)
loss per share attributed to internet group
common stock (basic and diluted)
n/a
$
(2.72
)
(6.18
)
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding for the internet group common stock
n/a
(1)
including disneys retained interest in the
internet group. disneys retained interest in the internet
group reflects 100% of internet group losses through
november17, 1999, approximately 72% for the period from
november18, 1999 through january28, 2001 (the last
date prior to the announcement of the conversion of the internet
group common stock) and 100% thereafter.
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-56-
table of contents
consolidated balance sheets
(in millions, except per share data)
september 30,
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,239
$
receivables
4,049
3,343
inventories
television costs
deferred income taxes
other assets
total current assets
7,849
6,605
film and television costs
5,959
5,641
investments
1,810
2,112
parks, resorts and other property, at cost
attractions, buildings and equipment
18,917
18,846
accumulated depreciation
(8,133
)
(7,662
)
10,784
11,184
projects in progress
1,148
land
12,780
12,906
intangible assets, net
2,776
2,736
goodwill
17,083
12,106
other assets
1,788
1,704
$
50,045
$
43,810
liabilities and stockholders
equity
current liabilities
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
$
5,173
$
4,404
current portion of borrowings
1,663
unearned royalties and other advances
total current liabilities
7,819
6,020
borrowings
12,467
8,940
deferred income taxes
2,597
2,729
other long term-liabilities
3,283
3,067
minority interests
commitments and contingencies (note14)
stockholders equity
preferred stock, $.01 par value
authorized 100million shares,
issued none
common stock
common stock disney, $.01 par value
authorized 3.6billion shares,
issued 2.1billion shares
12,107
12,096
common stock internet group, $.01 par
value
authorized 1.0billion shares,
issued none
retained earnings
12,979
12,171
accumulated other comprehensive (loss)income
(85
)
25,001
24,277
treasury stock, at cost, 81.4million disney
shares
(1,395
)
(1,395
)
shares held by twdc stock compensation
fundii, at cost
disney 6.6million and
8.6million shares
(161
)
(210
)
23,445
22,672
$
50,045
$
43,810
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-57-
table of contents
consolidated statements of cash
flows
(in millions)
year ended september 30,
net income (loss)
$
1,236
$
(158
)
$
operating items not requiring cash
depreciation
1,021
amortization of intangible assets
1,233
gain on sale of businesses
(34
)
(22
)
(489
)
equity in the income of investees
(225
)
(300
)
(208
)
restructuring and impairment charges
1,247
minority interests
cumulative effect of accounting changes
film and television costs
(97
)
(13
)
(210
)
other
1,151
3,450
1,651
changes in working capital
receivables
(535
)
inventories
(35
)
other assets
(86
)
accounts and taxes payable and other accrued
liabilities
(435
)
television costs
(149
)
deferred income taxes
(74
)
(101
)
(244
)
1,184
cash provided by operations
2,286
3,048
3,755
investing activities
investments in parks, resorts and other property
(1,086
)
(1,795
)
(2,013
)
acquisitions (net of cash acquired)
(2,845
)
(480
)
(34
)
dispositions
proceeds from sale of investments
purchases of investments
(9
)
(88
)
(82
)
investments in euro disney
(91
)
other
(37
)
(24
)
cash used by investing activities
(3,176
)
(2,015
)
(1,091
)
financing activities
borrowings
4,038
3,070
1,117
reduction of borrowings
(2,113
)
(2,807
)
(2,494
)
commercial paper borrowings, net
(33
)
(186
)
(741
)
exercise of stock options and other
repurchases of common stock
(1,073
)
(166
)
dividends
(428
)
(438
)
(434
)
cash provided (used)by financing activities
1,511
(1,257
)
(2,236
)
increase (decrease)in cash and cash
equivalents
(224
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
1,239
$
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
interest paid
$
$
$
income taxes paid
$
$
$
1,170
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-58-
table of contents
consolidated statements of stockholders
equity
(in millions, except per share data)
twdc
stock
accumulated
compen-
common
other
sation
shares
stock
compre-
fund
retained
hensive
treasury
stockholders
dis
dig
dis
dig
earnings
income
stock
dis
dig
equity total
balance at september 30, 1999
2,064
9,324
12,281
(25
)
(605
)
20,975
common stock issued
2,149
2,149
exercise of stock options, net
(84
)
common stock repurchased
(5
)
(1
)
(155
)
(11
)
(166
)
dividends ($0.21 per disney share)
(434
)
(434
)
other comprehensive (loss) (net of tax benefit of
$30million)
(3
)
(3
)
net income
balance at september30, 2000
2,086
9,920
2,181
12,767
(28
)
(689
)
(40
)
(11
)
24,100
common stock issued (cancellation)
(1
)
(22
)
(22
)
exercise of stock options, net
common stock repurchased
(64
)
(2
)
(706
)
(357
)
(10
)
(1,073
)
conversion of dig shares
(42
)
2,159
(2,159
)
(21
)
dividends ($0.21 per disney share)
(438
)
(438
)
other comprehensive income (net of tax expense of
$23million)
net loss
(158
)
(158
)
balance at september30, 2001
2,038
$
12,096
$
$
12,171
$
$
(1,395
)
$
(210
)
$
$
22,672
exercise of stock options, net
dividends ($0.21 per disney share)
(428
)
(428
)
other comprehensive (loss) (net of tax benefit of
$56million)
(95
)
(95
)
net income
1,236
1,236
balance at september30, 2002
2,041
$
12,107
$
$
12,979
$
(85
)
$
(1,395
)
$
(161
)
$
$
23,445
comprehensive income (loss) is as follows:
net income (loss)
$
1,236
$
(158
)
$
cumulative effect of adoption of sfas 133, net of
tax
market value adjustments for investments and
hedges, net of tax
(101
)
(18
)
foreign currency translation and other, net of tax
(4
)
(18
)
comprehensive income (loss)
$
1,141
$
(120
)
$
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-59-
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial
statements
(tabular dollars in millions, except per share
amounts)
1description of the business and
segment information
the walt disney company, together with the
subsidiaries through which the companys businesses are
conducted (the company), is a diversified worldwide
entertainment company with operations in the following business
segments: media networks, parks and resorts, studio
entertainment and consumer products.
description of the business
media networks
the company operates the abctelevision
network and the abcradio networks, which have affiliated
stations providing coverage to households throughout the united
states. the company also owns television and radio stations,
most of which are affiliated with either the abctelevision
network or the abcradio networks. the companys
cable/ satellite and international broadcast operations are
principally involved in the production and distribution of cable
television programming, the licensing of programming to domestic
and international markets and investing in foreign television
broadcasting, production and distribution entities. primary
cable/ satellite programming services, which operate through
consolidated subsidiary companies, are espn-branded networks,
the disney channel, disney channel worldwide, soapnet, toon
disney, abcfamily channel and fox kids channels in europe
and latin america. other programming services that operate
through joint ventures, and are accounted for under the equity
method, include a&e television networks, lifetime
entertainment services and e!entertainment television. the
company also produces original television programming for
network, first-run syndication, pay and international
syndication markets. additionally, the company operates abc-,
espn-, and disney-branded internet web site businesses.
parks and resorts
the company operates the walt disney world resort
in florida and the disneyland resort in california. the walt
disney world resort includes the magic kingdom, epcot,
disney-mgm studios and disneys animal kingdom, thirteen
resort hotels, a retail, dining and entertainment complex, a
sports complex, conference centers, campgrounds, golf courses,
water parks and other recreational facilities. in addition,
disney cruise line is operated out of port canaveral, florida.
the disneyland resort includes disneyland, disneys
california adventure, three resort hotels and downtown disney.
disneys regional entertainment operates sports-themed espn
zone dining and entertainment facilities. the company earns
royalties on revenues generated by the tokyo disneyland resort,
which includes two theme parks and two disney-branded hotels,
near tokyo, japan, and is owned and operated by an unrelated
japanese corporation. the company has an investment in euro
disneys.c.a. (euro disney), a publicly held french entity
that operates disneyland resort paris, which includes the
disneyland park, the walt disney studio park, seven themed
hotels, two convention centers, the disney village, a shopping,
dining and entertainment center and a 27hole golf
facility. the company earns royalties on disneyland resort paris
revenues. a subsidiary of the company also receives management
fees from euro disney. the companys walt disney
imagineering unit designs and develops new theme park concepts
and attractions, as well as resort properties. the company also
manages and markets vacation ownership interests in the disney
vacation club. included in parks& resorts are the
companys national hockey league franchise, the mighty
ducks of anaheim, and the anaheim angels, a major league
baseball team.
studio entertainment
the company produces and acquires live-action and
animated motion pictures for distribution to the theatrical,
home video and television markets. the company also produces
original animated
-60-
table of contents
television programming for network, first-run
syndication, pay and international syndication markets, stage
plays and musical recordings. the company distributes these
products through its own distribution and marketing companies in
the united states and most foreign markets under the walt disney
pictures, touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures, miramax and
dimension banners.
consumer products
the company licenses the name walt
disney, as well as the companys characters and,
visual and literary properties, to various manufacturers,
retailers, show promoters and publishers throughout the world.
the company also engages in direct retail distribution,
principally through the disney stores, and produces books and
magazines for the general public in the united states and
europe. in addition, the company produces computer software
products for the entertainment market, as well as film, video
and computer software products for the educational marketplace.
the companys direct marketing business operates the disney
catalog, which markets disney-themed merchandise through the
direct mail channel. catalog offerings include merchandise
developed exclusively for the disney catalog and
disneystore.com, as well as products from the disney store,
other internal disney partners and disney licensees.
segment information
the operating segments reported below are the
segments of the company for which separate financial information
is available and for which operating results are evaluated
regularly by executive management in deciding how to allocate
resources and in assessing performance. the accounting policies
of the business segments are the same as those described in the
summary of significant accounting policies.
segment operating results evaluated include
earnings before corporate and unallocated shared expenses,
amortization of intangible assets, gain on sale of businesses,
net interest expense and other, equity in the income of
investees, restructuring and impairment charges, income taxes
and minority interests. corporate and unallocated shared
expenses principally consist of executive management and certain
unallocated administrative support functions.
the following segment results include allocations
of certain costs, including certain information technology
costs, pension, legal and other shared services, which are
allocated based on consumption. in addition, while all
significant intersegment transactions have been eliminated,
studio entertainment revenues and operating income include an
allocation of consumer products revenues, which is meant to
reflect a portion of consumer products revenues attributable to
certain film properties. these allocations are agreed-upon
amounts between the businesses and may differ from amounts that
would be negotiated in an arms-length transaction.
business segments
revenues
media networks
$
9,733
$
9,569
$
9,836
parks and resorts
6,465
7,004
6,809
studio entertainment
third parties
6,622
5,952
5,837
intersegment
6,691
6,009
5,918
consumer products
third parties
2,509
2,647
2,843
intersegment
(69
)
(57
)
(81
)
2,440
2,590
2,762
total consolidated revenues
$
25,329
$
25,172
$
25,325
-61-
table of contents
business segments
segment operating income
media networks
$
$
1,758
$
1,985
parks and resorts
1,169
1,586
1,615
studio entertainment
consumer products
total segment operating income
$
2,822
$
4,005
$
4,112
segment operating income
$
2,822
$
4,005
$
4,112
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
(417
)
(406
)
(354
)
amortization of intangible assets
(21
)
(767
)
(1,233
)
gain on sale of businesses
net interest expense and other
(453
)
(417
)
(497
)
equity in the income of investees
restructuring and impairment charges
(1,454
)
(92
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
$
2,190
$
1,283
$
2,633
capital expenditures
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
1,278
1,524
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate
total consolidated capital expenditures
$
1,086
$
1,795
$
2,013
depreciation expense
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate
total consolidated depreciation expense
$
1,021
$
$
amortization expense
media networks
$
$
$
1,209
parks and resorts
studio entertainment
consumer products
total consolidated amortization expense
$
$
$
1,233
identifiable assets
media networks(1)(2)
$
26,038
$
20,374
parks and resorts(1)
11,305
11,369
studio entertainment
7,879
6,675
consumer products
1,125
1,041
corporate(3)
3,698
4,351
total consolidated assets
$
50,045
$
43,810
supplemental revenue data
media networks
advertising
$
5,174
$
5,988
$
6,637
subscription revenue
2,839
$
2,466
2,024
parks and resorts
merchandise, food and beverage
1,987
2,046
2,094
admissions
1,819
2,050
2,006
-62-
table of contents
geographic segments
revenues
united states and canada
$
20,770
$
20,895
$
21,036
europe
2,724
2,599
2,745
asia pacific
1,325
1,232
1,150
latin america and other
$
25,329
$
25,172
$
25,325
segment operating income
united states and canada
$
1,739
$
3,045
$
3,332
europe
asia pacific
latin america and other
(10
)
(11
)
$
2,822
$
4,005
$
4,112
identifiable assets
united states and canada
$
47,241
$
41,961
europe
2,355
1,428
asia pacific
latin america and other
$
50,045
$
43,810
(1)
identifiable assets include amounts associated
with equity method investments, including notes and other
receivables, as follows:
media networks
$
parks and resorts
(2)
includes goodwill and other intangible assets
totaling $19,360 in 2002 and $14,351 in 2001.
(3)
primarily deferred tax assets, other investments,
fixed and other assets.
2summary of significant accounting
policies
principles of consolidation
the consolidated financial statements of the
company include the accounts of the walt disney company and its
subsidiaries after elimination of intercompany accounts and
transactions. in december 1999, dvdfinancing, inc. (dfi),
a subsidiary of disney vacation development, inc. and an
indirect subsidiary of the company, completed a receivable sale
transaction. in connection with this sale, dfi prepares separate
financial statements, although its separate assets and
liabilities are also consolidated in these financial statements.
accounting changes
in july 2001, the financial accounting standards
board (fasb)issued statement of financial accounting
standards no.141, business combinations (sfas 141),
which requires all business combinations initiated after
june30, 2001 be accounted for under the purchase method.
effective october1, 2001, the company
adopted statement of financial accounting standards
no.142, goodwill and other intangible assets
(sfas142). sfas142 addresses the financial
accounting and reporting for acquired goodwill and other
intangible assets with indefinite lives. as a result of adopting
sfas142, goodwill and a substantial amount of the
companys intangible assets are no longer amortized.
pursuant to sfas142, intangible assets must be
periodically tested for impairment, and the new standard
provides six months to complete the impairment review. during
fiscal 2002, the company completed its impairment review, which
indicated that there was no impairment (see note6).
-63-
table of contents
the fasb issued statement of financial accounting
standards no.143, accounting for obligations associated
with the retirement of long-lived assets (sfas143) in
august 2001. sfas143 establishes accounting standards for
the recognition and measurement of an asset retirement
obligation and its associated asset retirement cost. the company
expects that the provisions of sfas143 will not have a
material impact on its consolidated results of operations and
financial position upon adoption. the company plans to adopt
sfas143 effective october1, 2002.
the company adopted statement of financial
accounting standards no.144, accounting for the
impairment or disposal of long-lived assets (sfas144),
effective october1, 2001, which did not have a material
impact on the companys consolidated results of operations
and financial position. sfas144 establishes a single
accounting model for the impairment or disposal of long-lived
assets, including discontinued operations.
in june 2002, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.146, accounting for
costs associated with exit or disposal activities
(sfas146). sfas146 requires that a liability for
a cost associated with an exit or disposal activity be
recognized when the liability is incurred. sfas146
requires that the initial measurement of a liability be at fair
value. the company plans to adopt sfas146 effective
october1, 2002 and does not expect that the adoption will
have a material impact on its consolidated results of operations
and financial position.
effective october1, 2000, the company
adopted two new accounting pronouncements, aicpa statement of
position no.00-2, accounting by producers or
distributors of films (sop00-2) and statement of
financial accounting standards no.133, accounting for
derivative instruments and hedging activities
(sfas133), subsequently amended by statement of
financial accounting standards no.138 (sfas138).
sop 00-2 establishes new accounting standards for
producers and distributors of films, which resulted in changes
in revenue recognition and accounting for exploitation costs,
including advertising and marketing expenses and development and
overhead costs. as a result of the adoption of sop00-2,
the company recorded a one-time after-tax charge of
$228million, or $0.11 per share, representing the
cumulative effect of the adoption. the charge represents costs
that were capitalized as of september30, 2000, that would
have been expensed under the new rules. the adoption of
sop00-2 did not have a material impact on operating
results.
sfas 133 and sfas 138 require that the company
record all derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value.
changes in derivative fair values that are designated as fair
value hedges are recognized in earnings as offsets to the
changes in fair value of related hedged assets, liabilities and
firm commitments. changes in the derivative fair values that are
designated as cash flow hedges are deferred and recorded as a
component of accumulated other comprehensive income
(aoci)until the hedged transactions occur and are
recognized in earnings. the ineffective portion of a hedging
derivatives change in fair value is immediately recognized
in earnings. derivatives that are executed for risk management
purposes but not designated as hedges under sfas133 and
sfas138 are recorded at their market value and recognized
in current earnings.
as a result of adopting sfas 133 as of
october1, 2000, and in accordance with the transition
provisions, the company recorded a one-time after-tax charge of
$50million, or $0.02 per share, in its consolidated
statements of income representing the cumulative effect of the
adoption, and an after-tax unrealized gain of $60million
to aoci. the adoption of sfas 133 did not have a material impact
on operating results.
use of estimates
the preparation of financial statements in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and
footnotes thereto. actual results may differ from those
estimates.
-64-
table of contents
revenue recognition
revenues from the theatrical distribution of
motion pictures are recognized when motion pictures are
exhibited. revenues from video sales are recognized on the date
that video units are made widely available for sale by
retailers. revenues from the licensing of feature films and
television programming are recorded when the material is
available for telecasting by the licensee and when certain other
conditions are met.
broadcast advertising revenues are recognized
when commercials are aired. revenues from television
subscription services related to the companys primary
cable programming services are recognized as services are
provided.
merchandise licensing advance and guarantee
payments are recognized when the underlying royalties are earned.
revenues from advance theme park ticket sales are
recognized when the tickets are used. revenues from participants
at the theme parks are generally recorded over the period of the
applicable agreements commencing with the opening of the related
attraction.
internet advertising revenues are recognized on
the basis of impression views in the period the advertising is
displayed, provided that no significant obligations remain and
collection of the resulting receivable is probable. direct
marketing and internet-based merchandise revenues are recognized
upon shipment to customers.
advertising expense
advertising costs are expensed as incurred. for
the years ended september30, 2002, 2001 and 2000, the
company incurred advertising expense totaling $2.3billion,
$2.2billion and $2.0billion, respectively.
cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on hand
and marketable securities with original maturities of three
months or less.
investments
debt securities that the company has the positive
intent and ability to hold to maturity are classified as
held-to-maturity and reported at amortized cost.
debt securities not classified as held-to-maturity and
marketable equity securities are classified as either
trading or available-for-sale, and are
recorded at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included
in earnings or stockholders equity, respectively. all
other equity securities are accounted for using either the cost
method or the equity method.
the company continually reviews its investments
to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost
basis is other than temporary. if the decline in fair value is
judged to be other than temporary, the cost basis of the
security is written down to fair value and the amount of the
write-down is included in the consolidated statements of income.
inventories
carrying amounts of merchandise, materials and
supplies inventories are generally determined on a moving
average cost basis and are stated at the lower of cost or market.
film and television costs
film and television costs that are produced are
stated at the lower of cost, less accumulated amortization, or
fair value. acquired programming costs for the companys
television and cable/ satellite networks are stated at the lower
of cost, less accumulated amortization, or net realizable
-65-
table of contents
value. acquired television broadcast program
licenses and rights and related liabilities are recorded when
the license period begins and the program is available for use.
film and television production and participation
costs are expensed based on the ratio of the current
periods gross revenues to estimated remaining total gross
revenues from all sources on an individual production basis.
television network and station rights for theatrical movies and
other long-form programming are charged to expense primarily on
an accelerated basis related to the usage of the programs.
television network series costs and multi-year sports rights are
charged to expense based on the ratio of the current
periods gross revenues to estimated remaining total gross
revenues from such programs.
estimates of total gross revenues can change
significantly due to a variety of factors, including the level
of market acceptance of film and television products,
advertising rates and subscriber fees. accordingly, revenue
estimates are reviewed periodically and amortization is
adjusted, if necessary. such adjustments could have a material
effect on results of operations in future periods. the net
realizable value of television broadcast program licenses and
rights is reviewed using a daypart methodology.
capitalized software costs
the company expenses costs incurred in the
preliminary project stage of developing or obtaining internal
use software, such as research and feasibility studies, as well
as costs incurred in the post-implementation/ operational stage,
such as maintenance and training. capitalization of software
development costs occurs only after the preliminary project
stage is complete, management authorizes the project, and it is
probable that the project will be completed and the software
will be used for the function intended. the capitalized costs
are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful
life of the software, which is generally five years.
parks, resorts and other property
parks, resorts and other property are carried at
cost. depreciation is computed on the straight-line method based
upon estimated useful lives as follows:
attractions
2540 years
buildings and improvements
40 years
leasehold improvements
life of lease
land improvements
25 years
equipment
210 years
furniture and fixtures
210 years
goodwill and intangible assets
the company performs an annual impairment test
for goodwill and intangible assets. goodwill and intangible
assets are allocated to various reporting units, which are
either the operating segment or one reporting level below the
operating segment. the companys reporting units for
purposes of applying the provisions of sfas142 are: cable
networks, television broadcasting, radio, studio entertainment,
consumer products and parks and resorts. sfas142 requires
the company to compare the fair value of the reporting unit to
its carrying amount on an annual basis to determine if there is
potential impairment. if the fair value of the reporting unit is
less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to
the extent that the fair value of the goodwill and intangible
assets within the reporting unit is less than their carrying
value. if the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds
its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized. fair values
for goodwill and intangible assets are determined based on
discounted cash flows, market multiples or appraised values as
appropriate.
-66-
table of contents
amortizable intangible assets are amortized on a
straight-line basis based upon estimated useful lives as follows:
intellectual property copyrights
1031 years
stadium facility leases
33 years
other
450 years
risk management contracts
in the normal course of business, the company
employs a variety of financial instruments to manage its
exposure to fluctuations in interest rates, foreign currency
exchange rates and investments in equity and debt securities,
including interest rate and cross-currency swap agreements;
forward, option and swaption contracts, and interest
rate caps.
the company formally documents all relationships
between hedging instruments and hedged items, as well as its
risk management objectives and strategies for undertaking
various hedge transactions. there are two types of derivatives
into which the company enters: hedges of fair value exposure and
hedges of cash flow exposure. hedges of fair value exposure are
entered into in order to hedge the fair value of a recognized
asset, liability, or a firm commitment. hedges of cash flow
exposure are entered into in order to hedge a forecasted
transaction (i.e. forecasted revenue) or the variability of cash
flows to be paid related to a recognized liability (i.e.
floating rate debt).
the company designates and assigns the financial
instruments as hedges of forecasted transactions, specific
assets, or specific liabilities. when hedged assets or
liabilities are sold or extinguished or the forecasted
transactions being hedged are no longer expected to occur, the
company recognizes the gain or loss on the designated hedging
financial instruments.
option premiums and unrealized losses on forward
contracts and the accrued differential for interest rate and
cross-currency swaps to be received under the agreements are
recorded on the balance sheet as other assets. unrealized gains
on forward contracts and the accrued differential for interest
rate and cross-currency swaps to be paid under the agreements
are included in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities.
realized gains and losses from hedges are classified in the
income statement consistent with the accounting treatment of the
items being hedged. the company accrues the differential for
interest rate and cross-currency swaps to be paid or received
under the agreements as interest and exchange rates shift as
adjustments to interest expense over the lives of the swaps.
gains and losses on the termination of effective swap
agreements, prior to their original maturity, are deferred and
amortized to interest expense over the remaining term of the
underlying hedged transactions.
cash flows from hedges are classified in the
consolidated statements of cash flows under the same category as
the cash flows from the related assets, liabilities or
forecasted transactions (see notes7 and 13).
earnings per share
the company presents both basic and diluted
earnings per share (eps) amounts. basic eps is calculated by
dividing net income by the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding during the year. diluted eps amounts are
based upon the weighted average number of common and common
equivalent shares outstanding during the year. common equivalent
shares are excluded from the computation in periods in which
they have an anti-dilutive effect. the difference between basic
and diluted eps, for the company, is solely attributable to
stock options. the company uses the treasury stock method to
calculate the impact of outstanding stock options. stock options
for which the exercise price exceeds the average market price
over the period have an anti-dilutive effect on eps and,
accordingly, are excluded from the calculation.
-67-
table of contents
for the years ended september30, 2002, 2001
and 2000, options for 156million, 81million and
20million shares, respectively, were excluded from the
diluted eps calculation for disney common stock because they
were anti-dilutive.
stock options
the company uses the intrinsic-value method of
accounting for stock-based awards granted to employees and,
accordingly, does not currently recognize compensation expense
for its stock-based awards to employees in the consolidated
statements of income. see note11 for pro forma information
on the impact of the fair-value method of accounting for stock
options.
reclassifications
certain reclassifications have been made in the
2001 and 2000 financial statements to conform to the 2002
presentation.
3significant acquisitions and
dispositions
on october24, 2001, the company acquired
fox family worldwide, inc. (ffw) for $5.2billion, funded
with $2.9billion of new long-term borrowings plus the
assumption of $2.3billion of ffw long-term debt. upon the
closing of the acquisition, the company changed ffws name
to abc family worldwide, inc. (abc family). among the businesses
acquired were the fox family channel, which has been renamed abc
family channel, a programming service that currently reaches
approximately 85million cable and satellite television
subscribers throughout the u.s.; a 76% interest in fox kids
europe, which reaches more than 31million subscribers
across europe; fox kids channels in latin america, and the saban
library and entertainment production businesses.
our motivation for the acquisition was to acquire
a fully integrated cable channel as well as a significant
international cable presence and therefore increase shareholder
value. we believe that we can reach this objective through the
use of new strategies that include cross promotion with our
other television properties, repurposing a portion of the
programming of the abc television network, utilizing programming
from the disney and abc libraries, developing original
programming and by reducing operating costs.
the acquisition of abc family has been accounted
for in accordance with sfas141. the cost of the
acquisition was allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities
assumed based on estimates of their respective fair values at
the date of acquisition. fair values were determined by internal
studies and independent third party appraisals.
-68-
table of contents
the following table summarizes the final purchase
price allocation of abc familys assets acquired and
liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition.
receivables
$
programming costs
other assets
intangible assets
goodwill
4,996
total assets
6,069
accounts payable and accrued liabilities
(555
)
other liabilities
(269
)
minority interest
(49
)
total liabilities
(873
)
fair value of net assets acquired
5,196
borrowings and preferred stock assumed
(2,371
)
cash purchase price, net of cash acquired
$
2,825
the excess of the purchase price over the fair
value of the identifiable net assets acquired of approximately
$5.0billion was allocated to goodwill that was assigned to
the cable networks reporting unit within the media networks
segment. none of this amount is expected to be deductible for
tax purposes.
the companys consolidated results of
operations have incorporated abc familys activity on a
consolidated basis from october24, 2001, the date of
acquisition. on an unaudited pro forma basis, adjusting only for
the assumption that the acquisition of abc family and related
incremental borrowings had occurred at the beginning of fiscal
2001, revenues for the year ended september30, 2002 and
2001 were $25,360million and $25,803million,
respectively. as-reported and unaudited proforma net
income (loss)and earnings (loss)per share for fiscal
2002 were approximately the same. the unaudited pro forma
earnings per share impact on fiscal 2001 was approximately $0.01
dilutive, assuming that the incremental acquisition goodwill had
not been amortized in the prior year pursuant to the new
goodwill accounting rules. the unaudited pro forma information
is not necessarily indicative of the results of operations had
the acquisition actually occurred at the beginning of fiscal
2001, nor is it necessarily indicative of future results.
in fiscal 2002, the company sold the disney store
operations in japan generating a pre-tax gain of
$34million. in fiscal 2001, the company sold infoseek
japan k.k. generating a $22million pre-tax gain and in
fiscal 2000 it sold fairchild publications, ultraseek
corporation and eurosport generating pre-tax gains of
$243million, $153million and $93million,
respectively. these gains are reported in the line gain on
sale of businesses in the consolidated statements of
income.
on march20, 2001, the company converted all
of its outstanding internet group common stock into disney
common stock, resulting in the issuance of approximately
8.6million shares of disney common stock. for the year
ended september30, 2001, earnings attributed to disney
common stock reflect approximately 72% of internet group losses
from october1, 2000 through january28, 2001 (the
last date prior to the announcement of the conversion), and 100%
thereafter. in addition, the company has ceased the operations
of the go.com portal business, which resulted in restructuring
and impairment charges of $878million in fiscal 2001 (see
note15).
-69-
table of contents
4investments
investments consist of the following:
investments, at equity(1)
$
$
investments, at cost(2)
investment in leveraged leases
notes receivable and other investments
$
1,810
$
2,112
(1)
equity investments consist of investments in
affiliated companies over which the company has significant
influence or ownership of 20% or more but less than or equal to
50%
(2)
cost investments consist of marketable securities
classified as available-for-sale and investments in affiliated
companies over which the company does not have significant
influence and ownership of less than 20%
euro disney and other equity
investments
euro disney operates the disneyland resort paris
on a 4,800-acre site near paris, france. the company accounts
for its 39% ownership interest in euro disney using the equity
method of accounting. as of september30, 2002, the
companys recorded investment in euro disney, including
accounts and notes receivable, was $424million.
in connection with the financial restructuring of
euro disney in 1994, euro disney associs s.n.c. (disney
snc), a wholly-owned affiliate of the company, entered into a
lease arrangement with a noncancelable term of 12years
related to substantially all of the disneyland park assets, and
then entered into a 12-year sublease agreement with euro disney.
remaining lease rentals at september30, 2002 of
approximately $702million receivable from euro disney
under the sublease approximate the amounts payable by disney snc
under the lease. at the conclusion of the sublease term, euro
disney will have the option to assume disney sncs rights
and obligations under the lease. if euro disney does not
exercise its option, disney snc may purchase the assets,
continue to lease the assets or elect to terminate the lease, in
which case disney snc would make a termination payment to the
lessor equal to 75% of the lessors then outstanding debt
related to the disneyland park assets, which is estimated to be
$1.1billion; disney snc could then sell or lease the
assets on behalf of the lessor to satisfy the remaining debt,
with any excess proceeds payable to disney snc.
also, as part of the restructuring, the company
agreed to provide a 10-year unsecured standby credit facility of
approximately $164million, bearing interest at the paris
interbank offered rate (pibor). as of september30, 2002,
euro disney had drawn $61million under this facility. it
is expected that euro disney will draw additional amounts under
the line of credit during fiscal 2003. the company also agreed,
as long as any of the restructured debt is outstanding, to
maintain ownership of at least 25% of the outstanding common
stock of euro disney through june 2004 and at least 16.67% for
an additional term thereafter.
after a five-year waiver resulting from the
restructuring, royalties and management fees from euro disney
were partially reinstated beginning fiscal year 1999. as a
result, the company earned approximately $33million,
$28million and $30million in royalties and
management fees in fiscal years 2002, 2001 and 2000,
respectively. royalties are to be fully reinstated beginning in
fiscal year 2004, with management fees progressively reinstated
through fiscal year 2018.
in november 1999, euro disney stockholders
approved an increase in share capital through an equity rights
offering. the offering raised $238million. the net
proceeds were used to partially finance the construction of a
second theme park, walt disney studios which opened on
march16,
-70-
table of contents
2002. the company subscribed to approximately
$91million of the equity rights offering, maintaining its
39% interest in euro disney.
since the opening of the walt disney studios,
euro disneys attendance and occupancy at its parks and
resorts have increased, although attendance growth has been
below original expectations. because of euro disneys
limited cash resources and its significant debt burden,
including the obligation to repay the line of credit with the
company in june 2004, euro disney will need to experience
continued steady growth in operating income in order to meet its
cash needs. if this growth is not sufficient to provide the
needed funding, additional financing may be required. there can
be no assurance that euro disney would be able to secure such
additional financing, and if such financing can be arranged, the
terms thereof may be less favorable than current financing
arrangements.
a summary of u.s.gaap financial information
for euro disney is as follows:
results of operations:
revenues
$
$
$
cost and expenses
(891
)
(871
)
(942
)
net interest expense and other
(75
)
(80
)
(105
)
loss before income taxes
(57
)
(46
)
(67
)
income taxes
net loss
$
(57
)
$
(46
)
$
(67
)
balance sheet:
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
other current assets
total current assets
parks, resorts and other property, net
2,605
2,319
other non-current assets
$
3,001
$
3,217
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
$
$
current portion of borrowings
other current liabilities
total current liabilities
borrowings
2,126
1,957
other non-current liabilities
stockholders equity
$
3,001
$
3,217
in addition to the companys investment in
euro disney, the company has other equity investments, primarily
comprised of cable investments such as a&e television
networks (37.5% owned), lifetime entertainment services (50%
owned) and e! entertainment television (39.6% owned).
-71-
table of contents
a summary of combined financial information for
the other equity investments is as follows:
results of operations:
revenues
$
3,111
$
3,161
$
2,973
net income
$
$
$
balance sheet:
current assets
$
1,938
$
1,702
non-current assets
1,419
1,348
$
3,357
$
3,050
current liabilities
$
$
non-current liabilities
stockholders equity
1,684
1,545
$
3,357
$
3,050
investments, at cost
as of september30, 2002 and 2001, the
company held $14million and $92million,
respectively, of securities classified as available-for-sale. as
of september30, 2002 and september30, 2001, the
company also held $148million and $472million,
respectively, of non-public cost method investments. realized
gains and losses are determined principally on an average cost
basis. in 2002, 2001 and 2000, the company recognized
$239million, $87million and $41million,
respectively, in net gains on sales of securities. included in
fiscal 2002 is a $216million gain on the sale of the
remaining shares of knight ridder stock that the company had
received in connection with the disposition of certain
publishing operations that had been acquired in connection with
the acquisition of abc.
in addition, in 2002 and 2001, the company
recorded non-cash charges of $2million and
$241million, respectively, to reflect other-than-temporary
losses in value of certain investments. in 2002, 2001 and 2000,
unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities
were not material.
investment in leveraged leases
the companys investment portfolio includes
commercial aircraft leveraged leasing investments made between
1992 and 1994 totaling $289million, which are diversified
across three air carriers (united airlines
$114million, delta airlines $119million,
and fedex $56million) and eleven aircraft.
risk of loss under these transactions is primarily related to
the ability of the air carriers to make underlying lease
payments.
we continue to monitor our investment in
commercial aircraft lease transactions given the current status
of the airline industry. we have, in particular, been monitoring
united airlines which has indicated that if it does not obtain
significant concessions from each of its employee unions,
achieve cost savings in other operating areas of the company and
obtain a loan guarantee from the airline transportation
stabilization board, it will have to file for bankruptcy
protection. to date, all payments on these leases have been made
when due. the inability of any of the companies to make their
lease payments or the termination of our leases through a
bankruptcy proceeding could result in material charges related
to a write-down of some or all of our investment and could
accelerate income tax payments.
the companys leveraged lease investment
includes the impact of certain income tax benefits that are
projected to be realized in the future under the current
u.s.income tax laws. as discussed more fully in
note8, the u.s. congress is considering a change in the
applicable income tax law.
-72-
table of contents
5film and television costs
theatrical film costs
released, less amortization
$
2,384
$
2,324
completed, not released
in-process
1,103
in development or pre-production
4,140
4,015
television costs
released, less amortization
completed, not released
in-process
in development or pre-production
1,357
1,240
television broadcast rights
1,123
1,155
6,620
6,410
less current portion
non-current portion
$
5,959
$
5,641
based on managements total gross revenue
estimates as of september30, 2002, approximately44%
of completed and unamortized film and television costs
(excluding amounts allocated to acquired film libraries) are
expected to be amortized during fiscal 2003, and
approximately71% during the next three years. by
september30, 2006, approximately80% of the total
completed and unamortized film and television costs are expected
to be amortized. as of september30, 2002, the company
estimated that approximately $332million of accrued
participation liabilities will be payable in fiscal year 2003.
at september30, 2002, acquired film
libraries have remaining unamortized film costs of
$387million which are amortized straight line over a
remaining period of approximately 5-14years.
the following table provides detail of film and
television cost spending and amortization.
film and television cost spending
$
(2,315
)
$
(2,273
)
$
(2,585
)
film and television cost amortization
2,218
2,260
2,375
film and television cost
$
(97
)
$
(13
)
$
(210
)
-73-
table of contents
6goodwill and intangible assets
the following table provides a reconciliation of
reported net earnings (loss) for the prior-years to adjusted
earnings had sfas142 been applied as of the beginning of
fiscal 2000.
earnings
earnings
amount
per share
amount
per share
reported net earnings (loss) attributed to disney
common stock
$
(41
)
$
(0.02
)
$
1,196
$
0.57
cumulative effect of accounting changes
0.13
reported earnings attributed to disney common
stock before the cumulative effect of accounting changes
0.11
1,196
0.57
add back amortization (net of tax):
goodwill
0.29
0.42
indefinite life intangible assets
0.02
0.04
adjusted earnings attributed to disney common
stock before the cumulative effect of accounting changes
$
$
0.42
$
2,157
$
1.03
the changes in the carrying amount of goodwill
for the year ended september30, 2002 are as follows:
media
networks
other
total
balance as of october1, 2001
$
12,042
$
$
12,106
goodwill acquired during the period
4,998
5,009
investment impairment adjustment
(32
)
(32
)
balance as of september30,
$
17,008
$
$
17,083
the media networks segment goodwill includes
goodwill attributed to the cable equity investees. during the
third quarter of fiscal 2002, the company determined that an
investment in a latin american cable operator had experienced a
permanent decline in value and recorded a goodwill impairment
loss of $32million representing the goodwill associated
with that investment. the impairment loss has been recorded in
equity in the income of investees in the
consolidated statements of income.
-74-
table of contents
7borrowings
the companys borrowings at
september30, 2002 and 2001, including interest rate swaps
designated as hedges, are summarized below.
interest rate and
cross-currency
stated
swaps(b)
effective
interest
interest
swap
rate(a)
pay float
pay fixed
rate(c)
maturities
commercial paper due 2003
$
$
2.0%
$
$
3.8%
2004-2005
u.s. medium-term notes
8,042
5,681
6.1%
2,612
5.1%
2003-2032
other usd denominated debt
1,303
4.8%
4.8%
privately placed debt
7.0%
3.8%
european medium term notes
1,646
1,258
3.3%
1,141
3.4%
2003-2007
preferred stock
7.4%
4.4%
capital cities/abc and abcfamily debt
1,085
9.3%
8.9%
other(d)
14,130
9,769
5.6%
4.9%
less current portion
1,663
total long-term borrowings
$
12,467
$
8,940
$
4,285
$
(a)
the stated interest rate represents the
weighted-average coupon rate for each category of borrowings.
for floating rate borrowings, interest rates are based upon the
rates at september30, 2002; these rates are not
necessarily an indication of future interest rates.
(b)
amounts represent notional values of interest
rate swaps.
(c)
the effective interest rate reflects the impact
of interest rate and cross-currency swaps on the stated rate of
debt.
(d)
includes write ups due to market value
adjustments for debt with qualifying hedges that are recorded as
debt on the balance sheet totaling $353million at
september30, 2002.
commercial paper
the company currently maintains u.s. and european
commercial paper programs with a combined program size of
$4.5billion. as of september30, 2002, the company
had established bank facilities totaling $4.5billion to
support commercial paper borrowings, with half of the facilities
scheduled to expire in february 2003 and the other half in march
2005. the company plans to renew or extend these bank facilities
prior to their scheduled expiration. under the bank facilities,
the company has the option to borrow at libor-based rates plus a
spread depending on the companys senior unsecured debt
rating. as of september30, 2002, the company had not
borrowed against the bank facilities. at september30,
2002, the total debt outstanding from commercial paper was
$721million, with maturities ranging from 4 to
158days and stated interest rates ranging from 1.85%
to2.53%.
$7.5 billion shelf registration
statement
in august 2001, the company filed a u.s. shelf
registration statement with the securities and exchange
commission(sec) which allows the company to issue from
time to time, up to $7.5billion of securities, including
debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary
shares, warrants and purchase contracts. of the
$7.5billion available at september30, 2002,
$2.75billion of debt had been issued under the
companys u.s.medium-term note program (described
below) and $1.303billion of debt had been issued under
other u.s.dollar denominated debt (also described below).
the remaining unused available capacity to issue under the shelf
is $3.447billion, subject to market conditions and other
factors impacting our borrowing capacity.
-75-
table of contents
u.s. medium-term note program
in september 2001, the company established a
$6.5billion u.s.medium-term note program under the
u.s.shelf registration statement described above for the
issuance of various types of debt instruments, such as fixed or
floating rate notes, u.s.dollar or foreign currency
denominated notes, redeemable notes, global notes and dual
currency or other indexed notes. in 2002, the company issued
$2.75billion under the current program. the remaining
capacity under the program may be further reduced from time to
time to the extent that the company issues securities outside of
the existing u.s.medium-term note program but under the
current shelf registration statement. at september30,
2002, the total debt outstanding under the current and prior
u.s.medium-term note programs was $8.042billion. the
maturities of current outstanding borrowings ranged from
1to 91years and stated interest rates ranged from
1.46% to 7.55%.
other u.s. dollar denominated debt
from time to time, the company may issue bonds or
notes separately from the u.s. medium-term note program, under
shelf registration statements in effect at the time. at
september30, 2002, the total debt outstanding from these
offerings, which included global bonds and quarterly interest
bonds (quibs), was $1.303billion. the maturities of these
outstanding borrowings ranged from 1 to 29years and the
stated interest rates ranged from 3.9% to 7%.
privately placed debt
in 1996, the company raised $850million of
privately placed financing. the notes pay 7.02% interest per
annum and amortize semi-annually. the outstanding principal as
of september30, 2002 was $425million.
european medium-term note program
in july 2002, the company renewed its european
medium-term note program for the issuance of various types of
debt instruments such as fixed or floating rate notes,
u.s.dollar or foreign currency denominated notes,
redeemable notes, index linked and dual currency notes. at such
time, the program size was increased from $3.0billion to
$4.0billion. in 2002, the company issued $989million
under the program. the remaining capacity to issue under the
program is $2.354billion, subject to market conditions and
other factors impacting our borrowing capacity. the remaining
capacity under the program replenishes as outstanding debt under
the program matures. at september30, 2002, the total debt
outstanding from the program was $1.646billion. the
maturities of current outstanding borrowings ranged from 1 to
5years and stated interest rates ranged from 2.63% to 14%.
the company has outstanding borrowings in the program
denominated in u.s.dollars, hong kong dollars, singapore
dollars, japanese yen and south african rand.
preferred stock
as a result of the fox family worldwide, inc.
(now abc family worldwide, inc.) acquisition in october 2001
(the abc family acquisition), the company assumed seriesa
preferred stock with a 9% coupon and quarterly dividend payments
valued at approximately $400million with an effective cost
of capital of 5.25%. the seriesa preferred stock is
callable starting august1, 2007, and has a maturity of
august1, 2027.
in july 1999, a subsidiary of the company issued
$102million of auction market preferred stock (amps).
these are perpetual, non-cumulative, non-redeemable instruments.
quarterly distributions, if declared, are at the rate of 5.427%
per annum, for the first five years. amps will be remarketed
through an auction procedure in july 2004. the company is
required to submit a valid bid for all the amps at that time.
based on the companys current credit rating, the holders
may require the company to remarket the amps at an earlier date.
the company has not received notification from the amps holders
to conduct an earlier auction.
-76-
table of contents
the seriesa preferred stock and the amps
are classified as borrowings given their substantive similarity
to a debt instrument.
capital cities/ abc and abc family publicly
traded debt
as a result of the abc family acquisition in
october 2001, the company assumed $475million of
91/4% senior notes due 2007, valued at $502million
and $560million of 101/4% senior discount notes due
2007, valued at $589million (collectively, the abc
family notes). at september30, 2002, the fair value
of the abc family notes was $892million, as the company
repurchased $194million of the notes prior to the stated
maturity date. the abc family notes were redeemable by abc
family starting november1, 2002 and semi-annually
thereafter. abc family exercised its right to redeem the notes
and, accordingly, all of the outstanding abc family notes were
redeemed on november1, 2002 at a price of 104.625% for the
senior notes and 105.125% of the principal amount for the senior
discount notes. the redemption did not have a material impact on
the company. as of september30, 2002, the abc family notes
were classified as current.
as a result of the capital cities/ abc, inc.
acquisition in 1996, the company assumed various debt previously
issued by capital cities/ abc, inc. certain of these securities
were subsequently exchanged for different securities. at
september30, 2002, the outstanding balance was
$193million with maturities ranging from 7 to
19years and stated interest rates ranging from 8.75% to
9.645%.
borrowings, excluding commercial paper and market
value adjustments, have the following scheduled maturities:
$
1,663
2,567
1,636
1,420
2,082
thereafter
3,688
$
13,056
the maturities in fiscal 2003 include the abc
family notes that were redeemed on november1, 2002.
the company capitalizes interest on assets
constructed for its parks, resorts and other property, and on
theatrical and television productions in process. in 2002, 2001
and 2000, total interest costs capitalized were
$36million, $94million and $132million were
capitalized.
-77-
table of contents
8income taxes
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
domestic (including u.s. exports)
$
1,832
$
1,126
$
2,509
foreign subsidiaries
$
2,190
$
1,283
$
2,633
income tax provision
current
federal
$
$
$
state
foreign (including withholding)
1,001
1,336
deferred
federal
(8
)
state
$
$
1,059
$
1,606
components of deferred tax assets and
liabilities
deferred tax assets
accrued liabilities
$
(1,272
)
$
(1,087
)
foreign subsidiaries
(233
)
(156
)
loss and credit carryforwards
(206
)
(195
)
total deferred tax assets
(1,711
)
(1,438
)
deferred tax liabilities
depreciable, amortizable and other property
2,967
2,663
licensing revenues
leveraged leases
investment in euro disney
other, net
total deferred tax liabilities
3,610
3,492
net deferred tax liability before valuation
allowance
1,899
2,054
valuation allowance
net deferred tax liability
$
1,973
$
2,107
reconciliation of effective income tax
rate
federal income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
nondeductible amortization of intangible assets
18.1
14.8
state taxes, net of federal income tax benefit
2.6
7.5
5.1
dispositions
1.4
7.5
impairment of intangible assets
20.6
foreign sales corporation and extraterritorial
income
(3.1
)
(1.9
)
(1.2
)
other, including tax reserves and related interest
4.4
1.8
(0.2
)
38.9
%
82.5
%
61.0
%
deferred tax assets at september30, 2002
and 2001 were reduced by a valuation allowance relating to a
portion of the tax benefits attributable to certain net
operating losses (nols) reflected on
-78-
table of contents
state tax returns of infoseek and its
subsidiaries for periods prior to the infoseek acquisition on
november18, 1999 (see note3), where applicable state
tax laws limit the utilization of such nols. in addition,
deferred tax assets at september30, 2002 were reduced by a
valuation allowance relating to a portion of the tax benefits
attributable to certain nols reflected on tax returns of abc
family worldwide, inc. and its subsidiaries for periods prior to
the abc family acquisition on october24, 2001 (see
note3). since the valuation allowance relates to acquired
deferred tax assets, the subsequent realization of these tax
benefits would result in the application of the allowance amount
as a reduction to goodwill.
at september30, 2002, approximately
$354million of nol carryforwards were available to offset
future taxable income through the year 2021. since the
acquisition of abc family constituted an ownership change as
defined under section382 of the internal revenue code, the
utilization of abc familys pre-change nols will be subject
to an annual limitation. however, such annual limitation will
not impair the realization of these nols.
at september30, 2002, approximately
$75million of foreign tax credit carryforwards were
available as credits against future income taxes. foreign tax
credit carryforwards will expire through the year 2005.
in 2002, 2001 and 2000, income tax benefits
attributable to employee stock option transactions of
$8million, $48million and $197million,
respectively, were allocated to stockholders equity.
during 2002 the company derived tax benefits of
$69million from an exclusion provided under
u.s.income tax laws with respect to certain
extraterritorial income (eti) attributable to
foreign trading gross receipts. the world trade organization
(wto) has ruled that this eti exclusion represents a
prohibited export subsidy under the wto agreement on subsidies
and countervailing measures. based upon this ruling, a wto
arbitration panel has determined that the european union
(eu) may impose up to $4billion per year in
trade sanctions against the u.s., although the eu has yet to
impose such sanctions. president bush has stated that the u.s.
will change its tax laws in order to comply with the wto ruling.
various legislative proposals providing for the repeal of the
eti exclusion have also introduced broad-based international tax
reforms, but the presidential administration and congress have
not yet agreed upon a solution to this issue. since the impact
of this matter upon the company depends upon the actions of the
eu and the specific provisions of any tax legislation ultimately
enacted by congress, it is not possible to predict the impact on
future financial results. however, if the eti exclusion is
repealed and legislation that would replace the eti exclusion
benefit is not enacted, the impact on the companys tax
provision could be significant.
as a matter of course, the company is regularly
audited by both federal, state and foreign tax authorities. from
time to time, these audits result in proposed assessments. among
current audits, the internal revenue service (irs) is in the
final stages of its examination of the companys federal
income tax returns for 1993 through 1995. in connection with
this examination, the irs has proposed assessments that
challenge certain of the companys tax positions which, if
upheld through the administrative and legal process, could have
a material impact on the companys earnings and cash flow.
the company believes that its tax positions comply with
applicable tax law and it intends to defend its positions
vigorously. the company believes it has adequately provided for
any reasonably foreseeable outcome related to these matters, and
it does not anticipate any material earnings impact from their
ultimate resolution. during 2002, the company negotiated the
settlement of a number of proposed assessments, and it continues
to pursue favorable settlement of the remaining items.
9pension and other benefit programs
the company maintains pension and post-retirement
medical benefit plans covering most of its domestic employees
not covered by union or industry-wide plans. employees hired
after january1, 1994 are not eligible for post-retirement
medical benefits. with respect to its qualified defined benefit
-79-
table of contents
pension plans, the companys policy is to
fund, at a minimum, the amount necessary on an actuarial basis
to provide for benefits in accordance with the requirements of
the employee retirement income security act of 1974. pension
benefits are generally based on years of service and/or
compensation. the following chart summarizes the balance sheet
impact, as well as the benefit obligations, assets, funded
status and rate assumptions associated with the pension and
post-retirement medical benefit plans.
post-
retirement
pension plans
benefit plans
reconciliation of funded status of the plans and
the amounts included in the companys consolidated balance
sheets:
projected benefit obligations
beginning obligations
$
(2,131
)
$
(1,825
)
$
(585
)
$
(413
)
service cost
(98
)
(90
)
(22
)
(13
)
interest cost
(157
)
(143
)
(43
)
(33
)
amendments
(14
)
(10
)
actuarial losses
(76
)
(146
)
(67
)
(139
)
benefits paid
ending obligations
$
(2,388
)
$
(2,131
)
$
(680
)
$
(585
)
fair value of plans assets
beginning fair value
$
2,450
$
2,773
$
$
actual return on plans assets
(197
)
(230
)
(20
)
(23
)
contributions
benefits paid
(88
)
(83
)
(19
)
(13
)
expenses
(14
)
(19
)
ending fair value
$
2,157
$
2,450
$
$
funded status of the plans
$
(231
)
$
$
(481
)
$
(356
)
unrecognized net (gain)loss
(129
)
unrecognized prior service cost (benefit)
(20
)
net balance sheet asset (liability)
$
$
$
(260
)
$
(207
)
amounts recognized in the balance sheet consist
of:
prepaid benefit cost
$
$
$
$
accrued benefit liability
(194
)
(156
)
(287
)
(241
)
accumulated other comprehensive income
$
$
$
(260
)
$
(207
)
-80-
table of contents
the component of net periodic benefit costs are
as follows:
post-retirement
pension plans
benefit plans
service costs
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest costs
expected return on plan assets
(241
)
(237
)
(217
)
(21
)
(21
)
(19
)
amortization of prior year service costs
recognized net actuarial loss
(18
)
(3
)
(7
)
net periodic benefit cost (credit)
$
$
(24
)
$
(3
)
$
$
$
rate assumptions:
discount rate
7.2
%
7.5
%
8.0
%
7.2
%
7.5
%
8.0
%
rate of return on plans assets
8.5
%
9.5
%
10.0
%
8.5
%
9.5
%
10.0
%
salary increases
4.7
%
5.0
%
5.5
%
n/a
n/a
n/a
annual increase in cost of benefits
n/a
n/a
n/a
10.0
%
10.0
%
7.5
%
net periodic benefit cost for the current year is
based on rate assumptions from the prior year.
the projected benefit obligations, accumulated
benefit obligations and fair value of plan assets for the
pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations in excess of
plan assets were $495million, $471million and
$324million, respectively, for 2002, and
$151million, $119million and $0, respectively, for
2001.
the companys accumulated pension benefit
obligations at september30, 2002 and 2001 were
$2.2billion and $1.9billion, respectively, of which
98.2% and 97.7%, respectively, were vested. in addition, the
company contributes to various pension plans under union and
industry-wide agreements. in 2002, 2001 and 2000, the costs
recognized under these plans were $41million,
$40million and $38million, respectively.
the market values of the companys shares
held by the pension plan master trust as of september30,
2002 and 2001 were $42million and $52million,
respectively.
the accumulated post-retirement benefit
obligations and fair value of plan assets for post-retirement
plans with accumulated postretirement benefit obligations in
excess of plan assets were $680million and
$199million, respectively for 2002, and $441million
and $79million, respectively for 2001.
assumed health care cost trend rates have a
significant effect on the amounts reported for the
post-retirement medical benefit plans. a one percentage point
decrease in the assumed health care cost trend rates would
reduce total service and interest costs and post-retirement
benefit obligations by $14million and $118million,
respectively. a one percentage point increase in the assumed
health care cost trend rates would increase total service and
interest costs and post-retirement benefit obligations by
$19million and $153million, respectively. the annual
increase in cost of post-retirement benefits is assumed to
decrease 1.0percentage point per year for 5years
until reaching 5.0%.
the company has savings and investment plans that
allow eligible employees to allocate up to 10% or 15% of salary
through payroll deductions depending on the plan in which the
employee participates. the company matches 50% of the
employees pre-tax contributions, up to plan limits. in
2002, 2001 and 2000, the costs of these plans were
$29million, $32million and $30million,
respectively.
-81-
table of contents
10stockholders equity
under its share repurchase program, the company
is authorized to repurchase approximately 330million
shares as of september30, 2002. no shares were repurchased
during the current year. during fiscal 2001, the company
repurchased a total of 63.9million shares of disney common
stock for approximately $1.1billion.
in december 1999, the company established the
twdcstock compensation fundii (fundii)
pursuant to the repurchase program to acquire shares of company
common stock for the purpose of funding certain future
stock-based compensation. any shares acquired by fundii
that are not utilized must be disposed of by december31,
2002.
the company declared a fourth quarter dividend of
$0.21 per share on december3, 2002 related to fiscal 2002.
the dividend is payable on january9, 2003 to shareholders
of record on december13, 2002. the company paid a
$428million dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the
first quarter of fiscal 2002 applicable to fiscal 2001, paid a
$438million dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the
first quarter of fiscal 2001 applicable to fiscal 2000 and paid
a $434million dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the
first quarter of fiscal 2000 applicable to fiscal 1999.
11stock incentive plans
under various plans, the company may grant stock
options and other awards to key executive, management and
creative personnel at exercise prices equal to or exceeding the
market price at the date of grant. in general, options for
common stock become exercisable over a five-year period from the
grant date and expire 10years after the date of grant. in
certain cases for senior executives, options become exercisable
over periods up to 10years and expire up to 15years
after date of grant. shares available for future option grants
at september30, 2002 totaled 90million.
the following table summarizes information about
stock option transactions, including the conversion of all
shares of disney internet group common stock(dig) into
shares of disney common stock(dis) effective march 2001
(shares in millions).
weighted
weighted
weighted
average
average
average
exercise
exercise
exercise
shares
price
shares
price
shares
price
outstanding at beginning of year
$
29.54
$
27.24
$
24.29
awards canceled
(14
)
33.64
(13
)
36.30
(18
)
29.56
awards granted
21.99
29.71
32.92
awards exercised
(2
)
18.02
(9
)
18.72
(28
)
18.94
awards expired
(6
)
34.72
options converted(1)
102.61
outstanding at september30
$
27.48
$
29.54
$
27.24
exercisable at september30
$
26.89
$
25.64
$
21.22
(1)
represents conversion of all outstanding
digoptions that were converted into options to purchase
disoptions on march20, 2001 (see note3).
-82-
table of contents
the following table summarizes information about
stock options outstanding at september30, 2002 (shares in
millions).
outstanding
exercisable
weighted average
weighted
weighted
range of exercise
number
remaining years of
average
number
average
prices
of options
contractual life
exercise price
of options
exercise price
$10-$14
2.3
$
13.84
$
13.70
$15-$19
3.1
18.33
18.33
$20-$24
7.3
21.89
21.59
$25-$29
6.6
27.09
26.97
$30-$34
7.7
31.54
32.09
$35-$39
6.1
37.35
37.55
$40-$44
8.1
41.16
40.57
$45-$395
7.4
111.09
115.33
the company granted restricted stock units to
certain executives during fiscal year 2002. certain units vest
upon the achievement of certain performance conditions. the
remaining units vest 50% in fiscal year 2005 and 50% in fiscal
year 2006. units are forfeited if the grantee terminates
employment prior to vesting. compensation expense recorded in
fiscal year 2002 was $3.4million.
the following table reflects pro forma net income
(loss)and earnings (loss)per share had the company
elected to adopt the fair value approach of statement of
financial accounting standards no.123, accounting for
stock-based compensation (in millions, except for per share
data).
net income (loss)attributed to disney
common stock:
as reported
$
1,236
$
(41
)
$
1,196
pro forma after option expense
(325
)
diluted earnings (loss)per share attributed
to disney common stock:
as reported
0.60
(0.02
)
0.57
pro forma after option expense
0.45
(0.15
)
0.46
these pro forma amounts may not be representative
of future disclosures since the estimated fair value of stock
options is amortized to expense over the vesting period, and
additional options may be granted in future years.
the weighted average fair values of options at
their grant date during 2002, 2001 and 2000, where the exercise
price equaled the market price on the grant date, were $8.02,
$10.25 and $12.49, respectively. the estimated fair value of
each disney option granted is calculated using the black-scholes
option-pricing model. the weighted average assumptions used in
the model were as follows:
risk-free interest rate
4.8
%
5.0
%
6.5
%
expected years until exercise
6.0
6.0
6.0
expected stock volatility
%
%
%
dividend yield
.96
%
.70
%
.59
%
-83-
table of contents
12detail of certain balance sheet
accounts
current receivables
accounts receivable
$
3,960
$
3,120
income taxes receivable
other
allowance for doubtful accounts
(243
)
(181
)
$
4,049
$
3,343
other current assets
prepaid expenses
$
$
other
$
$
parks, resorts and other property, at
cost
attractions, buildings and improvements
$
8,984
$
9,024
leasehold improvements
equipment
6,228
6,212
furniture and fixtures
land improvements
2,120
2,124
18,917
18,846
accumulated depreciation
(8,133
)
(7,662
)
projects in progress
1,148
land
$
12,780
$
12,906
intangible assets
intellectual copyrights
$
$
stadium facility leases
other amortizable intangible assets
accumulated amortization
(153
)
(132
)
amortizable intangible assets
fcc licenses
1,375
1,361
trademark
other intangible assets with indefinite lives
$
2,776
$
2,736
other non-current assets
receivables
$
$
other prepaid expenses
prepaid benefit costs
other
$
1,788
$
1,704
accounts payable and other accrued
liabilities
accounts payable
$
3,820
$
3,623
payroll and employee benefits
income tax payable
other
$
5,173
$
4,404
-84-
table of contents
other long-term liabilities
deferred revenues
$
$
capital lease obligations
program licenses and rights
participation liabilities
accrued benefit liability
other
1,299
1,346
$
3,283
$
3,067
13financial instruments
during 2002 and 2001, the company hedged certain
investment holdings using forward sale contracts. the contracts,
with notional amounts totaling $530million in 2002 and
2001, were terminated in october 2001.
interest rate risk management
the company is exposed to the impact of interest
rate changes. the companys objective is to manage the
impact of interest rate changes on earnings and cash flows and
on the market value of its investments and borrowings. in
accordance with policy, the company maintains a minimum amount
of fixed rate debt expressed as a percentage of its net debt.
significant interest rate risk management
instruments held by the company during 2002 and 2001 included
pay-floating and pay-fixed swaps. pay-floating swaps effectively
convert fixed rate medium and long-term obligations to variable
rate instruments indexed to libor. these swap agreements expire
in one to 30years. pay-fixed swaps effectively convert
floating rate obligations to fixed rate instruments. the
pay-fixed swaps expire in one to three years. as of
september30, 2002 and 2001 respectively, the company held
$300million and $500million of pay-fixed swaps that
no longer qualified as hedges. the prospective change in market
values related to these swaps from the time they were
ineffective as hedges, has been included in earnings.
the impact of interest rate risk management
activities on income in 2002, 2001 and 2000 was not material.
the amount of deferred gains from interest rate risk management
transactions at september30, 2002 and 2001 was
$41million and $22million, respectively.
foreign exchange risk management
the company transacts business globally and is
subject to risks associated with changing foreign exchange
rates. the companys objective is to reduce earnings and
cash flow fluctuations associated with foreign exchange rate
changes thereby enabling management to focus attention on core
business issues and challenges.
the company enters into various contracts that
change in value as foreign exchange rates change to protect the
value of its existing foreign currency assets, liabilities, firm
commitments and forecasted, but not firmly committed foreign
currency revenues. the company uses option strategies and
forward contracts to hedge forecasted revenues. in accordance
with policy, the company hedges a minimum percentage (not to
exceed a maximum percentage) of its forecasted transactions
generally for periods not to exceed five years. the company also
uses forward contracts to hedge foreign currency assets,
liabilities and firm commitments. the gains and losses on these
contracts offset gains or losses expected on the related
forecasted transaction, asset, liability or firm commitment. the
principal currencies hedged are the european euro, british
pound, japanese yen and canadian dollar. cross-currency swaps
are used to effectively convert foreign currency-denominated
borrowings to u.s.dollars.
-85-
table of contents
gains and losses on contracts hedging forecasted
foreign currency revenues are recorded to accumulated other
comprehensive income (aoci), and reclassified to current
earnings when such revenues are recognized, offsetting changes
in the value of the foreign currency revenues. at
september30, 2002 and 2001, the company had deferred gains
of $66million and $91million, respectively, and
deferred losses of $85million and $24million,
respectively, related to foreign currency hedge transactions.
deferred amounts to be recognized can change with
market conditions and will be substantially offset by changes in
the value of the related hedged transactions. amount expected to
be reclassified to earnings over the next twelve months is a
loss of $30million. the company reclassified a
$27million and $16million after-tax gain from aoci
to earnings during fiscal 2002 and 2001, respectively, which was
offset by net losses on items being hedged.
at september30, 2002 and 2001, changes in
value related to cash flow hedges included in aoci, were a loss
of $19million and a gain of $69million,
respectively. in addition, the company reclassified deferred
losses related to certain cash flow hedges from aoci to
earnings, due to the uncertainty of the timing of the original
forecasted transaction. during fiscal 2002 and 2001, the company
recorded the change in fair market value related to fair value
hedges and the ineffectiveness related to cash flow hedges to
earnings. these amounts were not material. the impact of foreign
exchange risk management activities on operating income in 2002
and in 2001 was a net gain of $44million and
$142million, respectively.
fair value of financial instruments
at september30, 2002 and 2001, the
companys financial instruments included cash, cash
equivalents, investments, receivables, accounts payable,
borrowings and interest rate, forward and foreign exchange risk
management contracts.
at september30, 2002 and 2001, the fair
values of cash and cash equivalents, receivables and accounts
payable approximated carrying values because of the short-term
nature of these instruments. the estimated fair values of other
financial instruments subject to fair value disclosures,
determined based on broker quotes or quoted market prices or
rates for the same or similar instruments, and the related
carrying amounts are as follows:
carrying
fair
carrying
fair
amount
value
amount
value
investments
$
$
$
$
borrowings
$
(14,130
)
$
(14,735
)
$
(9,769
)
$
(9,991
)
risk management contracts:
foreign exchange forwards
$
$
$
$
foreign exchange options
interest rate swaps
forward sale contracts
(3
)
(3
)
cross-currency swaps
(28
)
(28
)
(20
)
(20
)
$
$
$
$
credit concentrations
the company continually monitors its positions
with, and the credit quality of, the financial institutions that
are counterparties to its financial instruments, and does not
anticipate nonperformance by the counterparties. the company
would not realize a material loss as of september30, 2002
in the event of nonperformance by any one counterparty. the
company enters into transactions only with financial institution
counterparties that have a credit rating of a-or better.
the companys
-86-
table of contents
current policy regarding agreements with
financial institution counterparties is generally to require
collateral in the event credit ratings fall belowa- or in
the event aggregate exposures exceed limits as defined by
contract. in addition, the company limits the amount of
investment credit exposure with any one institution. as of
september30, 2002, counterparties pledged a total of
$14.8million.
the companys receivables and investments do
not represent a significant concentration of credit risk at
september30, 2002, due to the wide variety of customers
and markets into which the companys products are sold,
their dispersion across many geographic areas, and the
diversification of the companys portfolio among
instruments and issuers.
14commitments and contingencies
the company has various contractual commitments,
which are primarily for the purchase of broadcast rights for
various feature films, sports and other programming, aggregating
approximately $16.2billion, including approximately
$1.1billion for available programming as of
september30, 2002, and approximately $11.3billion
related to sports programming rights, primarily nfl, nba,
college football andmlb.
in 1997, the company guaranteed certain bond
issuances by the anaheim public authority for a total of
$111million. the guarantee also extends to interest that
will total $319million over the life of the bond. the bond
proceeds were used by the city of anaheim to finance the
expansion of the anaheim convention center, the construction of
infrastructure within the anaheim resort area and the
construction of a public parking facility. revenues from sales,
occupancy and property taxes from the disneyland resort and
non-disney hotels are used by the city of anaheim to repay the
bonds. the company has guaranteed the bonds and in the event of
a debt service shortfall, will be responsible to fund such short
fall. to the extent that subsequent tax revenues exceed the debt
service payments in subsequent periods, the company would be
reimbursed for any previously funded short falls. we will
continue to monitor this situation in the future. to date, the
tax revenues have exceeded the debt service payments.
the company and the government of the hong kong
special administrative region are developing the hong kong
disneyland theme park. in connection with that development, the
company has a maximum equity contribution obligation of
$291million at september30, 2002 based on current
exchange rates.
the company has various real estate operating
leases, including retail outlets and distribution centers for
consumer products and office space for general and
administrative purposes. rental expense for the operating leases
during 2002, 2001 and 2000, including, common-area maintenance
and contingent rentals, was $413million, $420million
and $482million, respectively.
contractual commitments, primarily broadcast
programming rights and future minimum lease payments under the
non-cancelable operating leases totaled $16.2billion at
september30, 2002, payable as follows:
broadcast
operating
programming
leases
total
$
4,198
$
$
4,421
3,107
3,307
2,882
3,055
2,296
2,452
1,128
1,269
thereafter
1,695
$
16,199
-87-
table of contents
the company has certain non-cancelable capital
leases primarily for land and broadcast equipment. future
payments under these leases as of september30, 2002 are as
follows:
$
thereafter
total minimum obligations
less amount representing interest
present value of net minimum obligations
less current portion
long-term portion
$
stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney
company. in this lawsuit, filed on
february27, 1991 and pending in the los angeles county
superior court, the plaintiff claims that a company subsidiary
defrauded it and breached a 1983 licensing agreement with
respect to certain winnie the pooh properties, by failing to
account for and pay royalties on revenues earned from the sale
of winnie the pooh movies on videocassette and from the
exploitation of winnie the pooh merchandising rights. the
plaintiff seeks damages for the licensees alleged breaches
as well as confirmation of the plaintiffs interpretation
of the licensing agreement with respect to future activities.
the plaintiff also seeks the right to terminate the agreement on
the basis of the alleged breaches. the company disputes that the
plaintiff is entitled to any damages or other relief of any
kind, including termination of the licensing agreement. the
claim is currently scheduled for trial in march 2003. if each of
the plaintiffs claims were to be confirmed in a final
judgment, damages as argued by the plaintiff could total as much
as several hundred million dollars and adversely impact the
value to the company of any future exploitation of the licensed
rights. however, given the number of outstanding issues and the
uncertainty of their ultimate disposition, management is unable
to predict the magnitude of any potential determination of the
plaintiffs claims.
milne and disney enterprises, inc. v. stephen
slesinger, inc. on november5,
2002, clare milne, the granddaughter of a.a.milne, author
of the winnie the pooh books, and the companys subsidiary
disney enterprises, inc. filed a complaint against stephen
slesinger, inc. (ssi) in the united states district
court for the central district of california. on
november4, 2002, ms.milne served notices to ssi and
the companys subsidiary terminating a.a.milnes
prior grant of rights to winnie the pooh, effective
november5, 2004, and granted all of those rights to the
companys subsidiary. in their lawsuit, ms.milne and
the companys subsidiary seek a declaratory judgment, under
united states copyright law, that ms.milnes
termination notices were valid; that ssis rights to winnie
the pooh in the united states will terminate effective
november5, 2004; that upon termination of ssis
rights in the united states, the 1983 licensing agreement that
is the subject of the stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney
company lawsuit will terminate by operation of law; and that, as
of november5, 2004, ssi will be entitled to no further
royalties for uses of winnie the pooh.
kohn v. the walt disney company et
al. on august15, 2002, aaron
kohn filed a class action lawsuit against the company, chief
executive officer michael eisner and chief financial officer
thomas staggs in the united states district court for the
central district of california on behalf of a putative class
consisting of purchasers of the companys common stock
between august15, 1997 and may15, 2002.
subsequently, at least nine substantially identical lawsuits
were also filed in the same court, each alleging that the
defendants violated federal securities laws by not disclosing
the pendency and potential implications of the stephen
slesinger, inc. lawsuit described above prior to the
companys filing of its quarterly report on form10-q
in may 2002. the plaintiffs claim that this
-88-
table of contents
alleged nondisclosure constituted a fraud on the
market that artificially inflated the companys stock
price, and contend that a decline in the stock price resulted
from the may 2002 disclosure. the plaintiffs seek compensatory
damages and/or rescission for themselves and all members of
their defined class. several of the plaintiffs have filed
motions asking the court to appoint lead plaintiffs and counsel,
and to consolidate the related actions into a single case.
management believes that it is not currently
possible to estimate the impact, if any, that the ultimate
resolution of these legal matters will have on the
companys results of operations, financial position or cash
flows.
the company, together with, in some instances,
certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant or
co-defendant in various other legal actions involving copyright,
breach of contract and various other claims incident to the
conduct of its businesses. management does not expect a material
impact to its results of operations, financial position or cash
flows by reason of these actions.
15restructuring and impairment
charges
the company recorded restructuring and impairment
charges for the years ended september30, 2001 and 2000
summarized as follows:
go.com intangible assets impairment
$
$
go.com severance, fixed asset write-offs and other
investment impairments
workforce reduction and other
chicago disneyquest closure
asset impairment
disney store closures
total restructuring and impairment charges
$
1,454
$
in 2001, the company recorded restructuring and
impairment charges totaling $1.45billion. the go.com
charge was for the closure of the go.com portal business and
includes a non-cash write-off of intangible assets totaling
$820million (see note3). the investment impairment
charge was for other-than-temporary declines in the fair value
of certain internet investments. the workforce reduction charges
are primarily for severance costs and are discussed more fully
below. the disneyquest and disney store closure charges were for
the closure of the chicago facility and approximately
100disney stores and includes the write-down of fixed
assets and leasehold improvements, leasehold termination costs,
severance and other related closure costs. the asset impairment
charge was for certain long-lived assets, primarily at the
disney store and disney catalog. these assets were evaluated for
impairment under a held for use model due to declining cash
flows. fair value was generally determined based on discounted
cash flows.
during the third quarter of fiscal 2001, the
company initiated a plan to eliminate 4,000full-time jobs
through a combination of voluntary and involuntary reductions.
the reduction affected employees in all business units and
geographic regions. the $111million of costs associated
with the workforce reduction consist primarily of severance
costs and write-offs of idled facilities. as of
september30, 2002, the company had substantially completed
its workforce reduction.
in 2000, impairment charges amounted to
$92million, primarily related to write-downs of certain
internet investments and an asset impairment write-down at
toysmart.com in connection with its closure.
-89-
table of contents
16subsequent event
on november 27, 2002, the company released its
new animated film, treasure planet. the films
opening week box office performance was significantly less than
expectations, requiring a downward revision of its projected
revenues and a corresponding $74million writedown of
capitalized film production costs. in accordance with film
accounting rules, this reduction of capitalized film production
costs was recorded as of september30, 2002. as a result,
the companys fiscal 2002 earnings differ from the amounts
initially reported in its november7, 2002 earnings release
to reflect this change in estimate.
-90-
table of contents
quarterly financial summary
(in millions, except per share data)
(unaudited)
december 31
march 31
june 30
september 30
revenues
$
7,016
$
5,856
$
5,795
$
6,662
segment operating income
net income
earnings per share:
diluted
$
0.21
$
0.13
$
0.18
$
0.09
basic
0.21
0.13
0.18
0.09
2001(1)(2)
revenues
$
7,403
$
6,023
$
5,960
$
5,786
segment operating income
1,231
1,025
1,122
net income (loss) before the cumulative effect of
accounting changes:
(567
)
earnings (loss) per share attributed to:
disney:
diluted
$
0.16
$
(0.26
)
$
0.19
$
0.03
basic
0.16
(0.26
)
0.19
0.03
internet group (basic and diluted)
(2.29
)
(0.45
)
n/a
n/a
(1)
net income does not reflect one-time after-tax
charges for the adoption of sop00-2 (film accounting)
totaling $228million ($0.11 per share) and sfas133
(derivative accounting) totaling $50million ($0.02 per
share), respectively, in the first quarter of 2001. see
note2 to the consolidated financial statements.
(2)
reflects restructuring and impairment charges of
$194million, $996million, $138million and
$126million in the first, second, third and fourth quarter
of 2001, respectively. the earnings per disney share impact of
the charges were $0.00, $0.44, $0.04 and $0.04, respectively.
see note15 to the consolidated financial statements.
-91-
