10-k
v95088e10vk.htm
form 10-k
the walt disney company form 10-k dated 09/30/03
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of
the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended september30, 2003
commission file number1-11605
incorporated in delaware
500 south buena vista street, burbank, california 91521
(818) 560-1000
i.r.s. employer identification no.
95-4545390
securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
name of each exchange
title of each class
on which registered
common stock, $.01 par value
new york stock exchange
pacific stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to
section12(g) of the act: none.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months, and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.
yesno
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to rule 405 of regulations-k is
not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.
[]
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
an accelerated filer (as defined in rule12b-2 of the act).
yesno
the aggregate market value of common stock held
by non-affiliates (based on the closing price on the last
business day of the registrants most recently completed
second fiscal quarter as reported on the new york stock
exchange-composite transactions) was $34.8billion. all
executive officers and directors of the registrant and all
persons filing a schedule13d with the securities and
exchange commission in respect to registrants common stock
have been deemed, solely for the purpose of the foregoing
calculation, to be affiliates of the registrant.
there were 2,045,364,299 shares of common stock
outstanding as of december5, 2003.
documents incorporated by reference
certain information required for part iii of this
report is incorporated herein by reference to the proxy
statement for the 2004 annual meeting of the companys
shareholders.
table of contents
[this page intentionally left blank]
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item 5. market for the companys common stock and related stockholder matters
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a. controls and procedures
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the company
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
item 14. principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules, and reports on form 8-k
signatures
report of independent auditors
consent of independent auditors
consolidated statements of income
consolidated balance sheets
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of shareholders equity
notes to consolidated financial statements
exhibit 4(c)
exhibit 10(g)
exhibit 10(h)
exhibit 21
exhibit 31(a)
exhibit 31(b)
exhibit 32(a)
exhibit 32(b)
table of contents
the walt disney company and
subsidiaries
table of contents
page
part i
item 1.
business
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
part ii
item 5.
market for the companys common stock and
related stockholder matters
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the company
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item 14.
principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and
reports on form8-k
signatures
consolidated financial information
the walt disney company
table of contents
part i
item1.
business
the walt disney company, together with its
subsidiaries, is a diversified worldwide entertainment company
with operations in four business segments: media networks, parks
and resorts, studio entertainment and consumer products. for
convenience, the terms company and we
are used to refer collectively to the parent company and the
subsidiaries through which our various businesses are actually
conducted.
information on revenues, operating income,
identifiable assets and supplemental revenue of the
companys business segments and by geographical area
appears in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements
included in item8 hereof. the company employed
approximately 112,000 people as of september30, 2003.
media networks
domestic broadcast television and radio
networks
the company operates the abc television network,
which as of september30, 2003 had 226 primary affiliated
stations operating under agreements reaching 99% of all u.s.
television households. the abc television network broadcasts
programs in dayparts as follows: early morning,
daytime, late night, prime time, news, children and sports.
we also operate the abc radio networks, which
provide programming to more than 4,800 affiliated radio stations
reaching approximately 127million domestic listeners
weekly. the abc radio networks produce and distribute to
affiliates a variety of programs and formats, including abc news
radio and other news network programming, syndicated talk and
music programs, abc sports programming and 24-hour music
formats. in addition, the abc radio networks produce radio
disney, a 24-hour music and talk format intended to appeal to
children and their parents. radio disney is carried in 57
markets, covering more than 61percent of the u.s. market.
abc radio networks also distributes the espn radio format, which
is carried on more than 700 stations, including 238 full-time
(five of which are owned by the company), making it the largest
radio sports network in the united states.
generally, the television and radio networks
produce their own programs or acquire broadcast rights from
other producers for network programming, and pay varying amounts
of compensation to affiliated stations for broadcasting the
programs and commercial announcements included therein. network
operations derive substantially all of their revenues from the
sale to advertisers of time in network programs for commercial
announcements. the ability to sell time for commercial
announcements and the rates received are primarily dependent on
the size and nature of the audience that the network can deliver
to the advertiser as well as overall advertiser demand for time
on network broadcasts.
domestic broadcast television and radio
stations
we own nine very high frequency
(vhf)television stations, five of which are located in the
top ten markets in the united states; one ultra high frequency
(uhf)television station; 52 standard am radio stations;
and 20 fm radio stations. our television stations, all of which
are affiliated with the abc television network, reach 24% of the
nations television households, calculated using the
multiple ownership rules of the federal communications
commission (fcc).
of the companys 41 owned radio stations
located in the top 20 u.s. advertising markets, 24 carry
predominantly locally originated music and talk programming, 13
carry the radio disney format and four carry the espn radio
format. of the companys 31 radio stations in the
non-top-20 markets, 28 carry the radio disney format. our radio
stations reach 16million people weekly in the top 20
united states advertising markets.
-1-
table of contents
markets, frequencies and other station details
are set forth in the following tables:
television
market
market
tv station
channel
ranking(1)
new york, ny
wabc-tv
los angeles, ca
kabc-tv
chicago, il
wls-tv
philadelphia, pa
wpvi-tv
san francisco, ca
kgo-tv
houston, tx
ktrk-tv
raleigh-durham, nc
wtvd-tv
fresno, ca
kfsn-tv
flint, mi
wjrt-tv
toledo, oh
wtvg-tv
radio
radio
market
market
station
frequency
ranking(2)
new york, ny
wabc
am
new york, ny
wplj
fm
new york, ny
wepn
am
los angeles, ca
kabc
am
los angeles, ca
kspn
am
los angeles, ca
kdis
am
los angeles, ca
klos
fm
chicago, il
wls
am
chicago, il
wmvp
am
chicago, il
wrdz
am
chicago, il
wzzn
fm
san francisco, ca
kgo
am
san francisco, ca
ksfo
am
san francisco, ca
kmky
am
dallas-fort worth, tx
wbap
am
dallas-fort worth, tx
kmki
am
dallas-fort worth, tx
kmeo
fm
dallas-fort worth, tx
kscs
fm
dallas-fort worth, tx
kesn
fm
philadelphia, pa
wwjz
am
houston, tx
kmic
am
washington, d.c.
wmal
am
washington, d.c.
wrqx
fm
washington, d.c.
wjzw
fm
boston, ma
wmki
am
detroit, mi
wjr
am
detroit, mi
wdvd
fm
detroit, mi
wdrq
fm
atlanta, ga
wdwd
am
atlanta, ga
wkhx
fm
atlanta, ga
wyay
fm
miami, fl
wmym
am
-2-
table of contents
radio
market
market
radio station
frequency
ranking(2)
seattle, wa
kkdz
am
phoenix, az
kmik
am
minneapolis, mn
kdiz
am
minneapolis, mn
kqrs
fm
minneapolis, mn
kxxr
fm
minneapolis, mn
wgvx
fm
minneapolis, mn
wgvy
fm
minneapolis, mn
wgvz
fm
st. louis, mo
wsdz
am
tampa, fl
wwmi
am
denver, co
kddz
am
pittsburgh, pa
weae
am
portland, or
kdzr
am
portland, or
kksl
am
cleveland, oh
wwmk
am
sacramento, ca
kiid
am
kansas city, mo
kphn
am
san antonio, tx
krdy
am
salt lake city, ut
kwdz
am
milwaukee, wi
wksh
am
providence, ri
wddz
am
charlotte, nc
wgfy
am
orlando, fl
wdyz
am
norfolk, va
whkt
am
norfolk, va
wpmh
am
indianapolis, in
wrdz
fm
new orleans, la
wbyu
am
west palm beach, fl
wmne
am
hartford, ct
wdzk
am
jacksonville, fl
wbwl
am
louisville, ky
wdrd
am
richmond, va
wdzy
am
albany, ny
wddy
am
tulsa, ok
kmus
am
albuquerque, nm
kaly
am
fremont, oh
wfro
am
little rock, ar
kdis
fm
mobile, al
wqua
fm
wichita, ks
kqam
am
flint, mi
wfdf
am
(1)
based on nielsen media research, u.s. television
household estimates, january1, 2003
(2)
based on 2003 arbitron radio market rank
cable/ satellite networks and international
broadcast operations
our cable/satellite and international broadcast
operations are principally involved in the distribution of
television programming, the licensing of programming to domestic
and international markets and investing in foreign television
broadcasting, production and distribution entities.
-3-
table of contents
cable properties, the companys ownership
percentage and subscribers are set forth in the following table:
subscribers
property
ownership %
(in millions)
espn
80.0
espn2
80.0
espn classic
80.0
espnews
80.0
disney channel
100.0
international disney channels
100.0
toon disney
100.0
soapnet
100.0
abc family channel
100.0
fox kids europe
76.0
fox kids latin america
100.0
a&e
37.5
the history channel
37.5
the biography channel
37.5
history international
37.5
a&e international
37.5
lifetime television
50.0
lifetime movie network
50.0
lifetime real women
50.0
e! entertainment television
39.6
style
39.6
the company has various other international
investments in addition to the cable properties listed in the
above table.
espn. espn, inc.
operates four domestic television sports networks: espn, espn2,
espn classic and espnews, which is a stand-alone network or a
wraparound service for some regional sports networks. in march
2003, espn launched espn hd, a high-definition television
simulcast service of espn. espn, inc. owns, has equity interests
in, or has distribution agreements with 25 international
networks, reaching households in more than 140 countries and
territories. international networks include espn star sports
joint venture, which delivers sports programming throughout most
of asia, and ctv specialty television, inc. (formerly netstar),
which owns the sports network, le rseau des sports, espn
classic canada, the nhl network and discovery canada, among
other media properties in canada.
espn also has several other brand extensions,
including espn.com, the leading internet sports content
provider; espn regional television; espn radio, which is
distributed through the abc radio networks; espn the magazine;
sportsticker, the leading supplier of real-time sports news and
scores; bass, the largest fishing organization in the world;
espn enterprises, which develops consumer products, and the espn
zone sports-themed dining and entertainment facilities which are
managed by disney regional entertainment and included in the
parks and resorts segment. espn also provides content for newer
technologies such as broadband, wireless, and video-on-demand.
disney channel.
disney channel is a cable and
satellite television service. new shows developed for initial
exhibition on disney channel include comedy, adventure, animated
and educational
-4-
table of contents
series, as well as original movies and
documentaries. the balance of the programming consists of
products acquired from third parties and products from our owned
theatrical film and television programming library.
disney channel also reaches outside of the united
states of america via its international operations. programming
consists primarily of the companys theatrical film and
television programming library, and products acquired from third
parties and locally produced programming. we continue to explore
the development of disney channel in other countries around the
world.
international disney channels, and launch dates
are set forth in the following table:
channel
launch date
taiwan
march 1995
uk
october 1995
australia
june 1996
malaysia(1)
october 1996
france
march 1997
middle east
april 1997
spain
april 1998
italy
october 1998
germany
october 1999
philippines(1)
january 2000
singapore(1)
february 2000
brunei(1)
february 2000
north latin america(2)
july 2000
south latin america(2)
july 2000
brazil
april 2001
portugal
november 2001
south korea(1)
march 2002
indonesia(1)
july 2002
sweden
february 2003
norway
february 2003
denmark
february 2003
japan
november 2003
(1)
represents feed extensions from the asia regional
channel.
(2)
represents feed extensions from the latin america
regional channel.
toon disney. toon
disney was launched in 1998 and is intended to appeal to
children and features an array of family-friendly, predominantly
animated programming from third parties and the disney library.
soapnet. soapnet was
launched in january 2000 and offers a wide variety of soap opera
and related programming 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
soapnets primetime schedule features same-day repeat
telecasts of the top-rated abc daytime series all my
children, general hospital, one life to live and port
charles. the service also airs the popular ryans
hope and another world and such serial dramas as
knots landing, dynasty and dallas, as well as an
original soap news series, soapcenter, and the daily emmy
award-nominated talk show, soap talk.
abc family. in
october 2001, the company acquired fox family worldwide, inc.,
which was renamed abc family worldwide, inc. abc family operates
the abc family channel, a television programming service, fox
kids europe, and fox kids latin america. abc family channel
programming consists of product acquired from third parties and
the abc television network and products from our owned
theatrical film library along with original programming.
original programming
-5-
table of contents
includes romantic comedy movies, reality series,
scripted half-hour comedies, entertainment specials and kid
action series.
a&e. the a&e
television networks are television programming services devoted
to cultural and entertainment programming. the networks include
a&e, a&e international, the history channel, history
international, a network that provides viewers with a window
into non-u.s. perspectives, and the biography channel, launched
in 1998, which is dedicated to exploration of the lives of
exceptional people.
lifetime. lifetime
entertainment services owns lifetime television, which is
devoted to womens lifestyle programming. during 1998,
lifetime launched the lifetime movie network, a 24-hour channel.
lifetime real women is lifetime televisions other sister
channel. in april 2003, lifetime magazine, a joint
venture between the walt disney company and the hearst
corporation, was launched.
e! entertainment. e!
entertainment television is a television programming service
focused on the entertainment world. e! entertainment television
also launched a sister channel, style, in 1998, a 24-hour
television service devoted to style, beauty and home design.
the companys share of the financial results
of the cable/satellite and international broadcast services,
other than disney channel, espn, inc., toon disney, soapnet and
abc family, is reported under the heading equity in the
income of investees in the companys consolidated
statements of income.
television production and
distribution
we also develop and produce television
programming for distribution to global broadcasters and cable
and satellite operators, including the major television
networks, disney channel and other cable and satellite networks,
under the buena vista television, buena vista production,
touchstone television and walt disney television labels. program
development is carried out in collaboration with a number of
independent writers, producers and creative teams, with a focus
on the development, production and distribution of half-hour
comedies and one-hour dramas for network primetime broadcast.
the one-hour drama alias and the half-hour comedies my
wife and kids, according to jim, scrubs (for nbc), 8
simple rules, life with bonnie, and less than perfect
were all renewed for the 2003/2004 television season. in
addition, my wife and kids was sold into syndication. new
primetime series that premiered in the fall of 2003 included
half-hour comedies hope & faith and its all
relative, and the one-hour dramas 10-8 and threat
matrix. planned midseason shows include one-hour dramas
line of fire and kingdom hospital. for the abc
family channel, the company produces the successful
childrens program, power ranger ninja storm, the
latest version of the popular power rangers franchise.
under the walt disney television and buena vista
television labels the company develops and produces animated
childrens television programming for distribution to
global broadcasters, including disney channel, the abc
television network, and other cable broadcasters.
the fall 2003 season on disney channel sees the
return of disneys kim possible with new episodes
and a 7-day-per-week format, as well as the premiere of
disneys lilo & stitch. upcoming disney channel
series premieres include dave the barbarian in january
2004. the 2003/2004 abc saturday morning television season
returns under the name abc kids. abc kids is a line-up of
animated and live-action series that includes disneys
recess, disneys fillmore, and disneys kim
possible, as well as disneys lilo and stitch
which premiered in september 2003.
the company also licenses its animated television
properties in a number of foreign television markets. in
addition, we syndicate certain of our television programs
abroad, including the disney club, a weekly series produced for
foreign markets.
the company is also producing original television
movies for the wonderful world of disney, which the abc
network airs on saturday evenings.
-6-
table of contents
we also produce a variety of prime-time specials
for exhibition on network television, as well as live-action
syndicated programming, which includes live! with regis and
kelly and the wayne brady show, daily talk shows,
ebert & roeper, a weekly motion picture review
program, and game shows such as who wants to be a
millionaire.
internet
the internet operations of the media networks
segment develop, publish and distribute content for online
services intended to appeal to broad consumer interest in
sports, news, family and entertainment. internet web sites and
products include abc.com, abcnews.com, espn.com and enhanced tv.
the companys internet operations derive revenue from a
combination of advertising and sponsorships, subscription
services and e-commerce.
abc.com, is the official web site of the abc
television network, while abcnews.com draws on the knowledge and
expertise of abc news correspondents throughout the world.
abcnews.com provides subscription broadband services that
provide on-demand access to leading abc news shows, such as
world news tonight with peter jennings and
nightline, through alliances with aol broadband, yahoo!
and real networks.
enhanced tv provides interactive television
programming and advertising services during abc telecasts, such
as monday night football.
espn.com delivers comprehensive sports news,
information and video to millions of fans each month.
competition
the abc television network, disney channel, espn,
abc family channel and our other broadcast and cable/satellite
services compete for viewers primarily with other television
networks, independent television stations and other video media
such as cable and satellite television programming services,
videocassettes and dvds and the internet. in the sale of
advertising time, the broadcasting operations compete with other
television networks, independent television stations, suppliers
of cable/satellite services and other advertising media such as
newspapers, magazines, billboards and the internet. the abc
radio networks likewise compete with other radio networks and
radio programming services, independent radio stations and other
advertising media.
the companys television and radio stations
are in competition with other television and radio stations,
cable and satellite television programming services,
videocassettes, dvds and other advertising media such as
newspapers, magazines, billboards and the internet. competition
occurs primarily in individual market areas. a television or
radio station in one market generally does not compete directly
with stations in other market areas.
the growth in the cable/satellite industrys
share of viewers has resulted in increased competitive pressures
for advertising revenues. in addition, the market place for the
acquisition of sports and other programming continues to be
competitive. the companys cable/satellite networks also
face competition for carriage by cable and satellite service
operators and distributors. the companys contractual
agreements with cable and satellite operators are renewed or
renegotiated from time to time in the ordinary course of
business. a significant number of these arrangements will be up
for renewal in the next 18months. consolidation in the
cable and satellite distribution industry and other factors may
adversely affect the companys ability to obtain and
maintain contractual terms for the distribution of its various
cable and satellite programming services that are as favorable
as those currently in place.
the companys media networks segment also
competes for the acquisition of sports and other programming.
the market for programming is very competitive, particularly the
markets for sports programming. the company currently has sports
rights agreements with the four major professional
-7-
table of contents
sports organizations the nfl, the
nba, mlb and the nhl as well as for other sporting
events, including, the events noted below.
abc television network
nfl
irl including the indianapolis 500
college football pac 10 and big 10
college football acc
college football big 12 and big east
bowl championship series
pga tour
isu skating events
us figure skating
espn and espn2/ abc television network
nhl
nba
espn and espn2
nfl
mlb (regular season)
acc basketball
big 10 football
big 10 basketball
big 12 basketball
conference usa basketball
pga tour
sec football
sec basketball
big east basketball
big east football
mlb division playoffs
events of this kind for which the company secures
right from third parties are an integral part of our programming
strategy and, when combined with news and information and
original programming, enable us to deliver a full complement of
sports assets to our fans, advertisers and distributors.
the internet properties are in competition for
users and advertising revenues with other sports, news, family
and entertainment internet web sites, as well as internet web
portals.
federal regulation
television and radio broadcasting are subject to
extensive regulation by the fcc under federal laws and
regulations, including the communications act of 1934, as
amended. violation of fcc regulations can result in substantial
monetary forfeitures, limited renewals of licenses and, in
egregious cases, denial of license renewal or revocation of a
license. fcc regulations that affect our media networks segment
include the following:
licensing of television and radio stations.
each of the television and radio
stations we own must be licensed by the fcc. these licenses are
granted for periods of up to eight years, and we must obtain
renewal of licenses as they expire in order to continue
operating the stations. we must also obtain fcc approval
whenever we seek to have a license transferred in connection
with the acquisition of a station. the fcc may decline to renew
or approve the transfer of a license in certain circumstances.
although we have generally received such renewals and approvals
in the past, there can be no assurance that we will always
obtain necessary renewals and approvals in the future.
-8-
table of contents
television and radio station ownership limits.
the fcc imposes limitations on the
number of television stations and radio stations we can own in a
specific market, on the combined number of television and radio
stations we can own in a single market and on the aggregate
percentage of the national audience that can be reached by
television stations we own. as of september30, 2003:
fcc regulations would have permitted us to own an
additional television station in all of the 10 markets in which
we have television stations, and we did not own more than one
television station in any of those markets.
fcc regulations would have permitted our stations
in the aggregate to reach 35% of the national audience
(attributing uhf television stations with only 50% of the
television households in their market). our stations reached
approximately 24% of the national audience calculated using the
fccs attribution rule.
fcc regulations may in some cases impose
restrictions on our ability to acquire additional radio or
television stations in the markets in which we own radio
stations, but we do not believe any such limitations are
material to our current business plans.
the fcc recently adopted changes to these rules
that would generally permit entities to own more television and
radio stations in some markets and allow a single entity to own
television stations that in the aggregate reach a larger
percentage of the total national audience. the effectiveness of
the new rules has, however, been stayed by a federal court
order, and congress is considering a number of measures to
repeal or prevent implementation of some or all of the new rules.
dual networks. fcc
rules currently prohibit any of the four major television
networks  abc, cbs, fox and nbc  from being under
common ownership or control. the new fcc rules, if implemented,
would not modify this limitation.
regulation of
programming. the fcc regulates
programming by, among other things, banning indecent
programming and imposing restrictions and commercial time limits
on political advertising. federal legislation and fcc rules also
limit the amount of commercial matter that may be broadcast
during programming designed for children 12years of age
and younger and generally require a minimum of three hours per
week of programming that has as a significant
purpose meeting the educational and informational needs of
children 17years of age and younger. fcc rules also give
television station owners the right to reject or refuse network
programming in certain circumstances or to substitute
programming that the licensee reasonably believes to be of
greater local or national importance.
cable and satellite carriage of broadcast
television stations. with respect to
cable systems located within a television stations dma,
fcc rules require that every three years each television station
elect either must carry status, pursuant to which
cable operators must carry a local television station in the
stations market, or retransmission consent
status, pursuant to which the cable operator is required to
negotiate with the television station to obtain the consent of
the television station for carriage of its signal. under the
satellite home improvement act, satellite carriers are permitted
to retransmit a local television stations signal into its
local market with the consent of the local television station.
if a satellite carrier elects to carry one local station in a
market, the satellite carrier must carry the signals of all
local television stations that also request carriage.
digital television.
fcc rules currently require full-power
analog television stations, such as ours, to provide digital
service on a second broadcast channel granted specifically for
the phase-in of digital broadcasting. fcc rules also regulate
digital broadcasting to ensure continued quality carriage of
mandated free over-the-air program service. all of the
companys stations have launched digital facilities and we
are evaluating various options with respect to use of digital
channels. all broadcasters are required to operate exclusively
in digital
-9-
table of contents
mode and surrender the additional channel by
december31, 2006, but the fcc has the authority to extend
this deadline in certain circumstances and is expected to do so
in most markets because the number of households receiving a
digital signal is not likely to exceed 85% by the deadline.
the foregoing is a brief summary of certain
provisions of the communications act and other legislation and
of specific fcc rules and policies. this summary focuses on
provisions material to our business. reference should be made to
the communications act, other legislation, fcc rules and public
notices and rulings of the fcc for further information
concerning the nature and extent of the fccs regulatory
authority.
fcc laws and regulations are subject to change,
and the company generally cannot predict whether new
legislation, court action or regulations, or a change in the
extent of application or enforcement of current laws and
regulations, would have an adverse impact on our operations.
parks and resorts
the company owns and operates the walt disney
world resort and disney cruise line in florida, the disneyland
resort in california, espn zone facilities in several states and
anaheim sports in california. the company manages and has an
ownership interest in the disneyland resort paris in france and
hong kong disneyland, which is under construction. the
companys ownership interest in disneyland resort paris and
hong kong disneyland is 39% and 43%, respectively. the company
also licenses the operations of both the disneyland resort paris
and hong kong disneyland. the company also licenses the
operations of the tokyo disneyland resort in japan.
walt disney world resort
the walt disney world resort is located 15 miles
southwest of orlando, florida on approximately 30,500 acres of
land owned by company subsidiaries. the resort includes four
theme parks (the magic kingdom, epcot, disney-mgm studios and
disneys animal kingdom); hotels; vacation ownership units;
a retail, dining and entertainment complex; a sports complex;
conference centers; campgrounds; golf courses; water parks and
other recreational facilities designed to attract visitors for
an extended stay.
the entire walt disney world destination resort
is marketed through a variety of national, international and
local advertising and promotional activities. several
attractions in each of the theme parks are sponsored by
corporate participants.
magic
kingdom the magic kingdom,
which opened in 1971, consists of seven themed lands: main
street usa, adventureland, fantasyland, frontierland, liberty
square, mickeys toontown fair and tomorrowland. each land
provides a unique guest experience, featuring themed rides and
attractions, live disney character interaction,
restaurants, refreshment areas and merchandise shops.
additionally, there are daily parades and a spectacular
nighttime fireworks extravaganza.
epcot
epcot, which opened in 1982, consists of two major themed areas:
future world and world showcase. future world dramatizes certain
historical developments and addresses the challenges facing the
world today through major pavilions devoted to showcasing
science and technology improvements, communication, energy,
transportation, using your imagination, life and health, nature
and food production, the ocean environment, and space. world
showcase presents a community of nations focusing on the
culture, traditions and accomplishments of people around the
world. countries represented with pavilions include the united
states, canada, china, france, germany, italy, japan, mexico,
morocco, norway and the united kingdom. both areas feature
themed rides and attractions, restaurants and merchandise shops.
disney-mgm
studios the disney-mgm
studios, which opened in 1989, consists of a theme park, an
animation studio and a film and television production facility.
the park centers on
-10-
table of contents
hollywood as it was during the 1930s and
1940s and features disney animators at work and a
backstage tour of the film and television production facilities
in addition to other attractions, themed food service and
merchandise facilities. the production facility consists of
three sound stages, merchandise shops and a back lot area and
currently hosts both feature film and television productions.
disney-mgm studios also features fantasmic!, a nighttime
entertainment spectacular.
disneys animal
kingdom disneys
animal kingdom, which opened in 1998, consists of a 145-foot
tree of life centerpiece surrounded by six themed areas:
dinoland u.s.a., africa, rafikis planet watch, asia,
discovery island and camp minnie mickey. each themed
area contains adventure attractions, entertainment shows,
restaurants and merchandise shops. the park features more than
200 species of animals and 4,000 varieties of trees and plants
on more than 500 acres of land.
resort
facilities as of
september30, 2003, the company owned and operated 16
resort hotels at the walt disney world resort, with a total of
approximately 20,000 rooms and 318,000 square feet of conference
meeting space. in addition, disneys fort wilderness
camping and recreational area offers approximately 800 campsites
and 400 wilderness homes. disneys pop century resort, a
value priced resort hotel which will include buildings themed to
different decades from the 1900s to the 1990s, is
scheduled to open on december14, 2003. the pop century
resort will add 2,880 rooms.
the disney vacation club (dvc)offers
ownership interests in 6 resort facilities, located at the walt
disney world resort, as well as in vero beach, florida, and
hilton head island, south carolina. disneys saratoga
springs resort & spa in orlando, florida is scheduled to
begin a phased opening in may 2004. available units at each
facility are for sale under a vacation ownership plan and
operated as rental property until the units are sold.
recreational amenities and activities available
at the walt disney world resort include five championship golf
courses, miniature golf courses, full-service spas, tennis,
sailing, water skiing, swimming, horseback riding and a number
of other noncompetitive sports and leisure time activities. the
resort also operates two water parks: blizzard beach and typhoon
lagoon.
we have also developed a 120-acre retail, dining
and entertainment complex known as downtown disney, which
consists of the marketplace, pleasure island and west side. in
addition to more than 20 specialty retail shops and restaurants,
the downtown disney marketplace is home to the
50,000-square-foot world of disney retail store featuring
disney-branded merchandise. also featured is once upon a toy,
the fun new interactive store with walt disney world attraction
toys and hasbro games with a disney twist. pleasure island, a
nighttime entertainment center adjacent to the downtown disney
marketplace, includes restaurants, nightclubs and shopping
facilities. downtown disney west side is situated on 66 acres on
the west side of pleasure island and includes a disneyquest
facility, cirque du soleil and several retail, dining and
entertainment operations.
disneys wide world of sports, which opened
in 1997, is a 200 acre sports complex providing professional
caliber training and competition, festival and tournament events
and interactive sports activities. the complexs venues
accommodate more than 30 different sporting events, including
baseball, tennis, basketball, softball, track and field,
football and soccer. its 9,000-seat stadium is the spring
training site for mlbs atlanta braves. additionally, the
complex is the pre-season training site of the nfls 2003
super bowl champion, tampa bay buccaneers, and the nbas
orlando magic. the amateur athletic union hosts approximately 30
championship events per year at the facility.
in the downtown disney resort area, seven
independently operated hotels are situated on property leased
from the company. these hotels have a capacity of approximately
3,700 rooms. additionally, two hotels, the walt disney world
swan and the walt disney world dolphin, with an aggregate
capacity of approximately 2,300 rooms, are independently
operated on property leased from the company near epcot.
-11-
table of contents
nearing completion of development is celebration,
an innovative planned community that combines architecture,
education, health and technology in ways intended to promote a
strong sense of community. founded in 1994, celebration is home
to more than 8,000 residents, public and private schools, a
health facility, an 18-hole public golf course, a private
university center, park and recreation areas and a town center
featuring a variety of shops, restaurants and the celebration
hotel.
disneyland resort
the company owns 450 acres and has under
long-term lease an additional 56 acres of land in anaheim,
california. the disneyland resort includes two theme parks
(disneyland and disneys california adventure), three
hotels and a retail, dining and entertainment district designed
to attract visitors for an extended stay.
the entire disneyland resort is marketed through
international, national and local advertising and promotional
activities as a destination resort. a number of the attractions
and restaurants at each of the theme parks are sponsored by
other corporations through long-term agreements.
disneyland
disneyland, which opened in 1955, consists of main street usa
and seven principal areas: adventureland, critter country,
fantasyland, frontierland, new orleans square, tomorrowland and
toontown. these areas feature themed rides and attractions,
restaurants, refreshment stands and merchandise shops.
disneys california
adventure disneys
california adventure, which opened in 2001, is adjacent to
disneyland and includes four principal areas: golden state,
hollywood pictures backlot, paradise pier and a bugs
land. these areas include rides, attractions, shows,
restaurants, merchandise shops and refreshment stands.
resort facilities
disneyland resort includes
three company-owned hotels: the 1,000-room disneyland hotel,
500-room disneys paradise pier hotel and disneys
grand californian hotel, a deluxe 750-room hotel located
adjacent to disneys california adventure.
the resort also includes downtown disney, a
themed 310,000 square foot outdoor complex of entertainment,
dining and shopping venues, located adjacent to both disneyland
park and disneys california adventure.
disneyland resort paris
disneyland resort paris is a 4,800 acre
development located in marne-la-valle, approximately 20
miles east of paris, france. euro disney s.c.a. (euro disney)
and its subsidiaries operate the disneyland resort paris, which
includes the disneyland park; the walt disney studios park;
seven themed hotels with approximately 5,800 rooms; two
convention centers; the disney village, a shopping, dining and
entertainment center; and a 27-hole golf facility.
disneyland park, which opened in 1992, consists
of main street and four principal themed areas: adventureland,
discoveryland, fantasyland and frontierland. these areas include
themed rides, attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops
and refreshment stands.
walt disney studios park opened in march 2002
adjacent to disneyland park. the park takes guests into the
worlds of cinema, animation and television and includes four
principal themed areas: front lot, animation courtyard,
production courtyard and backlot. these areas each include
themed rides, attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops
and refreshment stands.
development of the site also continues with the
val deurope project, a newly constructed planned community
being built near disneyland resort paris. the first
twophases of the city of val deurope include a town
center, which consists of an international shopping center; a
150room hotel; office, commercial and residential space;
and a regional train station. these new developments are
operated by third parties on land leased or purchased from euro
disney. in july 2003 euro disney signed an agreement with a
third party developer beginning the third phase of val
deurope. included
-12-
table of contents
in this phase will be expansion of disney village
and projects aimed at increasing val deuropes
capacity to welcome new residents.
in addition, several new on-site hotels opened in
2003 that are owned and operated by third party developers
providing approximately 1,400 rooms. agreements have been signed
with additional third party developers to provide approximately
800 additional on-site hotel rooms and/or time share units over
the next three years.
of the 4,800 acres comprising the site, 2,100
acres have been developed to date. the project is being
developed pursuant to a 1987 master agreement between french
governmental authorities and euro disney, a publicly held french
company in which the company currently holds a 39% equity
interest and which is managed by a subsidiary of the company.
euro disney is obligated to pay the company quarterly royalties
on revenues generated by the disneyland resort paris theme parks
and management fees. as a result of euro disneys financial
difficulties, discussed in note 4 to the companys
consolidated financial statements, certain fees for fiscal 2003
were waived, and the payment of fees for fiscal 2004 was
deferred. the company did not recognize waived fees for fiscal
2003 and likely will not recognize revenues from royalties and
management fees in fiscal2004. the financial results of
the companys investment in euro disney are reported under
the heading equity in the income of investees in the
companys consolidated statements of income.
hong kong disneyland
in 1999, the company and the government of the
hong kong special administrative region signed a master project
agreement for the development and operation of hong kong
disneyland. phase i of the development, which will be located on
309 acres of land on lantau island, includes the hong kong
disneyland theme park and one or more hotels. subject to the
governments completion of infrastructure by specified
target dates, hong kong disneyland is currently targeted to open
in 2005/2006. the master project agreement permits further
phased buildout of the development under certain circumstances.
construction and operation of the project will be
the responsibility of hongkong international theme parks
limited, an entity in which the hong kong government owns a 57%
interest and a subsidiary of the company owns the remaining 43%.
a separate hong kong subsidiary of the company is responsible
for managing hong kong disneyland. based on the current exchange
rate between the hong kong and u.s. dollars, the companys
equity contribution obligation is limited to u.s.
$316million. as of september30, 2003 the company had
contributed u.s. $73million and the remaining
$243million is payable over the next three years. once
hong kong disneyland commences operations, company subsidiaries
will be entitled to receive management fees and royalties in
addition to the companys equity interest.
tokyo disney resort
tokyo disney resort is located on approximately
494 acres of land, six miles east of downtown tokyo, japan. the
resort includes two theme parks (tokyo disneyland and tokyo
disneysea); two disney-branded hotels; five independently
operated hotels; several merchandise shops; and ikspiari, a
retail, dining and entertainment complex. the company earns
royalties on revenues generated by the tokyo disney resort,
which is owned and operated by oriental land co., ltd. (olc), an
unrelated japanese corporation. olc markets the tokyo disney
resort primarily through a variety of local, domestic and
international advertising and promotional activities. long-term
corporate partners sponsor many of the theme park attractions.
tokyo disneyland, which opened in 1983, was the
first disney theme park to open outside the united states. tokyo
disneyland consists of seven principal areas: adventureland,
critter country, fantasyland, tomorrowland, toontown,
westernland and world bazaar.
-13-
table of contents
tokyo disneysea adjacent to tokyo disneyland,
opened in 2001. the park is divided into seven unique
ports of call, including mediterranean harbor,
american waterfront, port discovery, lost river delta, mermaid
lagoon, mysterious island and arabian coast. the recent resort
expansion also includes the addition of the 502-room hotel
miracosta, the 504-room disney ambassador hotel, the disney
resort line monorail and the bon voyage merchandise location.
disney cruise line
disney cruise line, which is operated out of port
canaveral, florida, is a cruise vacation line that includes two
85,000-ton ships, the disney magic and the disney
wonder. both ships cater to children, families and adults,
with distinctly themed areas and activities for each group. each
ship features 877 staterooms, 73% of which are outside
staterooms providing guests with ocean views. each cruise
vacation includes a visit to disneys castaway cay, a
1,000-acre private bahamian island. the company packages 3, 4
and 7day cruise vacations with visits to the walt disney
world resort and also offers cruise-only options.
disney regional entertainment
through the disney regional entertainment group,
the company is building on the popularity of the espn brand with
the espn zone concept, which combines three interactive areas
under one roof for a complete sports and entertainment
experience: the studio grill, offering dining in an espn studio
environment; the screening room, offering fans an exciting
sports viewing environment; and the sports arena, challenging
guests with a variety of interactive and competitive
attractions. the company currently operates eight espn zone
restaurants.
walt disney imagineering
walt disney imagineering provides master
planning, real estate development, attraction and show design,
engineering support, production support, project management and
other development services, including research and development
for the companys operations.
anaheim sports, inc.
a company subsidiary owns and operates the
nhls 2003 western conference champions, the mighty ducks
of anaheim. anaheim sports, inc. provides management services to
the mighty ducks. in may 2003, the company sold anaheim angels
l.p., holder of the anaheim angels mlb franchise.
seasonality and competition
all of the theme parks and the associated resort
facilities are operated on a year-round basis. historically, the
theme parks and resort business experiences fluctuations in park
attendance and resort occupancy resulting from the seasonal
nature of vacation travel. peak attendance and resort occupancy
generally occur during the summer months when school vacations
occur and during early-winter and spring holiday periods.
the companys theme parks and resorts
compete with all other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism
and recreational activities. the profitability of the
leisure-time industry is influenced by various factors that are
not directly controllable, such as economic conditions including
business cycle and exchange rate fluctuations, travel industry
trends, amount of available leisure time, oil and transportation
prices and weather patterns. as a result, the companys
theme park and resort operations were adversely affected during
fiscal 2003 by significant reductions in domestic and
international travel.
studio entertainment
the studio entertainment segment produces and
acquires live-action and animated motion pictures, animated
direct-to-video programming, musical recordings and live stage
plays.
-14-
table of contents
the company is an industry leader in the
distribution of films (including its film and television
library) to the theatrical, home entertainment, pay-per-view,
video-on-demand, pay television and free-to-air television
markets. each of these markets is discussed in more detail below.
theatrical distribution
walt disney pictures and television, a subsidiary
of the company, produces and acquires live-action motion
pictures that are distributed primarily under the walt disney
pictures and touchstone pictures banners. another subsidiary,
miramax film corp., acquires and produces motion pictures that
are distributed under the miramax and dimension banners. the
company also produces and distributes animated motion pictures
under the banner walt disney pictures, and co-finances and
distributes animated motion pictures developed in conjunction
with pixar, inc. the companys relationship with pixar is
discussed in more detail below in the section labeled
relationship with pixar.
during fiscal 2004, we expect to distribute in
domestic markets approximately 21 feature films under the walt
disney pictures and touchstone pictures banners and
approximately 15 films under the miramax and dimension banners.
these expected releases include several live-action family films
and full-length animated films, with the remainder targeted to
teenagers, families and/or adults. in addition, the company
periodically reissues previously released animated films. as of
september30, 2003, the company had released 798
full-length live-action features (primarily color), 66
full-length animated color features, and approximately 539
cartoon shorts and 53 live action shorts under the walt disney
pictures, touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures, miramax and
dimension banners.
we distribute and market our filmed products
principally through our own distribution and marketing companies
in the united states and major foreign markets. films released
theatrically in the u.s. can be released theatrically in
international territories simultaneously or generally up to six
months later.
the company incurs significant marketing and
advertising costs before and throughout the theatrical release
of a film in an effort to generate public awareness of the film,
to increase the publics intent to view the film and to
help generate significant operating income in the home
entertainment and other ancillary markets. these costs are
expensed as incurred, and therefore we typically incur losses in
the theatrical markets on a film in any given quarter, including
quarters before the theatrical release of the film.
home entertainment
in the domestic market, we distribute home
entertainment releases from each of our motion picture banners.
in the international market, we distribute each of our motion
picture banners both directly and through independent foreign
distribution companies. in addition, we develop, acquire and
produce original programming for direct-to-video release.
the domestic and international home entertainment
window typically starts four to six months after each theatrical
release with the issuance of dvd and vhs versions of each title.
domestically, most titles are sold simultaneously to both
rentailers, such as blockbuster inc., and retailers,
such as best buy co., inc. upon a titles release,
consumers are afforded the option to rent for a limited period
of time typically, two to sevendays, or purchase the
titles outright (sell-through). depending on
consumer demand, certain titles may be released first
exclusively to retailers and then to rentailers (rental
window).
in the international home entertainment market,
titles are either released simultaneously in the rental and
sell-through channels or with a rental window before
sell-through, depending on local market regulations, dvd
hardware penetration and dvd software demand.
as of september30, 2003, under the banners
walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures,
miramax and dimension, 1,039 produced and acquired titles,
including 848 live
-15-
table of contents
action titles and 191 cartoon shorts and animated
features, were available to the domestic home entertainment
marketplace and 2,295 produced and acquired titles, including
1,668 live action titles and 627 cartoon shorts and animated
features, were available to the international home entertainment
market.
television distribution
pay-per-view:
generally about two months after the home entertainment window
begins, the studios television distributor, buena vista
television, licenses titles to cable and satellite platforms for
showing on a pay-per-view basis (ppv). ppv services, such as in
demand and directv, deliver one-time rentals electronically to
consumers televisions at a price comparable to that of
physical media rentals. video on demand (vod)is an
augmentation of ppv, and currently shares the ppv window. the
ppv/ vod window lasts generally about three months.
pay television (pay
1): effective with theatrical releases
beginning january1, 2003, there are two pay windows. the
first window is generally fifteen months in duration and follows
the ppv/ vod window. the company has licensed to the encore pay
television services, over a multi-year period, exclusive
domestic pay television rights to certain films released under
the walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures, hollywood
pictures, miramax and dimension banners. in addition, the
company has licensed exclusive domestic pay television rights to
certain films released under the dimension banner to the
showtime pay television services over a multi-year period.
free television (free
1): following the pay 1 window is a
free television window wherein telecasts are accessible to
consumers without charge. this free window may last up to
84months. motion pictures are usually sold in the first
free window on an ad hoc basis to major networks and basic cable
services. the company maintains only one output deal, with the
abc network television and its affiliates, covering branded live
action and animated product broadcast in the wonderful world of
disney slot.
pay television 2 (pay 2) and free television 2
(free 2): in the u.s., free 1 is
generally followed by a twelve month pay 2 window, included
under our license arrangement with encore, and finally by a
second free window (free 2). the free 2 window is a syndication
window where films are licensed both to basic cable networks and
to station groups, such as tribune co. major packages of the
companys feature films and animated television programming
have been licensed for broadcast under multi-year agreements.
international
television: the company also licences
its theatrical and television properties outside of the us. the
typical windowing sequence is broadly consistent with the
domestic cycle such that titles premiere on television in ppv/
vod then air in pay tv before airing in free tv. certain
properties may then be re-licensed to one or more of the above
windows. windowing strategies are developed in response to local
market practices and conditions, and the exact sequence and
length of each window can vary country by country.
audio products and music publishing
walt disney records produces and distributes
compact discs, audiocassettes and records, consisting primarily
of soundtracks from animated films and read-along products,
directed at the childrens market in the united states. we
also license the creation of similar products throughout the
rest of the world. our hollywood records subsidiary, under the
hollywood records and buena vista records labels, develops,
produces and markets recordings from new talent across the
spectrum of popular music, as well as soundtracks from certain
live-action motion pictures. we also own the nashville-based
music label lyric street records.
in addition, walt disney records and music
publishing commissions new music for the companys motion
pictures and television programs, and records the songs and
licenses the song copyrights to others for printed music,
records, audiovisual devices and public performances.
-16-
table of contents
buena vista theatrical group
the buena vista theatrical group includes both
disney theatrical productions and disney live family
entertainment.
disney theatrical productions develops, produces
and licenses stage musicals. to date, the companys shows
have included beauty and the beast, the lion king and
elton john and tim rices aida. the company
generally elects to produce its own shows in the united states,
the united kingdom and australia and licenses its shows to local
producers in other territories. as of september30, 2003,
disney theatrical production had twelve productions running
worldwide. five new productions opening in fiscal 2004 include:
beauty and the beast in seoul in july 2004; the lion
king in sydney in october 2003 and holland in april 2004;
and aida in essen in october 2003 and osaka in december
2003.
through a license to feld entertainment, disney
live family entertainment has seven shows of disney on
ice, touring in more than 40 countries worldwide. disney/
pixars monsters, inc. opened in august 2003.
relationship with pixar
the company entered into a feature film agreement
with pixar in 1991, which resulted in the release of its first
film with pixar, toy story, in november 1995. in 1997,
the company extended its relationship with pixar by entering
into a co-production agreement, under which pixar agreed to
produce, on an exclusive basis, five original computer-animated
feature films for distribution by the company. both parties
agreed to co-finance and co-brand the films and share equally in
the profits of each picture and any related merchandise or
ancillary products, after the company recovers all marketing and
distribution costs. the first three films under the extension
were a bugs life, monsters, inc. and finding
nemo. pixar is currently in various stages of production on
the final two films under the deal: the incredibles and
cars. the company is currently in negotiations with pixar
as to whether, and, if so, on what terms to continue their
relationship.
competition and intellectual property
protection
the success of studio entertainment operations is
heavily dependent upon public taste and preferences, which are
unpredictable and subject to change. in addition, studio
entertainment operating results fluctuate due to the timing and
performance of releases in the theatrical, home entertainment
and television markets. release dates are determined by several
factors, including competition and the timing of vacation and
holiday periods.
the studio entertainment businesses compete with
all forms of entertainment. a significant number of companies
produce and/or distribute theatrical and television films,
exploit products in the home entertainment market, provide pay
television programming services and sponsor live theater. we
also compete to obtain creative and performing talents, story
properties, advertiser support, broadcast rights and market
share, which are essential to the success of our studio
entertainment businesses.
the companys ability to distribute and
exploit its motion picture and television programming is
affected by the strength and effectiveness of intellectual
property protections in both the united states and abroad.
emerging technologies, regulatory limitations on intellectual
property protection, lack of enforcement of protective laws in
some jurisdictions and claims of intellectual property
infringement all create risks and added costs that can adversely
affect the operation and results of the companys studio
entertainment operations, despite the companys strong
efforts to protect its intellectual property rights throughout
the united states and in other key markets. see further
discussion under consumer products  competition and
intellectual property protection below.
-17-
table of contents
consumer products
the consumer products segment licenses the
companys characters and other intellectual property to
manufacturers, retailers, show promoters and publishers
throughout the world. character merchandising and publications
licensing engages in promoting the companys films and
television programs, as well as developing new properties. the
company also engages in retail, direct mail and online
distribution of products based on the companys characters
and films through the disney store, disney catalog and
disneystore.com, respectively. we also publish books, magazines
and comics worldwide; and produce and license computer software
and video games for the entertainment market.
character merchandise and publications
licensing
the companys worldwide licensing effort is
divided among three lines of business: disney hardlines which
manages product categories such as food and beverages, home
furnishings and electronics, stationary and personal care;
disney softlines: which manages apparel, and disney toys.
through these lines of business, the company earns royalties,
which are usually based on a fixed percentage of the wholesale
or retail selling price of the licensees products. the
company licenses characters from its film, television and other
properties. some of the major properties licensed by the company
include mickey mouse, winnie the pooh and disney
princesses. the company partners, both globally and
regionally, with key strategic licensees that are experts in
their particular merchandise category. licensed character
merchandise categories include apparel, toys, gifts, home
furnishings and housewares, consumer electronics, stationery,
sporting goods, food, beverage and packaged goods. the company
is also expanding its direct-to-retail relationships.
licensed publication categories include
childrens books, continuity-series books, book sets, art
and picture books and magazines.
in addition to receiving licensing fees, the
company is actively involved in the development and approval of
licensed merchandise and in the conceptualization, development,
writing and illustration of licensed publications. we
continually seek to create new characters to be used in licensed
products.
disney stores
the company markets disney-themed products
directly through its retail facilities operated under the disney
store name. these facilities are generally located in leading
shopping malls and other retail complexes. the stores carry a
wide variety of disney merchandise and promote other businesses
of the company. during fiscal 2003, we opened three new stores
and closed 82stores worldwide. the total number of owned
stores was 481 as of september30, 2003 (369stores
domestically and 112stores internationally). in addition,
the company sold 46stores during fiscal 2002 to oriental
land co., ltd., the owner and operator of the tokyo disney
resort, concurrently entering into a license agreement pursuant
to which a company subsidiary receives royalties based on a
percentage of the stores sales.
the company announced that it is pursuing
strategic options for the disney store in north america and
europe including the possible sale of stores in north america
and europe, in order to focus on its core competencies and
activities intended to increase capital returns. in connection
with the proposed sale, the company expects to close a certain
number of under performing stores in north america and receive
royalty payments from the buyer under a long-term licensing
arrangement.
books and magazines
the company publishes books in the united states
and europe through disney publishing worldwide
(children)and hyperion (adult). disney publishing is among
the worlds largest childrens publishers, with books,
magazines and continuity programs in 55 languages in 74
countries, reaching more than 100million readers each
month. during 2003, the companys u.s. childrens book
-18-
table of contents
group had a record number of books on the new
york times bestseller list including three books in the
artemis fowl series (co-published with miramax), the
prestigious newbery award-winning crispin: the cross of lead,
by avi, and five books based on lizzie mcguire. the
companys magazine business includes such successful titles
as disney, disney adventures, discover and familyfun
as well as popular comic magazine titles such as
w.i.t.c.h., a new property currently the fasting growing
comic magazine for girls which sells in 44 countries worldwide.
through its continuity business, disney offers language learning
products such as disneys magic english which has
become one of worlds most successful language learning
series. the company also holds a 50% equity interest in us
weekly, a weekly mass market magazine.
buena vista games
buena vista games, formerly disney interactive,
develops, markets, licenses and distributes globally a variety
of interactive entertainment, educational and sports computer
software and video games.
direct marketing
the direct marketing business operates the disney
catalog and disneystore.com, which market disney-themed
merchandise through the direct mail and online channels,
respectively. offerings include merchandise developed
exclusively for the disney catalog and disneystore.com as well
as products from disney store, other internal disney units and
disney licensees. the disney catalog also operates its own
retail outlet stores for the purpose of selling overstock and
other merchandise.
competition, seasonality, and intellectual
property protection
the company competes in its character
merchandising and other licensing, publishing, interactive and
retail activities with other licensors, publishers and retailers
of character, brand and celebrity names. although public
information is limited, we believe the company is the largest
worldwide licensor of character-based merchandise and
producer/distributor of childrens film-related products.
operating results for the licensing and retail distribution
business are influenced by seasonal consumer purchasing behavior
and by the timing and performance of animated theatrical
releases.
the companys licensing businesses, as well
as its studio entertainment and theme park and resort
operations, are affected by the companys ability to
exploit and protect its intellectual property, including
trademarks, trade names, copyrights, patents and trade secrets,
throughout the world. as a result, domestic and foreign laws
promoting or limiting intellectual property rights may have
significant impacts on the companys operations. in the
united states, for example, the 1998 sonny bono copyright term
extension act provided extended copyright protection for certain
older properties currently licensed or otherwise exploited by
the company, which otherwise might lose such protection in the
near future. earlier this year, the constitutionality of this
act was upheld by the u.s. supreme court in washington d.c. thus
extending the term of copyright in the united states by twenty
years.
copyright and trademark protections are limited
or even unavailable in some foreign countries and preventing
unauthorized use of the companys intellectual properties
can be difficult even in countries with substantial legal
protections. in addition, new technologies have facilitated
piracy of the companys copyrighted works, including motion
pictures, television programming and sound recordings, by such
means as internet peer-to-peer file sharing and personal video
recorders that permit ad stripping and the unauthorized copying
of motion pictures and television programs. the company devotes
significant resources to protecting its intellectual properties
in the united states and other key foreign markets.
in addition, the companys businesses that
rely on the exploitation of intellectual property are subject to
the risk of challenges by third parties claiming infringement of
their proprietary rights.
-19-
table of contents
irrespective of their validity, such claims may
result in substantial costs and diversion of resources which
could have an adverse effect on our operations.
available information
our annual report on form10-k, quarterly
reports on form10-q, current reports on form8-k and
amendments to those reports are available without charge on our
website, www.disney.com/investors, as soon as reasonably
practicable after they are filed electronically with the sec. we
are providing the address to our internet site solely for the
information of investors. we do not intend the address to be an
active link or to otherwise incorporate the contents of the
website into this report.
item 2.properties
the walt disney world resort, disneyland park and
other properties of the company and its subsidiaries are
described in item1 under the caption parks and
resorts. film library properties are described in
item1 under the caption studio entertainment. radio
and television stations owned by the company are described under
the caption media networks.
a subsidiary of the company owns approximately 51
acres of land and 1.9 million square feet of office, studio and
warehouse space in burbank, california, on which the
companys studios and executive and administrative offices
are located. the studio facilities are used for the production
of both live-action and animated motion pictures and television
products. in addition, company subsidiaries lease approximately
1.1million square feet of office and warehouse space and
own one 400,000 square foot building in burbank, which are used
for certain studio, media, and corporate activities.
a subsidiary of the company owns approximately
2.5million square feet of office and warehouse buildings
on approximately 115 acres in glendale, california. the
buildings are used for the companys operations and also
contain space leased to third parties. subsidiaries of the
company also lease approximately 316,000 square feet of office
and warehouse space in glendale, which is used for the
companys operations.
a subsidiary of the company owns approximately 22
acres of land in los angeles, california, on which production,
technical, and office facilities are located. a subsidiary of
the company also has a long-term lease on the el capitan theater
in los angeles.
the companys media networks segment
corporate offices and technical operations are located in
buildings owned by a subsidiary of the company in new york city,
totaling approximately 1.5million square feet. other
subsidiaries of the company also have long-term leases on the
new amsterdam theater in new york city which is used for the
companys live theatrical productions and a studio facility
in times square which is used for television broadcasting. in
addition, subsidiaries of the company lease approximately
807,000square feet of office, studio, and warehouse space
in new york city. the companys 80%-owned subsidiary, espn,
inc., owns espn plaza in bristol, connecticut, from which it
conducts its technical operations. the media networks segment
owns and leases other broadcast facilities, offices, and
broadcast transmitter sites.
subsidiaries of the company lease space in the
united states and canada, including retail space for the disney
stores and office and warehouse space for the companys
operations.
a u.k. subsidiary of the company owns buildings
on a four-acre parcel under a long-term lease in london,
england. the mixed-use development consists of office space
occupied by subsidiary operations and office and retail space
leased by third parties. company subsidiaries also lease office
and retail space in other parts of europe and in asia,
australia, and latin america.
-20-
table of contents
item 3.legal proceedings
in re the walt disney company derivative
litigation. william and geraldine
brehm and thirteen other individuals filed an amended and
consolidated complaint on may28, 1997 in the delaware
court of chancery seeking, among other things, a declaratory
judgment against each of the companys directors as of
december 1996 that the companys 1995 employment agreement
with its former president, michael s. ovitz, was void, or
alternatively that mr.ovitzs termination should be
deemed a termination for cause and any severance
payments to him forfeited. on october8, 1998, the delaware
court of chancery dismissed all counts of the amended complaint.
plaintiffs appealed, and on february9, 2000, the supreme
court of delaware affirmed the dismissal but ruled also that
plaintiffs should be permitted to file an amended complaint in
accordance with the courts opinion. the plaintiffs filed
their amended complaint on january3, 2002. on
february6, 2003, the companys directors motion
to dismiss the amended complaint was converted by the court to a
motion for summary judgment and the plaintiffs were permitted to
take discovery. the company and its directors answered the
amended complaint on april1, 2003. on may28, 2003,
the court (treating as a motion to dismiss the motion for
summary judgment into which it had converted the original motion
on february6, 2003) denied the directors motion to
dismiss the amended complaint. the parties are conducting
discovery.
similar or identical claims have also been filed
by the same plaintiffs (other than william and geraldine brehm)
in the superior court of the state of california, los angeles
county, beginning with a claim filed by richard and david kaplan
on january3, 1997. on may18, 1998, an additional
claim was filed in the same california court by dorothy l.
greenfield. on september25, 2001, ms.greenfield
sought leave to amend her claim, but withdrew her request to
amend on january3, 2002. all of the california claims have
been consolidated and stayed pending final resolution of the
delaware proceedings.
stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney
company. in this lawsuit, filed on
february27, 1991 and pending in the los angeles county
superior court, the plaintiff claims that a company subsidiary
defrauded it and breached a 1983 licensing agreement with
respect to certain winnie the pooh properties, by failing to
account for and pay royalties on revenues earned from the sale
of winnie the pooh movies on videocassette and from the
exploitation of winnie the pooh merchandising rights. the
plaintiff seeks damages for the licensees alleged breaches
as well as confirmation of the plaintiffs interpretation
of the licensing agreement with respect to future activities.
the plaintiff also seeks the right to terminate the agreement on
the basis of the alleged breaches. the company disputes that the
plaintiff is entitled to any damages or other relief of any
kind, including termination of the licensing agreement. if each
of the plaintiffs claims were to be confirmed in a final
judgment, damages as argued by the plaintiff could total as much
as several hundred million dollars and adversely impact the
value to the company of any future exploitation of the licensed
rights. however, given the number of outstanding issues and the
uncertainty of their ultimate disposition, management is unable
to predict the magnitude of any potential determination of the
plaintiffs claims. on april24, 2003, the matter was
removed to the united states district court for the central
district of california, which, on may19, 2003, dismissed
certain claims and remanded the matter to the los angeles
superior court. the company has appealed from the district
courts order to the court of appeals for the ninth
circuit. in the meanwhile, the superior court has assigned the
case to a different judge in the courts complex litigation
pilot program. pre-trial proceedings continue in the state court.
milne and disney enterprises, inc. v. stephen
slesinger, inc. on november 5, 2002,
clare milne, the granddaughter of a. a. milne, author of the
winnie the pooh books, and the companys subsidiary disney
enterprises, inc. filed a complaint against stephen slesinger,
inc. (ssi) in the united states district court for
the central district of california. on november4, 2002,
ms.milne served notices to ssi and the companys
subsidiary terminating a. a. milnes prior grant of rights
to winnie the pooh, effective november5, 2004, and granted
all of those rights to the companys
-21-
table of contents
subsidiary. in their lawsuit, ms.milne and
the companys subsidiary seek a declaratory judgment, under
united states copyright law, that ms.milnes
termination notices were valid; that ssis rights to winnie
the pooh in the united states will terminate effective
november5, 2004; that upon termination of ssis
rights in the united states, the 1983 licensing agreement that
is the subject of the stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt
disney company lawsuit will terminate by operation of law;
and that, as of november5, 2004, ssi will be entitled to
no further royalties for uses of winnie the pooh. in january
2003, ssi filed (a)an answer denying the material
allegations of the complaint and (b)counterclaims seeking
a declaration (i)that ms.milnes grant of
rights to disney enterprises, inc. is void and unenforceable and
(ii)that disney enterprises, inc. remains obligated to pay
ssi royalties under the 1983 licensing agreement. ssi also filed
a motion to dismiss the complaint or, in the alternative, for
summary judgment. on may8, 2003, the court ruled that
milnes termination notices are invalid and dismissed
ssis counterclaims as moot. following further motions, on
august1, 2003, ssi filed an amended answer and
counterclaims and a third-party complaint against harriet hunt
(heir to e.h.shepard, illustrator of the original
winnie the pooh stories), who had served a notice of termination
and a grant of rights similar to ms.milnes. by order
dated october27, 2003, the court certified an
interlocutory appeal from its may8 order to the court of
appeals for the ninth circuit and milne and disney have
petitioned the court of appeal accordingly.
management believes that it is not currently
possible to estimate the impact, if any, that the ultimate
resolution of these matters will have on the companys
results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
kohn v. the walt disney company, et
al. on august15, 2002, aaron
kohn filed a class action lawsuit against the company, its chief
executive officer and its chief financial officer in the united
states district court for the central district of california on
behalf of a putative class consisting of purchasers of the
companys common stock between august15, 1997 and
may15, 2002. subsequently, at least nine substantially
identical lawsuits were also filed in the same court, each
alleging that the defendants violated federal securities laws by
not disclosing the pendency and potential implications of the
stephen slesinger, inc. lawsuit described above prior to
the companys filing of its quarterly report on
form10-q in may 2002. the plaintiffs claim that this
alleged nondisclosure constituted a fraud on the market that
artificially inflated the companys stock price, and
contend that a decline in the stock price resulted from the may
2002 disclosure. the plaintiffs seek compensatory damages and/or
rescission for themselves and all members of their defined
class. several of the plaintiffs have filed motions asking the
court to appoint lead plaintiffs and counsel, and to consolidate
the related actions into a single case. on december10,
2002, plaintiffs motion to consolidate the related actions
into a single case was granted, and their motion for appointment
of lead plaintiffs and counsel was granted on february21,
2003. on or about april7, 2003, plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended class action complaint and on may22,
2003, defendants moved to dismiss the complaint. the court
granted defendants motion and the case was dismissed with
prejudice on october24, 2003.
the company, together with, in some instances,
certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant or
co-defendant in various other legal actions involving copyright,
breach of contract and various other claims incident to the
conduct of its businesses. management does not expect the
company to suffer any material liability by reason of such
actions.
sec proceeding. the
u.s. securities and exchange commission is conducting an
investigation into an amendment of the companys
form10-k for the fiscal year 2001, certain related matters
and other related party transactions that have been previously
disclosed by the company. the investigation does not relate to
the companys financial statements.
-22-
table of contents
item 4.submission of matters to a vote
of security holders
no matters were submitted to a vote of
shareholders during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year
covered by this report.
executive officers of the company
the executive officers of the company are elected
each year at the organizational meeting of the board of
directors, which follows the annual meeting of the shareholders,
and at other board of directors meetings as appropriate. each of
the executive officers has been employed by the company in the
position or positions indicated in the list and pertinent notes
below. messrs.eisner, disney, staggs and murphy have been
employed by the company as executive officers for more than five
years.
at september30, 2003, the executive
officers of the company were as follows:
executive
name
age
title
officer since
michael d. eisner
chairman of the board and chief executive officer
roy e. disney
vice chairman of the board(3)
robert a. iger
president and chief operating
officer(1)
thomas o. staggs
senior executive vice president and chief
financial officer
peter e. murphy
senior executive vice president and chief
strategic officer
alan n. braverman
senior executive vice president and general
counsel(2)
(1)
mr.iger was appointed to his present
position in january 2000, having served (from february 1999
until january 2000) as president of walt disney international
and chairman of the abc group. mr.iger previously held a
number of increasingly responsible positions at abc, inc. and
its predecessor capital cities/ abc, inc., culminating in
service as president and chief operating officer of abc, inc.
from 1994 to 1999.
(2)
mr.braverman was named executive vice
president and general counsel of the company in january 2003 and
promoted to senior executive vice president and general counsel
of the company in october 2003. prior to his appointment as
general counsel of the company, mr.braverman had been
executive or senior vice president and general counsel of abc,
inc. since august 1996 and also deputy general counsel of the
company since august 2001.
(3)
mr.disney resigned as an executive officer
on november30, 2003.
-23-
table of contents
part ii
item 5.market for the companys
common stock and related stockholder matters
the companys common stock is listed on the
new york and pacific stock exchanges under the ticker symbol
dis. the following table shows, for the periods
indicated, the high and low sales prices per share of common
stock as reported in the bloomberg financial markets services.
sales price
high
low
4th quarter
$
23.80
$
19.40
3rd quarter
21.55
16.92
2nd quarter
18.74
14.84
1st quarter
20.24
13.90
4th quarter
$
19.79
$
13.77
3rd quarter
25.00
18.90
2nd quarter
24.51
20.50
1st quarter
22.54
17.90
the company declared a dividend of $0.21 per
disney share on december2, 2003 with respect to fiscal
2003, and a dividend of $0.21 per disney share on
december3, 2002, with respect to fiscal 2002.
as of september30, 2003, the approximate
number of common shareholders of record was 1,026,000.
-24-
table of contents
item 6. selected financial data
(in millions, except per share data)
2003(1)
2002(6)
2001(3)
2000(4)
1999(5)
statements of income
revenues
$
27,061
$
25,329
$
25,172
$
25,325
$
23,373
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes
1,338
1,236
1,300
per disney share
earnings before the cumulative effect of
accounting changes
diluted
$
0.65
$
0.60
$
0.11
$
0.57
$
0.62
basic
0.65
0.61
0.11
0.58
0.63
dividends
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
balance sheets
total assets
$
49,988
$
50,045
$
43,810
$
45,027
$
43,679
borrowings
13,100
14,130
9,769
9,461
11,693
shareholders equity
23,791
23,445
22,672
24,100
20,975
statements of cash flows
cash provided by (used for):
operating activities
$
2,901
$
2,286
$
3,048
$
3,755
$
2,568
investing activities
(1,034
)
(3,176
)
(2,015
)
(1,091
)
(2,290
)
financing activities
(1,523
)
1,511
(1,257
)
(2,236
)
(1)
the 2003 results include the write-off of our
aircraft leveraged lease investment with united airlines of
$114million pre-tax and a benefit from the favorable
settlement of certain state tax issues of $56million.
these items had a ($0.04) and $0.03 impact on diluted earnings
per share, respectively. the amounts do not reflect the
cumulative effect of adopting eitf 00-21 which was a charge of
$71million or ($0.03) per diluted share. see notes 4, 8
and 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
(2)
the 2002 results include a $216million
pre-tax gain on the sale of investments and a $34million
pre-tax gain on the sale of the disney stores in japan. these
items had a $0.06 and $0.01 impact on diluted earnings per
share, respectively. see notes 4 and 3 to the consolidated
financial statements. during fiscal 2002, the company acquired
fox family worldwide, inc. for $5.2billion. see note 3 to
the consolidated financial statements.
(3)
the 2001 results include restructuring and
impairment charges totaling $1.5billion pre-tax. the
diluted earnings per disney share impact of these charges was
$0.52. the amounts do not reflect the cumulative effect of
accounting changes related to film and derivative accounting
changes which were charges of $228million and
$50million, respectively or ($0.11) and ($0.02) per
diluted share, respectively. see notes 15 and 2 to the
consolidated financial statements.
(4)
the 2000 results include pre-tax gains of
$243million, $93million and $153million from
the sale of fairchild publications, eurosport and ultraseek,
respectively. the impact of income taxes substantially offset
certain of the gains. the diluted earnings per disney share
impacts of these items were $0.00, $0.02 and $0.01,
respectively. the results also include a $92million
pre-tax restructuring and impairment charge. the diluted
earnings per disney share impact of the charge was $0.01.
(5)
the 1999 results include a pre-tax gain from the
sale of starwave corporation of $345million, equity in
infoseek loss of $322million and restructuring and
impairment charges of $172million pre-tax. the diluted
earnings per disney share impacts of these items were $0.10,
($0.09) and ($0.05), respectively.
(6)
effective the beginning of fiscal 2002, the
company adopted statement of financial accounting standards
no.142, goodwill and other intangible assets and,
accordingly, ceased amortization of goodwill and substantially
all intangible assets.
-25-
table of contents
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
consolidated results
(in millions, except per share data)
results of operations
revenues
$
27,061
$
25,329
$
25,172
costs and expenses
(24,330
)
(22,924
)
(21,573
)
amortization of intangible assets
(18
)
(21
)
(767
)
gain on sale of businesses
net interest expense
(793
)
(453
)
(417
)
equity in the income of investees
restructuring and impairment charges
(16
)
(1,454
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
2,254
2,190
1,283
income taxes
(789
)
(853
)
(1,059
)
minority interests
(127
)
(101
)
(104
)
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes
1,338
1,236
cumulative effect of accounting changes:
film accounting
(228
)
derivative accounting
(50
)
multiple element revenue accounting
(71
)
net income (loss)
$
1,267
$
1,236
$
(158
)
earnings (loss)attributed to disney common
stock(1)
$
1,267
$
1,236
$
(41
)
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting changes attributed to disney common stock:
diluted(2)
$
0.65
$
0.60
$
0.11
basic
$
0.65
$
0.61
$
0.11
cumulative effect of accounting changes per share:
film accounting
$
$
$
(0.11
)
derivative accounting
(0.02
)
multiple element revenue accounting
(0.03
)
$
(0.03
)
$
$
(0.13
)
earnings (loss)per share attributed to
disney common stock:(1)
diluted (2)
$
0.62
$
0.60
$
(0.02
)
basic
$
0.62
$
0.61
$
(0.02
)
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding of disney common stock:
diluted
2,067
2,044
2,100
basic
2,043
2,040
2,085
(1)
disneys retained interest in the internet
group was approximately 72% through january28, 2001 (the
last date prior to the announcement of the conversion of the
internet group common stock) and 100% thereafter. loss and loss
per share attributed to the internet group in fiscal year 2001
were $(117) million and $(2.72), respectively.
(2)
the calculation of diluted earnings per share
assumes the conversion of the companys convertible senior
notes and adds back related after-tax interest expense of
$10million for fiscal year 2003.
-26-
table of contents
organization of information
managements discussion and analysis
provides a narrative on the companys financial performance
and condition that should be read in conjunction with the
accompanying financial statements. it includes the following
sections:
consolidated results
business segment results
stock option accounting
liquidity and capital resources
contractual obligations, commitments and off
balance sheet arrangements
accounting policies and estimates
accounting changes
forward-looking statements
consolidated results
2003 vs. 2002
overview
our income before the cumulative effect of
accounting change was $1.3 billion in fiscal 2003, which was
$102million, or 8%, higher than in fiscal 2002. this
represented diluted earnings per share before the cumulative
effect of accounting change of $0.65, which was $0.05 higher
than in fiscal 2002. we made an accounting change effective as
of the beginning of fiscal 2003 to adopt a new accounting rule
for multiple element revenue accounting (eitf 00-21, see note 2
to the consolidated financial statements), which impacted the
timing of revenue recognition related to nfl football
programming at espn. this change resulted in a cumulative effect
charge totaling $71million. diluted earnings per share
including the effect of this accounting change were $0.62 for
fiscal 2003.
results for the current year included a write-off
of an aircraft leveraged lease investment with united airlines
($114million pre-tax or $0.04 per share), a pre-tax gain
of $16million on the sale of the anaheim angels and
restructuring and impairment charges of $16million at the
disney store, as described more fully under consumer products,
below. additionally, the current year included a benefit from
the favorable settlement of certain state tax issues
($56million or $0.03 per share). results for the prior
year included a pre-tax gain on the sale of shares of
knight-ridder, inc. ($216 million or $0.06 per share) and a
pre-tax gain on the sale of the disney store business in japan
($34million or $0.01 per share).
excluding the aforementioned items, the increase
in net income for fiscal 2003 was primarily the result of
increased segment operating income at our studio entertainment
and media networks segments and increased equity in the income
of cable investees, partially offset by lower segment operating
income at our parks and resorts segment and consumer products
segment, higher corporate and unallocated shared expenses and
increased net interest expense. changes in segment operating
income are discussed in detail in the separate sections below.
net interest expense
net interest expense is detailed below:
year ended september 30,
(in millions)
interest expense
$
(666
)
$
(708
)
$
(544
)
interest and investment income (loss)
(127
)
net interest expense
$
(793
)
$
(453
)
$
(417
)
-27-
table of contents
the increase in net interest expense reflects
lower interest expense due to lower interest rates and average
debt balances, offset by higher investment losses. the
investment losses in fiscal 2003 included the $114million
write-off of our leveraged lease investment with united airlines
referred to above. in contrast, fiscal 2002 included the
$216million gain on the sale of knight-ridder, inc. shares
referred to above.
equity in the income of investees
the increase in equity in the income of our
investees reflected increases at lifetime television, due to
lower advertising expenses, as well as increases at a&e and
e! entertainment due to higher advertising revenues. in
addition, a write-down of an investment in a latin american
cable operator negatively affected prior-year equity income.
effective income tax rate
the effective income tax rate decreased from
38.9% in fiscal 2002 to 35.0% in fiscal 2003. the decrease in
the current year effective income tax rate is primarily due to a
reduction in income tax expense due to a $56million
reserve release as a result of the favorable resolution of
certain prior-year state income tax exposures. as more fully
disclosed in note 8 to the consolidated financial statements,
the current year effective income tax rate reflects a $71
million benefit for certain income exclusions provided for under
u.s. income tax laws. these income exclusions are under review
and if they were to be repealed without the enactment of
legislation replacing a substantial amount of the current
benefit, there would be a negative impact on the companys
income tax expense going forward.
pension and benefit costs
increasing pension and post-retirement medical
benefit plan costs have affected results in all of our segments,
with the majority of these costs being borne by the parks and
resorts segment. the costs increased from $71million in
fiscal 2002 to $131million in fiscal 2003. the increase in
fiscal 2003 was due primarily to a lower discount rate used to
measure the present value of plan obligations, a lower expected
long-term return on plan assets and the actual performance of
plan assets. for fiscal 2003 expense, the discount rate
assumption decreased from 7.50% to 7.20% reflecting the decline
in overall market interest rates and the expected return on plan
assets was reduced from 9.50% to 8.50% reflecting trends in the
overall financial markets.
we expect pension and post-retirement medical
costs to increase further in fiscal 2004 to $375million.
the increase is due primarily to a further decrease in the
discount rate assumption and a further reduction in the expected
return on plan assets. for fiscal 2004 expense, the discount
rate assumption is decreasing from 7.20% to 5.85%, reflecting
the further decline in prevailing market interest rates. our
long-term expected rate of return on plan assets has been
reduced from 8.50% for fiscal 2003 to 7.50% for fiscal 2004.
cash contributions to the pension plans are
expected to increase in fiscal 2004 to approximately
$130million from $25million in fiscal 2003.
over the past few years, the value of assets in
the plans have declined in line with the performance of the
financial markets generally. this situation combined with the
increase in the present value of pension obligations results in
pension obligations exceeding the fair value of plan assets for
certain of the pension plans. in this circumstance, the
accounting rules require that we record an immediate adjustment
to reflect the unfunded accumulated pension obligation.
accordingly, as of september30, 2003, the company recorded
an additional minimum pension liability adjustment totaling
$899million ($564million after tax; see note 9 to
the consolidated financial statements). the accounting rules
require that this after-tax adjustment be recorded as a
reduction of equity by charging accumulated other comprehensive
income rather than as a current year expense.
-28-
table of contents
expense recognition under the pension accounting
rules is based upon plan asset returns and plan benefit costs
over the life of the companys workforce.
2002 vs. 2001
overview
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
change for fiscal 2002 was $1.2billion, compared to
$120million in fiscal 2001. diluted earnings per share
before the cumulative effect of accounting change was $0.60 in
fiscal 2002 as compared to $0.11 in fiscal 2001.
results in fiscal 2002 included a pre-tax gain
($216million or $0.06 per share) on the sale of the
remaining shares of knight-ridder, inc., a pre-tax gain on the
sale of the disney store business in japan ($34million or
$0.01 per share), the results of operations of abc family (which
was acquired on october24, 2001), incremental interest
expense for borrowings related to that acquisition and the
cessation of amortization of goodwill and certain intangible
assets, due to the adoption of sfas 142 effective
october1, 2001. results for fiscal 2001 included
restructuring and impairment charges ($1.5 billion or $0.52 per
share) and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
($278million or $0.13 per share). earnings and earnings
per share attributed to disney common stock before the
cumulative effect of accounting changes and adjusted for the
impact of sfas 142 for fiscal 2001 were $891million and
$0.42, respectively.
in addition to the items discussed above, fiscal
2002 results reflected lower segment operating income in our
media networks and parks and resorts segments, lower equity in
the income of investees and higher net interest expense,
partially offset by higher segment operating income in the
studio entertainment segment. changes in segment operating
income are discussed in detail in the separate sections below.
equity in the income of investees
lower equity in the income of investees reflected
the write-down of an investment in a latin american cable
operator, decreases at the cable investments resulting from the
soft advertising market and higher advertising costs at lifetime
television.
net interest expense
net interest expense increased to
$453million in fiscal 2002 as compared to
$417million in fiscal 2001 due to incremental borrowings
in connection with the abc family acquisition. higher interest
expense was partially offset by increased investment income due
to the gain on the sale of knight-ridder shares.
effective income tax rate
the effective income tax rate decreased from
82.5% in fiscal 2001 to 38.9% in fiscal 2002. the fiscal 2001
effective income tax rate was higher due to nondeductible
impairment charges related to intangible assets that were
recorded during that year. additionally, fiscal 2001 had much
higher non deductible goodwill amortization as the company
ceased amortizing goodwill in fiscal 2002.
fiscal 2001 restructuring and impairment
charges
the company recorded restructuring and impairment
charges of approximately $1.5billion for the year ended
september30, 2001, which primarily related to the closure
of the go.com portal businesses, impairments of internet
investments, a company-wide workforce reduction and the closure
of the disneyquest facility in chicago and certain disney stores
in north america. the majority of these were non-cash charges.
as of september30, 2003 there were no remaining reserve
balances outstanding or cash flow requirements related to these
charges.
-29-
table of contents
business segment results
year ended september 30,
(in millions)
revenues:
media networks
$
10,941
$
9,733
$
9,569
parks and resorts
6,412
6,465
7,004
studio entertainment
7,364
6,691
6,009
consumer products
2,344
2,440
2,590
$
27,061
$
25,329
$
25,172
segment operating income:
media networks
$
1,213
$
$
1,758
parks and resorts
1,169
1,586
studio entertainment
consumer products
$
3,174
$
2,822
$
4,005
the company evaluates the performance of its
operating segments based on segment operating income and
management uses aggregate segment operating income as a measure
of the performance of operating businesses. the company believes
that aggregate segment operating income assists investors by
allowing them to evaluate changes in the operating results of
the companys portfolio of businesses separate from factors
other than business operations that affect net income. the
following table reconciles segment operating income to income
before income taxes, minority interests and the cumulative
effect of accounting changes.
year ended september 30,
(in millions)
segment operating income
$
3,174
$
2,822
$
4,005
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
(443
)
(417
)
(406
)
amortization of intangible assets
(18
)
(21
)
(767
)
gain on sale of businesses
net interest expense
(793
)
(453
)
(417
)
equity in the income of investees
restructuring and impairment charges
(16
)
(1,454
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
$
2,254
$
2,190
$
1,283
depreciation expense is as follows:
year ended september 30,
(in millions)
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
studio entertainment
consumer products
segment depreciation expense
corporate
total depreciation expense
$
1,059
$
1,021
$
-30-
table of contents
segment depreciation expense is included in
segment operating income and corporate depreciation expense is
included in corporate and unallocated shared expenses.
media networks
the following table provides supplemental revenue
and segment operating income detail for the media networks
segment:
year ended
september 30,
(in millions)
revenues:
broadcasting
$
5,418
$
5,058
$
5,703
cable networks
5,523
4,675
3,866
$
10,941
$
9,733
$
9,569
segment operating income (loss):
broadcasting
$
$
(37
)
$
cable networks
1,176
1,023
1,063
$
1,213
$
$
1,758
media networks
2003 vs. 2002
revenues
media networks revenues increased 12%, or
$1.2billion, to $10.9billion. the increase reflected
an increase of 7%, or $360million, at broadcasting and an
increase of 18%, or $848million at the cable networks.
increased broadcasting revenues were driven
primarily by an increase of $196million at the abc
television network, $60million at the companys owned
and operated television stations and $33million at the
radio networks and stations. the increases at the television
network and stations were primarily driven by higher advertising
revenues reflecting higher rates due to an improved advertising
marketplace. the airing of the super bowl in the second quarter
of the current year also contributed to increased advertising
revenues. revenues at the radio networks and stations also
increased due to the stronger advertising market.
increased cable networks revenues were driven by
increases of $455million in revenues from cable and
satellite operators and $385million in advertising
revenues. increased advertising revenue was primarily a result
of the addition of nba games. revenues from cable and satellite
operators are largely derived from fees charged on a per
subscriber basis, and the increases in the current year
reflected both contractual rate adjustments and subscriber
growth. the companys contractual arrangements with cable
and satellite operators are renewed or renegotiated from time to
time in the ordinary course of business. a significant number of
these arrangements will be up for renewal in the next
18months. consolidation in the cable and satellite
distribution industry and other factors may adversely affect the
companys ability to obtain and maintain contractual terms
for the distribution of its various cable and satellite
programming services that are as favorable as those currently in
place. if this were to occur, revenues from cable networks could
increase at slower rates than in the past or could be stable or
decline.
-31-
table of contents
costs and expenses
costs and expenses for this segment consist
primarily of programming rights costs and amortization,
production costs, distribution and selling expenses and labor
costs. costs and expenses increased 11%, or $981million,
over fiscal 2002 due to higher programming and production costs,
partially offset by lower bad debt expense at the cable
networks. additionally, the prior year benefited from the
receipt of insurance proceeds related to the loss of a broadcast
tower.
higher programming and production costs at the
abc television network were primarily due to the airing of the
super bowl and the costs of coverage of the war in iraq. higher
programming costs at the cable networks were primarily due to
nba and mlb telecasts and higher programming costs at abc
family. programming cost increases were partially offset by
lower cost amortization for the nfl contract due to commencing
the three year option period as described under sports
programming costs, below. the decrease in bad debt expense
at cable networks reflected negative impacts in the prior year
related to financial difficulties of adelphia communications
company (adelphia) in the united states and kirchmedia &
company (kirch) in germany.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 23%, or
$227million, to $1.2billion. the increase reflected
increases of $74million at broadcasting and $153 million
at the cable networks. increased segment operating income at
broadcasting reflected higher advertising revenues, partially
offset by increased programming and production costs. growth at
the cable networks reflected higher revenues from cable and
satellite operators and higher advertising revenue, partially
offset by increased sports programming costs.
sports programming costs
the initial five-year period of the
companys contract to televise nfl games was non-cancelable
and ended with the telecast of the 2003 pro bowl. in february
2003, the nfl did not exercise its renegotiation option and as a
result, the companys nfl contract was extended for an
additional three years ending with the telecast of the 2006 pro
bowl. the aggregate fee for the three-year period will be
$3.7billion. espn recognized the costs of the initial
five-year term of the contract at levels that increased each
year commensurate with increasing nfl revenues. as a result,
espn experienced its highest level of nfl programming costs
during fiscal 2003. the implementation of the contract extension
will reduce fiscal 2004 nfl costs by approximately
$180million versus fiscal 2003, and such costs are
expected to be relatively level over the remaining two years of
the contract extension.
cost recognition for nfl programming at the abc
television network in fiscal 2004 is expected to decrease by
$300million as compared to fiscal 2003. the decrease at
the abc television network is primarily due to the absence of
the super bowl, which was aired by the abc television network in
fiscal 2003 and will be absent in fiscal 2004, as well as fewer
games in fiscal 2004. the absence of the super bowl and the
lower number of games at the abc television network will also
result in lower revenue from nfl broadcasts in fiscal 2004.
due to the payment terms in the nfl contract,
there will be approximately a $116million decrease in cash
payments under the contract in fiscal 2004 as compared to fiscal
2003.
the company has various contractual commitments
for the purchase of television rights for sports and other
programming, including the nfl, nba, mlb, nhl and various
college football conference and bowl games. the costs of these
contracts have increased significantly in recent years. we enter
into these contractual commitments with the expectation that,
over the life of the contracts, revenue from advertising during
the programming and affiliate fees will exceed the costs of the
programming. while contract costs may initially exceed
incremental revenues and negatively impact operating income, it
is our expectation that the combined value to our sport networks
from all of these contracts will result in long-term benefits.
the actual impact of these contracts on the companys
-32-
table of contents
results over the term of the contracts is
dependent upon a number of factors, including the strength of
advertising markets, effectiveness of marketing efforts and the
size of viewer audiences.
media networks
2002 vs. 2001
revenues
revenues increased 2%, or $164million, to
$9.7billion, reflecting a decrease of 11%, or
$645million, at broadcasting, partially offset by an
increase of 21%, or $809million, at the cable networks.
decreased broadcasting revenue was driven
primarily by a decrease of $608 million at the abc television
network and $64million at the companys owned and
operated stations. the declines at the abc television network
and the companys owned television stations were primarily
driven by lower ratings and lower advertising rates.
increases at the cable networks were driven by an
increase of $540million due to higher revenues from cable
and satellite operators at espn and disney channel and
approximately $342million due to the acquisition of abc
family, partially offset by a decrease of $19million in
advertising revenues. revenues from cable and satellite
operators increased due to higher rates at espn and subscriber
growth at both espn and the international disney channels. lower
advertising revenues were due to the soft advertising market and
lower revenues from adelphia and kirch as a result of their
financial difficulties.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses increased 12%, or
$936million, driven by higher sports programming costs at
espn, higher bad debt expense due to the financial difficulties
of adelphia and kirch and increased advertising costs at the
cable networks, partially offset by lower costs at the internet
group and proceeds from an insurance settlement.
segment operating income
segment operating income decreased 44%, or
$772million, to $1.0billion, driven by decreases of
$732million at broadcasting, primarily due to decreased
advertising revenues. cable operating income decreased 4%, or
$40million, as revenue gains were more than offset by cost
increases.
parks and resorts
2003 vs. 2002
revenues
revenues at parks and resorts decreased 1%, or
$53million, to $6.4 billion. the decrease was driven
primarily by decreases of $57million due to the sale of
the anaheim angels baseball team during the third quarter of
fiscal 2003, $51million from decreased revenues from euro
disney, and $14million from the walt disney world resort.
these decreases were partially offset by an increase of
$83million at the disneyland resort. the decrease in
revenues from euro disney reflected the cessation of billing and
recognition of revenues from royalty and management fees
commencing with the second quarter of fiscal 2003 due to euro
disneys financial difficulties. the company likely will
not recognize revenues from royalties and management fees in
fiscal 2004.
revenues at the walt disney world resort were
down marginally and reflected lower theme park attendance and
hotel occupancy compared to the prior year, partially offset by
increased per capita guest spending at the theme parks and hotel
properties. decreased theme park attendance and hotel occupancy
at the walt disney world resort reflected continued softness in
travel and tourism.
-33-
table of contents
guest spending increases reflected ticket price
increases and fewer promotional programs offered during the year.
at the disneyland resort, increased revenues were
primarily driven by higher theme park attendance and hotel
occupancy. these increases were driven by the success of certain
promotional programs offered during the year, as well as the
opening of new attractions and entertainment venues at both the
disneyland park and disneys california adventure during
the current year.
across our domestic theme parks, attendance and
per capita guest spending increased 1% compared to the prior
year. hotel occupancy was 77% on 8,341,030rooms in fiscal
2003 compared to 76% on 8,533,135rooms in fiscal 2002. per
room guest spending was $210 and $204 in fiscal 2003 and 2002,
respectively.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses, which consist principally of
labor, costs of merchandise, food and beverages sold,
depreciation, repairs and maintenance, entertainment, marketing
and sales expense, increased 3%, or $159million compared
to the prior year. the increase in costs and expenses was
primarily due to higher costs at the walt disney world resort
and the disneyland resort, partially offset by cost decreases
due to the sale of the anaheim angels during the third quarter.
higher costs at walt disney world and disneyland were primarily
driven by higher spending on employee benefits, repairs and
maintenance, marketing, information systems, insurance, and
depreciation. employee benefits costs in fiscal 2004 are
expected to increase due to higher fiscal 2004 pension and
postretirement medical costs as discussed under
consolidated results, above.
segment operating income
segment operating income decreased 18%, or
$212million, to $957million, primarily due to higher
costs and expenses at the walt disney world resort and the
decreased revenues from euro disney. revenue increases at the
disneyland resort were offset by higher costs and expenses.
parks and resorts
2002 vs. 2001
revenues
revenues decreased 8%, or $539million, to
$6.5billion, driven by decreases of $496million at
the walt disney world resort, $40million at the disneyland
resort and $24million at disney cruise line, partially
offset by increased royalties of $52million from the tokyo
disney resort.
at the walt disney world resort, decreased
revenues reflected lower attendance, occupancy and per room
guest spending at the hotel properties. these decreases were
driven by decreases in international and domestic visitation
resulting from continued disruption in travel and tourism and
softness in the economy. lower per room guest spending at the
walt disney world resort was driven by promotional programs.
at the disneyland resort, decreased revenues were
driven primarily by lower per capita guest spending at the theme
parks and at the hotel properties. lower guest spending at the
disneyland resort was driven by ticket and other promotional
programs as well as a higher mix of local guests, who have
higher annual pass usage and tend to spend less per visit.
the increased royalties at tokyo disney resort
were due to the opening of the tokyo disneysea theme park and
the tokyo disneysea hotel miracosta in the fourth quarter of
fiscal 2001.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses decreased 2%, or
$122million, driven primarily by volume decreases, reduced
marketing expenses and permanent cost reduction initiatives and
the absence of pre-opening
-34-
table of contents
costs for disneys california adventure.
these cost decreases were partially offset by higher employee
benefits and insurance costs.
segment operating income
segment operating income decreased 26%, or
$417million, to $1.2billion, driven by revenue
declines at the walt disney world and disneyland resorts,
partially offset by decreased costs and expenses at these
resorts and increased royalties from the tokyo disney resort.
studio entertainment
2003 vs. 2002
revenues
revenues increased 10%, or $673million, to
$7.4billion. the increase primarily reflects an increase
of $553million in worldwide theatrical motion picture
distribution and $185million in worldwide home
entertainment distribution.
the worldwide theatrical motion picture
distribution revenue increases reflected the strong performance
of pirates of the caribbean, disney/ pixars
finding nemo, chicago, santa clause 2, bringing down
the house and bruce almighty, which the company
distributed internationally, compared to the prior year, which
included disney/ pixars monsters, inc., signs
and lilo & stitch. worldwide home video increases
reflected stronger dvd and vhs sales of lilo & stitch,
beauty & the beast, signs, sweet home alabama and other
dvd titles compared to the prior year, which included
monsters, inc., pearl harbor and snow white and
the seven dwarfs.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses, which consist primarily of
production cost amortization, distribution and selling expenses,
product costs and participation costs, increased 5%, or
$326million. the increases reflected increases in
worldwide theatrical distribution and international home video
and higher development and production write-offs, partially
offset by decreases in television distribution and domestic home
entertainment costs. higher costs in worldwide theatrical
distribution reflected higher distribution costs for current
year titles due to the promotion of high-profile releases,
including finding nemo, pirates of the caribbean, chicago
and gangs of new york, partially offset by lower
production cost amortization due to the write-down of
treasure planet in the prior year. cost increases in
international home entertainment reflected higher distribution
costs and production cost amortization for current year titles,
which included beauty & the beast, lilo & stitch
and treasure planet, partially offset by lower
participation costs. lower costs in television distribution
reflected lower production cost amortization and participation
costs related to the sale of film products to television
networks, the pay television market and in domestic syndication.
lower costs in domestic home entertainment reflected higher
participation costs for prior-year titles, which included
monsters, inc. and pearl harbor.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased from
$273million to $620million, due to growth in
worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution, higher
revenues in domestic home entertainment, lower television
distribution costs, partially offset by higher development and
production write-offs.
studio entertainment
2002 vs. 2001
revenues
revenues increased 11%, or $682million, to
$6.7billion, driven by growth of $603million in
worldwide home entertainment and $76million in domestic
theatrical motion picture distribution, partially offset by a
decline of $95 million in international theatrical motion
picture distribution.
-35-
table of contents
improvements in worldwide home entertainment
revenues reflected strong dvd and vhs sales driven by successful
titles including monsters, inc., pearl harbor, snow white and
the seven dwarfs and cinderella ii: dreams come true
along with the success of miyazakis spirited away
in japan. in domestic theatrical motion picture
distribution, revenue increases were driven by the performance
of monsters, inc., signs and lilo & stitch.
despite the success of monsters, inc., decreased
international theatrical motion picture distribution revenues
reflected stronger performance of fiscal 2001 titles, which
included pearl harbor, unbreakable and dinosaur.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses increased 12%, or
$669million, driven by increases in worldwide home
entertainment and worldwide theatrical motion picture
distribution. increased costs in worldwide home entertainment
reflected higher marketing, distribution and participation costs
due to monsters, inc. and pearl harbor on dvd and
vhs. higher costs in worldwide theatrical motion distribution
reflected increased marketing and distribution costs and higher
participation costs for monsters, inc. and signs
and a $98million impairment write-down for treasure
planet.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 5%, or
$13million, to $273million, due to increases in
worldwide home entertainment, partially offset by a decline in
worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution.
consumer products
2003 vs. 2002
revenues
revenues decreased 4%, or $96million, to
$2.3billion, reflecting declines of $161million at
the disney store, partially offset by increases of
$60million in merchandise licensing and $30million
in publishing operations.
the decline at the disney store is due primarily
to the sale of the disney store business in japan in the prior
year, as well as lower comparative store sales and fewer stores
in north america. the increase in merchandise licensing
primarily reflected higher revenues from toy licensees, due in
part to higher contractually guaranteed minimum royalties in
north america, strong performance across europe and increased
royalties from direct-to-retail licenses. higher publishing
revenues were driven by increases in europe, reflecting the
strong performance of the topolino, w.i.t.c.h. and art
attack titles.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses, which consist primarily of
labor, product costs (including product development costs,
distribution and selling expenses) and leasehold and occupancy
expenses, decreased 4% or $86million. the decrease was
primarily driven by lower costs at the disney store due to the
sale of the japan business and closures of disney store
locations domestically. these decreases were partially offset by
volume increases at publishing and higher divisional
administrative costs.
segment operating income
segment operating income decreased 3%, or
$10million, to $384million, primarily driven by a
decline at the disney store and increased administrative costs,
partially offset by an increase in merchandise licensing due to
increased sales.
disney stores
the company operates 474 disney stores in north
america and europe. during the year, the company announced that
it was pursuing strategic options for the disney store,
including the
-36-
table of contents
possible sale of stores in north america and
europe, in order to focus on its core competencies and
activities intended to increase capital returns. in connection
with preparing the chain for sale, the company expects to close
a certain number of underperforming stores in north america.
during fiscal 2003, the company recorded charges
totaling $16million, principally reflecting fixed asset
write-downs related to the stores it expects to close (and
certain related facilities) and the cost of certain
administrative headcount reductions. fixed assets associated
with the stores identified for closure have been written down to
their fair value, determined on the basis of estimated future
discounted cash flows through the expected date of the closures.
the charges are reported in restructuring and impairment
charges in the consolidated statements of income.
as store closures occur, the company expects to
incur additional charges related to lease termination costs and
other actions that may be taken in connection with the
disposition of the stores. total future base rent commitments
for the disney stores in north america and europe totaled
approximately $395million as of september30, 2003.
of these commitments, it is anticipated that the company will
bear the cost of those associated with the stores that will be
closed, and that a buyer would assume those associated with
stores that are sold. total future base rent commitments for the
stores that the company expects to close were approximately
$54million as of september30, 2003. in conjunction
with the sale negotiations, the company will undertake
negotiations with lessors to seek favorable lease termination
terms for stores that will be closed, but will likely incur
charges related to the lease terminations in the second and
third quarters of fiscal 2004. it is not possible at this time
to determine what amount will ultimately be paid to terminate
these leases.
management believes that the company will recover
its investment in stores that will be sold; however, it is
possible that certain stores currently identified for sale may
ultimately be closed which could result in additional charges.
the following table provides supplemental
revenues and operating income detail for the disney stores in
north america and europe, which includes the results of stores
we expect to close:
year ended
september 30,
(in millions)
revenues
$
$
operating loss
(84
)
(15
)
if we are successful in selling certain disney
stores in north america and europe, we would expect to receive
royalty payments from the buyer under a long-term license for
the disney brand.
consumer products
2002 vs. 2001
revenues
revenues decreased 6%, or $150million, to
$2.4billion, reflecting declines of $63million at
buena vista games, $57million at the disney store and
$52million in merchandise licensing, partially offset by
increases of $22 million in publishing operations.
the decline in merchandise licensing reflected
lower guarantee payments in the current year and soft
merchandise licensing performance domestically and
internationally. lower revenues at buena vista games were due to
weaker performing personal computer cd-rom and video game
titles. at the disney store, higher comparative store sales were
more than offset by lower revenues due to the sale of the disney
store business in japan during the third quarter of fiscal 2002
as well as the impact of store closures domestically. higher
publishing revenues were driven by successful releases during
fiscal 2002 including lucky man: a memoir by michael j.
fox and hope through heartsongs.
-37-
table of contents
costs and expenses
costs and expenses decreased 7% or
$143million, primarily driven by lower costs at the disney
store due to the sale of the japan business, closures of disney
store locations domestically and lower advertising costs.
decreased costs also reflected lower buena vista games sales
volumes as well as cost reductions at the disney catalog. these
decreases were partially offset by volume increases at the
disney stores and at publishing.
segment operating income
segment operating income decreased 2%, or
$7million, to $394million, primarily driven by
declines in merchandise licensing and at buena vista games,
partially offset by increases at the disney store and the disney
catalog.
stock option accounting
under the current provisions of statement of
financial standards no.123 accounting for stock-based
compensation (sfas 123), the company has elected to continue
using the intrinsic-value method of accounting for stock-based
awards granted to employees in accordance with accounting
principles board opinion no. 25 accounting for stock issued
to employees (apb 25). accordingly, the company has not
recognized compensation expense for the fair value of its
stock-based awards to employees in its consolidated statements
of income. companies electing to continue to follow the apb 25
method must make pro forma disclosures, as if the fair value
based method of accounting had been applied.
the following table reflects pro forma net income
(loss)and earnings (loss)per share had the company
elected to record an expense for the fair value of employee
stock options pursuant to the provisions of sfas 123:
year ended
september 30,
(in millions, except for per share data)
net income (loss)attributed to disney
common stock:
as reported
$
1,267
$
1,236
$
(41
)
pro forma after stock option expense
(325
)
diluted earnings (loss)per share attributed
to disney common stock:
as reported
0.62
0.60
(0.02
)
pro forma after stock option expense
0.48
0.45
(0.15
)
these pro forma amounts may not be representative
of future disclosures since the estimated fair value of stock
options is amortized to expense over the vesting period, and
additional options may be granted in future years. the pro forma
amounts assume that the company had been following the fair
value approach since the beginning of fiscal 1996.
fully diluted shares outstanding and diluted
earnings per share include the effect of in-the-money stock
options calculated based on the average share price for the
period and assumes
-38-
table of contents
conversion of the convertible senior notes (see
note 7 to the consolidated financial statements). the dilution
from employee options increases as the companys share
price increases, as shown below:
average
total
percentage of
hypothetical
disney
in-the-money
incremental
average shares
fy 2003
share price
options
diluted shares(1)
outstanding
eps impact(3)
$
18.56
38 million
(2)
$
0.00
25.00
119 million
12 million
0.6
%
(0.01
)
30.00
147 million
24 million
1.2
%
(0.01
)
40.00
212 million
49 million
2.4
%
(0.02
)
50.00
220 million
66 million
3.2
%
(0.02
)
(1)
represents the incremental impact on fully
diluted shares outstanding assuming the average share prices
indicated, using the treasury stock method. under the treasury
stock method, the tax effected proceeds that would be received
from the exercise of all in-the-money options are assumed to be
used to repurchase shares.
(2)
fully diluted shares outstanding for the year
ended september30, 2003 total 2,067million and
include the dilutive impact of in-the-money options at the
average share price for the period of $18.56 and the assumed
conversion of the convertible senior notes. at the average share
price of $18.56, the dilutive impact of in-the-money options was
3million shares for the year.
(3)
based upon fiscal 2003 earnings of
$1,267million or $0.62 per share.
liquidity and capital resources
cash and cash equivalents increased by
$344million during the year ended september30, 2003.
the change in cash and cash equivalents is as follows:
year ended september 30,
(in millions)
cash provided by operations
$
2,901
$
2,286
$
3,048
cash used by investing activities
(1,034
)
(3,176
)
(2,015
)
cash (used)provided by financing activities
(1,523
)
1,511
(1,257
)
increase (decrease)in cash and cash
equivalents
$
$
$
(224
)
operating activities
cash provided by operations increased 27%, or
$615million, to $2.9 billion, reflecting higher pre-tax
income adjusted for non-cash items, the collection of certain
long-term receivables, working capital improvements and higher
cash distributions from equity investees. these increases were
partially offset by increased film and television production
spending on fiscal 2004 productions. working capital
improvements were primarily due to smaller increases in accounts
receivable compared to the prior year due to the timing of home
video and theatrical releases.
investing activities
investing activities consist principally of
investments in parks, resorts and other property and mergers,
acquisition and divestiture activity. during fiscal 2003,
investing activities consisted primarily of investments in
parks, resorts and other property. during fiscal 2002, investing
activities included approximately $2.8billion for the
acquisition of abc family worldwide.
investments in parks, resorts and other
properties
the five years between 1996 and 2001 represented
a period of increased levels of capital investment at the
company, as we sought to strengthen and extend the competitive
advantage of our
-39-
table of contents
key brands and businesses. during this period,
capital spending averaged approximately $2billion annually
as we invested capital to transform our parks and resorts
properties around the world by adding new theme parks and theme
park attractions, hotel rooms and convention space. having
substantially completed this phase of investment, we have since
decreased capital spending.
during the year, the company invested
$1.0billion in parks, resorts and other properties.
investments in parks, resorts and other properties by segment
are as follows:
year ended september 30,
(in millions)
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
1,278
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate and unallocated shared expenditures
$
1,049
$
1,086
$
1,795
capital expenditures for the parks and resorts
segment are principally for theme park and resort expansion, new
rides and attractions, recurring capital and capital
improvements. the decrease in fiscal 2003 as compared to fiscal
2002 was primarily due to the completion in the prior year of a
new resort facility at walt disney world. significant new
attractions that were in process in fiscal 2003 included tower
of terror at disneys california adventure, mission space
at epcot and mickeys philharmagic at walt disney world. in
addition to new attractions, fiscal 2003 spending included
certain information systems projects at walt disney world.
capital expenditure increases at media networks
primarily reflect investments in facilities and equipment for
expanding and upgrading broadcast centers and production
facilities, and also for upgrading television station facilities.
corporate and unallocated capital expenditures
were primarily for information technology hardware and software.
other
investing activities
during the year, the company invested
$130million primarily for the acquisition of a radio
station. the company also made equity contributions to hong kong
disneyland totaling $47million and received proceeds of
$166million from the sale of the angels and certain
utility infrastructure at walt disney world.
during fiscal 2002, the company acquired abc
family for $5.2billion, which was funded with
$2.9billion of new long-term borrowings, plus the
assumption of $2.3billion of borrowings (of which
$1.1billion was subsequently repaid).
during fiscal 2002, the company received proceeds
totaling $601million from the sale of investments,
primarily the remaining shares of knight-ridder, inc., which the
company had received in connection with the disposition of
certain publishing assets in fiscal 1997. additionally, the
company received aggregate proceeds of $200million from
the sale of the disney store business in japan and the sale of
certain real estate properties in the u.k. and florida.
during fiscal 2001, the company invested
$480million to acquire the copyright for certain
intellectual property, radio station and publishing assets and
the rights to a music library. in fiscal 2001, investing
activities also included $137million of cash proceeds
generated primarily from the sale of infoseek japan, k.k. cash
proceeds from the sale of investments were primarily from the
sale of the knight-ridder shares.
-40-
table of contents
financing activities
cash used in financing activities during fiscal
2003 of $1.5billion primarily reflected the net repayment
of borrowings and the payment of dividends to shareholders.
during the year, the companys borrowing
activity was as follows:
(in millions)
additions
payments
total
us medium term notes and other us dollar
denominated debt
$
$
(1,024
)
$
(725
)
senior convertible notes
1,323
1,323
repayment of debt incurred in connection with the
abc family acquisition
(892
)
(892
)
commercial paper borrowings (net change for the
year)
(721
)
(721
)
european medium term notes
(127
)
(127
)
other
(16
)
(3
)
$
1,635
$
(2,780
)
$
(1,145
)
debt instruments issued during the year had
stated interest rates ranging from 2.125% to 5.875% and
maturities in fiscal 2018 through fiscal 2023. see note 7 to the
consolidated financial statements for more detailed information
regarding the companys borrowings.
at september30, 2003, total committed
borrowing capacity, capacity used and unused borrowing capacity
were as follows:
committed
capacity
unused
(in millions)
capacity
used
capacity
bank facilities expiring 2004(1)(2)
$
2,250
$
$
2,087
bank facilities expiring 2005(1)
2,250
2,250
total
$
4,500
$
$
4,337
(1)
no commercial paper borrowings were outstanding
as of september30, 2003. these bank facilities allow for
borrowings at libor-based rates plus a spread, depending upon
the companys public debt rating. as of september 30, 2003,
the company had not borrowed under these bank facilities.
(2)
the company also has the ability to issue up to
$350million of letters of credit under this facility,
which if utilized, reduces available borrowing. as of
september30, 2003, $163million of letters of credit
had been issued under this facility.
the company has filed a u.s. shelf registration
statement which allows the company to borrow up to
$7.5billion of which $1.8billion was available at
september30, 2003. the company also has a euro medium-term
note program, which permits issuance of approximately
$4billion of additional debt instruments, which has
$2.5billion of capacity at september30, 2003.
the company declared an annual dividend of $0.21
per share on december2, 2003 related to fiscal 2003. the
dividend is payable on january6, 2004 to shareholders of
record on december12, 2003. the company paid a
$429million dividend ($0.21 per disney share) related to
fiscal 2002, on january9, 2003 to shareholders of record
on december13, 2002. the company paid a $428million
dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the first quarter of
fiscal 2002 applicable to fiscal 2001 and paid a
$438million dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the
first quarter of fiscal 2001 applicable to fiscal 2000.
-41-
table of contents
during fiscal 2001, the company acquired
approximately 63.9million shares of disney common stock
and 1.8million shares of internet group common stock for
approximately $1.1billion and $10million,
respectively. no shares were repurchased during fiscal 2002 and
fiscal 2003. as of september30, 2003, the company was
authorized to repurchase up to approximately 330million
shares of company common stock.
we believe that the companys financial
condition is strong and that its cash balances, other liquid
assets, operating cash flows, access to debt and equity capital
markets and borrowing capacity, taken together, provide adequate
resources to fund ongoing operating requirements and future
capital expenditures related to the expansion of existing
businesses and development of new projects. however, the
companys operating cash flow and access to the capital
markets can be impacted by macroeconomic factors outside of its
control. in addition to macroeconomic factors, the
companys borrowing costs can be impacted by short and
long-term debt ratings assigned by independent rating agencies,
which are based, in significant part, on the companys
performance as measured by certain credit measures such as
interest coverage and leverage ratios. on october4, 2002,
standard & poors ratings services lowered its
long-term ratings on the company to bbb+. subsequently, on march
20, 2003, standard & poors placed the bbb+ long-term
corporate credit rating of the company on credit watch with
negative implications. on december3, 2003, standard &
poors removed the companys long-term credit rating
from credit watch with negative implications and affirmed its
existing bbb+ with a negative outlook. at the same time,
standard & poors affirmed its a-2 short-term corporate
credit rating on the company. on october18, 2002,
moodys investors service downgraded the companys
long-term debt rating to baa1 from a3, affirmed the p2
short-term rating and indicated that our outlook was stable. the
companys bank facilities contain only one financial
covenant, relating to interest coverage, which the company met
on september30, 2003 by a significant margin.
contractual obligations, commitments and off
balance sheet arrangements
the company has various contractual obligations
which are recorded as liabilities in our consolidated financial
statements. other items, such as certain purchase commitments
and other executory contracts are not recognized as liabilities
in our consolidated financial statements but are required to be
disclosed. for example, the company is contractually committed
to acquire broadcast programming and make certain minimum lease
payments for the use of property under operating lease
agreements.
the following table summarizes our significant
contractual obligations and commercial commitments at
september30, 2003 and the future periods in which such
obligations are expected to be settled in cash. in addition, the
table reflects the timing of principal payments on outstanding
-42-
table of contents
borrowings. additional details regarding these
obligations are provided in footnotes to the financial
statements, as referenced in the table:
payments due by period
less than
1-3
4-5
more than
(in millions)
total
1 year
years
years
5 years
borrowings (note 7)
$
12,629
$
2,393
$
3,261
$
1,469
$
5,506
operating lease commitments (note 14)
2,150
1,033
capital lease obligations (note 14)
sports programming commitments (note 14)
8,790
2,661
4,497
1,424
broadcast programming commitments (note 14)
2,835
1,310
total sports and other broadcast programming
commitments
11,625
3,971
5,278
1,961
creative talent and employment
agreements(1)
1,115
other(2)
total contractual obligations(3)
$
28,942
$
7,361
$
9,823
$
4,046
$
7,712
(1)
the companys commitments under creative
talent agreements include obligations to actors, producers,
sports personnel, executives, television and radio personalities.
(2)
other firm commitments primarily includes
commitments to fund hong kong disneyland and also includes other
commitments such as computer hardware maintenance commitments
and minimum print and advertising commitments.
(3)
comprised of the following:
liabilities recorded on the balance sheet
$
14,525
commitments not recorded on the balance sheet
14,417
$
28,942
the company also has obligations with respect to
its pension and post-retirement medical benefit plans. see note
9 to the consolidated financial statements.
contingent commitments and
contingencies
the company also has certain contractual
arrangements that would require the company to make payments or
provide funding if certain circumstances occur (contingent
commitments). the company does not currently expect that
these contingent commitments will result in any amounts being
paid by the company.
the company has guaranteed certain special
assessment and water/sewer revenue bond series issued by the
celebration community development district and the enterprise
community development district (collectively, the districts).
the bond proceeds were used by the districts to finance the
construction of infrastructure improvements and the water and
sewer system in the mixed-use, residential community of
celebration, florida. as of september 30, 2003, the remaining
debt service obligation guaranteed by us was $103 million, of
which $62million was principal. the company is responsible
to satisfy any shortfalls in debt service payments, debt service
and maintenance reserve funds, and to ensure compliance with
specified rate covenants. to the extent that the company has to
fund payments under its guarantees, the districts have an
obligation to reimburse the company from district revenues.
the company has also guaranteed certain bond
issuances by the anaheim public authority for a total of
$111million. the guarantee also extends to future interest
payments that will total
-43-
table of contents
$296million over the 40-year life of the
bond. the bond proceeds were used by the city of anaheim to
finance construction of infrastructure and a public parking
facility adjacent to the disneyland resort. revenues from sales,
occupancy and property taxes from the disneyland resort and
non-disney hotels are used by the city of anaheim to repay the
bonds. in the event of a debt service shortfall, we will be
responsible to fund the shortfall. to the extent that subsequent
tax revenues exceed the debt service payments in subsequent
periods, we would be reimbursed for any previously funded
shortfalls.
to date, tax revenues have exceeded the debt
service payments for both the celebration and anaheim bonds.
the company has guaranteed payment of certain
facility and equipment leases on behalf of a third-party service
provider that supplies the company with broadcasting
transmission, post-production, studio and administrative
services in the u.k. if the third-party service provider
defaults on the leases, we would be responsible for the
remaining obligation unless we find another service provider to
take over the leases. as of september30, 2003, the
remaining facility and equipment lease obligation was
$72million. these leases expire in march 2014.
euro
disney
the company has a 39% interest in euro disney
s.c.a., which operates the disneyland resort paris. as of
september30, 2003, the companys investment in and
accounts and notes receivable from euro disney totaled
$494million, including $117million drawn under a
line of credit which is due in june 2004. the maximum amount
available under the line is 168million euros
($192million at september30, 2003 exchange rates).
the slowdown in the european travel and tourism
industry has negatively affected euro disneys results of
operations and cash flow. in response to this situation, euro
disney initiated discussions with its lenders and the company to
obtain waivers of its fiscal 2003 loan covenants and to obtain
supplemental financing to address euro disneys cash
requirements.
as a result of an agreement entered into on
march28, 2003, the company did not charge euro disney
royalties and management fees for the period from
january1, 2003 to september30, 2003. during the last
three quarters of fiscal 2002, the companys royalty and
management fee income from euro disney totaled $27million.
additionally, the company agreed to allow euro disney to pay its
royalties and management fees annually in arrears for fiscal
2004, instead of quarterly.
on november3, 2003, euro disney obtained
waivers from its lenders, effective through march31, 2004,
with respect to covenants for fiscal 2003. the agreement is
expected to give euro disney, its lenders and the company time
to find a resolution to euro disneys financial situation.
in conjunction with the bank waivers, the company has provided a
new 45million euros ($52million at
september30, 2003 exchange rates) subordinated credit
facility, which can be drawn on through march31, 2004 only
after euro disneys existing line of credit with the
company is fully drawn. repayment of any amount drawn down on
the new credit facility is subject to euro disney meeting
certain financial thresholds or the prior repayment of all of
euro disneys existing debt to its lenders.
euro disney is currently engaged in discussions
with its agent banks and the company to obtain supplemental
financing to address its cash requirements. such financing may
include an extension or change in the terms associated with the
companys credit line or additional commitments from the
company. if a resolution to euro disneys future financing
needs is not obtained by march31, 2004, the waivers would
expire and euro disneys lenders could accelerate the
maturity of euro disneys debt. should that occur, euro
disney would be unable to meet all of its debt obligations. the
company believes that euro disney will ultimately obtain the
requisite loan modifications and additional financing; however,
there can be no assurance that this will be the case. should
euro disney be unable to obtain loan modifications and/or
additional financing, some or all of the companys
$494million euro disney investment and receivables would
likely become impaired.
-44-
table of contents
additionally, it is possible that financing
modifications and/or the form of the resolution could result in
a partial impairment of the companys euro disney
investment and receivables.
as of september30, 2003, euro disney had,
on a us gaap basis, total assets of $3.4billion and total
liabilities of $3.3billion, including borrowings totaling
$2.5billion. see notes2 and 4 to the consolidated
financial statements for additional information related to euro
disneys financial position and results of operations as
well as the potential impact of fasb interpretation no.46.
in connection with a financial restructuring of
euro disney in 1994, euro disney associs s.n.c. (disney
snc), a wholly owned affiliate of the company, entered into a
lease arrangement with a financing company with a noncancelable
term of 12years related to substantially all of the
disneyland park assets, and then entered into a 12-year sublease
agreement with euro disney on substantially the same terms.
remaining lease rentals at september30, 2003 of
approximately $544million receivable from euro disney
under the sublease approximate the amounts payable by disney snc
under the lease. at the conclusion of the sublease term, euro
disney will have the option of assuming disney sncs rights
and obligations under the lease for a payment of $90 million
over the ensuing 15months. if euro disney does not
exercise its option, disney snc may purchase the assets,
continue to lease the assets or elect to terminate the lease. in
the event the lease is terminated, disney snc would be obligated
to make a termination payment to the lessor equal to 75% of the
lessors then outstanding debt related to the disneyland
park assets, which payment would be approximately
$1.3billion. disney snc would then have the right to sell
or lease the assets on behalf of the lessor to satisfy the
remaining debt, with any excess proceeds payable to disney snc.
notwithstanding euro disneys financial difficulties, the
company believes it is unlikely that disney snc would be
required to pay the 75% lease termination payment as the company
currently expects that in order for euro disney to continue its
business it will either exercise its assumption option in 2006
or that the assumption of the lease by euro disney will
otherwise be provided for in the resolution to euro
disneys financial situation.
insurance
significant changes have occurred during 2002 and
2001 in the commercial insurance market which impacted the cost
and availability of the companys insurance coverage. we
have successfully renewed all of our policies in the current
fiscal year, with premiums and deductibles at levels consistent
with the prior year. in 2002, the company established a wholly
owned captive insurance company to insure certain components of
loss exposure which were previously insured by third-party
insurance companies. the companys risk of loss created by
the captive insurance company has been reduced during 2003 by
the ability of the company to economically transfer some of this
additional risk to third-party insurers.
aircraft
leases
as disclosed in note 4 to the consolidated
financial statements, based on united airlines bankruptcy
filing, the company believes it is unlikely that it will recover
its aircraft leveraged lease investment with united airlines.
during the first quarter of the current year, the company
wrote-off its investment in leveraged leases with united
airlines and the pre-tax charge of $114million for the
write-off is reported in net interest expense in the
consolidated statements of income. as of september30,
2003, the companys remaining net aircraft leveraged lease
investment totaled approximately $175 million, consisting of
$119million and $56million with delta air lines and
fedex, respectively. given the current status of the airline
industry, we continue to monitor the recoverability of these
investments, particularly delta air lines. the inability of
delta air lines to make their lease payments, or the termination
of our leases in bankruptcy proceeding, could result in a
material charge for the write-down of some or all our investment
and acceleration of income tax payments.
-45-
table of contents
legal
and tax matters
as disclosed in notes 8 and 14 to the
consolidated financial statements, the company has exposure for
certain legal and tax matters. management believes that it is
currently not possible to estimate the impact, if any, that the
ultimate resolution of these matters will have on the
companys operations, financial position or cash flows.
accounting policies and estimates
we believe that the application of the following
accounting policies, which are important to our financial
position and results of operations, requires significant
judgments and estimates on the part of management. for a summary
of all of our accounting policies, including the accounting
policies discussed below, see note 2 of the consolidated
financial statements.
film and television revenues and
costs
we expense the cost of film and television
production and participations as well as certain multi-year
sports rights over the applicable product life cycle based upon
the ratio of the current periods gross revenues to the
estimated remaining total gross revenues or straight-line, as
appropriate. these estimates are calculated on an individual
production basis for film and television and on an individual
contract basis for sports rights. estimates of total gross
revenues can change due to a variety of factors, including the
level of market acceptance, advertising rates and subscriber
fees.
for film and television productions, estimated
remaining gross revenue from all sources includes revenue that
will be earned within ten years of the date of the initial
theatrical release for film productions. for television series,
we include revenues that will be earned within 10years of
the delivery of the first episode, or if still in production,
five years from the date of delivery of the most recent episode.
for acquired film libraries, remaining revenues include amounts
to be earned for up to 20years from the date of
acquisition.
television network and station rights for
theatrical movies, series and other programs are charged to
expense based on the number of times the program is expected to
be shown. estimates of usage of television network and station
programming can change based on competition and audience
acceptance. accordingly, revenue estimates and planned usage are
reviewed periodically and are revised if necessary. a change in
revenue projections or planned usage could have an impact on our
results of operations.
costs of film and television productions and
programming costs for our television and cable networks are
subject to valuation adjustments pursuant to the applicable
accounting rules. the net realizable value of the television
broadcast program licenses and rights are reviewed using a
daypart methodology. the companys dayparts are: early
morning, daytime, late night, prime time, news, children and
sports (includes network and cable). a daypart is defined as an
aggregation of programs broadcast during a particular time of
day or programs of a similar type. the net realizable values of
other cable programming are reviewed on an aggregated basis for
each cable channel. estimated values are based upon assumptions
about future demand and market conditions. if actual demand or
market conditions are less favorable than our projections, film,
television and programming cost write-downs may be required.
revenue recognition
the company has revenue recognition policies for
its various operating segments, which are appropriate to the
circumstances of each business. see note 2 to the consolidated
financial statements for a summary of these revenue recognition
policies.
we record reductions to revenues for estimated
future returns of merchandise, primarily home video, dvd and
software products, and for customer programs and sales
incentives. these estimates are based upon historical return
experience, current economic trends and projections of customer
-46-
table of contents
demand for and acceptance of our products.
differences may result in the amount and timing of our revenue
for any period if actual performance varies from our estimates.
pension and postretirement benefit plan
actuarial assumptions
the companys pension benefit and
postretirement medical benefit obligations and related costs are
calculated using actuarial concepts, within the framework of
statement of financial accounting standards no.87
employers accounting for pensions (sfas 87) and
statement of financial accounting standards no.106,
employers accounting for postretirement benefit other
than pension (sfas 106), respectively. two critical
assumptions, the discount rate and the expected return on plan
assets, are important elements of expense and/or liability
measurement. we evaluate these critical assumptions annually.
other assumptions involve demographic factors such as
retirement, mortality, turnover and rate of compensation
increases.
the discount rate enables us to state expected
future cash flow as a present value on the measurement date. the
guideline for setting this rate is a high-quality long-term
corporate bond rate. a lower discount rate increases the present
value of benefit obligations and increases pension expense. we
reduced our discount rate to 5.85% in 2003 from 7.20% in 2002 to
reflect market interest rate conditions. a one percentage point
decrease in the assumed discount rate would increase annual
expense and the projected benefit obligation by $28million
and $650million, respectively. a one percentage point
increase in the assumed discount rate would decrease annual
expense and projected benefit obligations by $26million
and $541million, respectively.
to determine the expected long-term rate of
return on the plan assets, we consider the current and expected
asset allocation, as well as historical and expected returns on
each plan asset class. a lower expected rate of return on
pension plan assets will increase pension expense. our long-term
expected return on plan assets was 7.50% and 8.50% in 2003 and
2002, respectively. a one percentage point increase/decrease in
the long-term return on pension plan asset assumption would
decrease/increase annual pension expense by $31 million.
goodwill, intangible assets, long-lived assets
and investments
effective october1, 2001, we adopted
statement of financial accounting standards no.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets (sfas142), as
described more fully in note2 to the consolidated
financial statements. goodwill and other intangible assets must
be tested for impairment on an annual basis. we completed our
impairment testing as of september30, 2003 and determined
that there were no impairment losses related to goodwill and
other intangible assets. in assessing the recoverability of
goodwill and other intangible assets, market values and
projections regarding estimated future cash flows and other
factors are used to determine the fair value of the respective
assets. if these estimates or related projections change in the
future, we may be required to record impairment charges for
these assets.
for purposes of performing the impairment test
for goodwill and other intangible assets as required by
sfas142 we established the following reporting units:
cable networks, television broadcasting, radio, studio
entertainment, consumer products and parks and resorts.
for purposes of performing our impairment test,
we used a present value technique (discounted cash flow) to
determine fair value for all of the reporting units except for
the television broadcasting group. the television broadcasting
reporting unit includes the abc television network and owned and
operated television stations. these businesses have been grouped
together because their respective cash flows are dependent on
one another. for purposes of our impairment test, we used a
present value technique to value the owned and operated
television stations and a revenue multiple to value the
television network. we did not use a present value technique or
a market multiple approach to value the television network as a
present value technique would not capture the full fair value of
the television network and there have been no recent comparable
sale transactions for a television network. we applied what we
believe to be the most appropriate valuation methodologies
-47-
table of contents
for each of the reporting units. if we had
established different reporting units or utilized different
valuation methodologies the impairment test results could differ.
long-lived assets include certain long-term
investments. the fair value of the long-term investments is
dependent on the performance of the investee companies, as well
as volatility inherent in the external markets for these
investments. in assessing potential impairment for these
investments, we consider these factors as well as forecasted
financial performance of our investees. if these forecasts are
not met, impairment charges may be required.
contingencies and litigation
we are currently involved in certain legal
proceedings and, as required, have accrued our estimate of the
probable costs for the resolution of these claims. this estimate
has been developed in consultation with outside counsel and is
based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a
combination of litigation and settlement strategies. it is
possible, however, that future results of operations for any
particular quarterly or annual period could be materially
affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of
our strategies related to these proceedings. see note 14 to the
consolidated financial statements for more detailed information
on litigation exposure.
income tax audits
as a matter of course, the company is regularly
audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. from time
to time, these audits result in proposed assessments. the
internal revenue service (irs)has completed its
examination of the companys federal income tax returns for
1993 through 1995 and has proposed assessments that challenge
certain of the companys tax positions. the company has
negotiated the settlement of a number of these assessments, and
is pursuing an administrative appeal before the irs with regard
to the remainder. if the remaining proposed assessments are
upheld through the administrative and legal process, they could
have a material impact on the companys earnings and cash
flow. however, the company believes that its tax positions
comply with applicable tax law and intends to defend its
positions vigorously. the company believes it has adequately
provided for any reasonably foreseeable outcome related to these
matters. accordingly, although their ultimate resolution may
require additional cash tax payments, the company does not
anticipate any material earnings impact from these matters.
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2003, the company favorably
resolved certain state income tax audit issues and the
corresponding reduction in income tax expense was due to the
release of related income tax reserves and is reflected in the
current year income tax provision. see note 8 to the
consolidated financial statements.
accounting changes
sfas 150
in may 2003, the financial accounting standards
board (fasb)issued statement of financial accounting
standards no.150 (sfas 150), accounting for certain
financial instruments with characteristics of both liabilities
and equity. sfas 150, establishes standards for how an
issuer classifies and measures certain financial instruments
with characteristics of both liabilities and equity. the
adoption of sfas 150 in the fiscal fourth quarter of 2003 did
not have a material impact on the companys results of
operation or financial position.
sfas 149
in april 2003, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.149 (sfas 149),
amendment of statement 133 on derivative instruments and
hedging activities. sfas 149 amends and clarifies financial
accounting and reporting for derivative instruments and for
hedging activities under statement of financial accounting
standards no.133, accounting for derivative instruments
and hedging activities (sfas 133). the adoption of sfas 149
in the fiscal fourth quarter of 2003 did not have a material
impact on the companys results of operation or financial
position.
-48-
table of contents
eitf 00-21
the company adopted emerging issues task force
(eitf)no.00-21, revenue arrangements with
multiple deliverables (eitf 00-21) in the fiscal fourth
quarter of 2003. this new accounting rule addresses revenue
recognition for revenues derived from a single contract that
contains multiple products or services. the rule provides
additional requirements to determine when such revenues may be
recorded separately for accounting purposes. historically, the
company has recognized the nfl broadcast portion of espns
affiliate revenue when the nfl games were aired, as espns
affiliate contracts provided a basis for allocating such revenue
between nfl and non-nfl programming. since the cost of the nfl
rights has also been recognized as the games were aired, the
company recognized both the nfl revenues and nfl costs in the
quarters the games were aired.
under eitf 00-21s requirements for
separating the revenue elements of a single contract, the
company will no longer allocate espns affiliate revenue
between nfl and non-nfl programming for accounting purposes. as
a consequence, the company will no longer match all nfl revenue
with nfl costs as espn affiliate revenue (including the nfl
portion) will be recognized ratably throughout the year, while
nfl contract costs will continue to be recognized in the
quarters the games are aired. this accounting change impacts
only the timing of revenue recognition and has no impact on cash
flow. as a result of this change, the media networks segment
will report significantly reduced revenue and profitability in
the first fiscal quarter when the majority of the nfl games are
aired, with commensurately increased revenues and profits in the
second and third fiscal quarters.
the company has elected to adopt this new
accounting rule using the cumulative effect approach. in the
fiscal fourth quarter of 2003, the company recorded an after-tax
charge of $71million for the cumulative effect of a change
in accounting as of the beginning of fiscal year 2003. this
amount represents the revenue recorded for nfl games in the
fourth quarter of fiscal year 2002, which would have been
recorded ratably over fiscal 2003 under the new accounting
method. the impact in the fourth quarter reflects the
recognition of the remaining $34million of the
$71million cumulative effect, offset by the
$36million impact of not recognizing nfl revenue that,
under the pre-eitf 00-21 method, the company would have recorded
in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2003 as the games were aired.
this amount will be recognized during fiscal year 2004. the
following table shows the quarterly effect on fiscal year 2003
of this new accounting method.
three months
three months
three months
three months
ended
ended
ended
ended
year ended
dec 31, 2002
mar 31, 2003
june 30, 2003
sept 30, 2003
sept 30, 2003
net
net
net
net
net
(in millions, except per share data)
income
eps(1)
income
eps(1)
income
eps(1)
income
eps(1)
income
eps(1)
results prior to eitf00-21 adoption
$
$
0.13
$
$
0.11
$
$
0.19
$
$
0.20
$
1,302
$
0.63
quarterly impact of accounting change
(149
)
(0.07
)
0.04
0.05
(2
)
(0.00
)
0.02
0.06
0.15
0.24
0.20
1,338
0.65
cumulative effect of accounting change
(71
)
(0.03
)
(71
)
(0.03
)
results subsequent to eitf00-21 adoption
$
$
0.02
$
$
0.15
$
$
0.24
$
$
0.20
$
1,267
$
0.62
(1)
eps amounts are based on diluted shares
outstanding and may not add due to rounding.
fin 46
in january 2003, the fasb issued fasb
interpretation no.46, consolidation of variable
interest entities (fin 46) and amended it in october 2003,
such that it is now effective for the company in the first
fiscal quarter of 2004. variable interest entities (vies) are
entities that lack sufficient equity to finance their activities
without additional financial support from other parties or whose
equity holders lack adequate decision making ability based on
criteria set forth in the interpretation. all vies, with
-49-
table of contents
which the company is involved, must be evaluated
to determine the primary beneficiary of the risks and rewards of
the vie. the primary beneficiary is required to consolidate the
vie for financial reporting purposes.
the company has equity interests in certain
entities, including euro disney s.c.a. (euro disney) and
hongkong international theme parks limited (hong kong
disneyland), which are currently not consolidated, but under
current rules are accounted for under the equity or cost method
of accounting. the current fin 46 guidance is still evolving
with several proposed amendments and clarifications recently
issued through an exposure draft release. while we continue to
evaluate the total impact of fin 46, based on the current
exposure draft, the company anticipates that it will likely be
required to consolidate euro disney and hong kong disneyland in
the first quarter of fiscal 2004. see note4 to the
consolidated financial statements for the impact of
consolidating euro disney and hong kong disneyland. the company
also has variable interests in certain other entities,
including, but not limited to, financing arrangements for film
rights and certain capital assets. these entities may be
considered vies under fin 46 and we may be required to
consolidate certain of them.
management believes that recognition of any
additional liabilities as a result of consolidating any vies
would not increase the level of claims on the general assets of
the company; rather, they would represent claims against the
additional assets recognized by the company as a result of
consolidating the vies. conversely, we believe that any
additional assets recognized as a result of consolidating any
vies would not represent additional assets of the company that
could be used to satisfy claims by the creditors of the company.
in addition, the potential consolidation of vies in which the
company is not the majority equity holder will generally result
in an increase in the minority interest in our financial
statements.
fin 45
in november 2002, the fasb issued fasb
interpretation no.45, guarantors accounting and
disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect
guarantees of indebtedness of others (fin 45). fin 45
requires a guarantor to recognize a liability, at the inception
of the guarantee, for the fair value of obligations it has
undertaken in issuing the guarantee and also requires more
detailed disclosures with respect to guarantees. fin 45 is
effective for guarantees issued or modified after
december31, 2002 and requires additional disclosures for
existing guarantees. the adoption of fin 45 did not have a
material impact on the companys results of operations or
financial position. the company has provided additional
disclosure with respect to guarantees in note 14 to the
consolidated financial statements.
sfas 146
the company adopted statement of financial
accounting standards no.146, accounting for costs
associated with exit or disposal activities (sfas 146)
effective october1, 2002, which did not have a material
impact on its consolidated results of operations and financial
position. sfas 146 requires that a liability for a cost
associated with an exit or disposal activity be recognized at
fair value when the liability is incurred, rather than when the
exit or disposal plan was committed to as was generally the case
under the previous rules.
sfas 144
the company adopted statement of financial
accounting standards no.144, accounting for the
impairment or disposal of long-lived assets (sfas 144)
effective october1, 2001, which did not have a material
impact on the companys consolidated results of operations
and financial position. sfas 144 establishes a single accounting
model for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets,
including discontinued operations.
-50-
table of contents
sfas 143
the company adopted statement of financial
accounting standards no.143, accounting for obligations
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets (sfas
143) in october1, 2002, which did not have a material
impact on its consolidated results of operations and financial
position. sfas 143 establishes standards for the recognition and
measurement of an asset retirement obligation and its associated
asset retirement cost.
sfas 142
effective october1, 2001, the company
adopted statement of financial accounting standards
no.142, goodwill and other intangible assets (sfas
142). sfas142 addresses the financial accounting and
reporting for acquired goodwill and other intangible assets. as
a result of adopting sfas 142, goodwill and a substantial amount
of the companys intangible assets are no longer amortized.
pursuant to sfas 142, goodwill and other intangible assets must
be tested for impairment on an annual basis. during the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2003, the company updated its impairment
review, which indicated that there was no impairment. see note 6
to the consolidated financial statements.
sfas 141
in july 2001, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.141, business
combinations (sfas 141), which requires all business
combinations initiated after june30, 2001 be accounted for
under the purchase method.
sop 00-2
effective october1, 2000, the company
adopted aicpa statement of position no.00-2, accounting
by producers or distributors of films (sop 00-2). the
companys results of operations and financial position
reflect the impact of the new standard commencing
october1, 2000 and the company recorded a one-time
after-tax charge of $228million representing the
cumulative effect of the adoption of sop 00-2 in its
consolidated financial statements for the year ended
september30, 2001.
sfas 133
in june 1998, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.133 accounting for
derivative instruments and hedging activities (sfas 133),
subsequently amended by sfas no.137 and sfas no.138.
sfas 133 requires that derivatives be recorded on the balance
sheet at fair value. changes in the fair value of derivatives
will either be recognized in earnings as offsets to the changes
in fair value of related hedged assets, liabilities and firm
commitments or, for forecasted transactions, deferred and
recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive
income (aoci)until the hedged transactions occur and are
recognized in earnings. the ineffective portion of a hedging
derivatives change in fair value will be immediately
recognized in earnings.
as a result of adopting sfas 133 as of
october1, 2000, and in accordance with the transition
provisions, the company recorded (1)an after-tax charge of
$50million, in its consolidated statements of income
representing the cumulative effect of the adoption and
(2)an after-tax unrealized gain of $60 million in aoci.
forward-looking statements
the private securities litigation reform act of
1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements made
by or on behalf of the company. we may from time to time make
written or oral statements that are forward-looking,
including statements contained in this report and other filings
with the securities and exchange commission and in reports to
our shareholders. such statements may, for example, express
expectations or projections about future actions that we may
take, including restructuring or strategic initiatives or about
developments beyond our control including
-51-
table of contents
changes in domestic or global economic
conditions. these statements are made on the basis of
managements views and assumptions as of the time the
statements are made and we undertake no obligation to update
these statements. there can be no assurance, however, that our
expectations will necessarily come to pass.
factors that may affect forward-looking
statements. for an enterprise as large
and complex as the company, a wide range of factors could
materially affect future developments and performance, including
the following:
changes in company-wide or business-unit
strategies, which may result in changes in the types or mix of
businesses in which the company is involved or will invest;
changes in u.s., global or regional economic
conditions, which may affect attendance and spending at the
companys parks and resorts, purchases of company-licensed
consumer products, the advertising market for broadcast and
cable television programming and the performance of the
companys theatrical and home entertainment releases;
changes in u.s. and global financial and equity
markets, including market disruptions and significant interest
rate fluctuations, which may impede the companys access
to, or increase the cost of, external financing for its
operations and investments;
changes in cost of providing pension and other
post-retirement benefits, including changes in health care
costs, investment returns on plan assets, and discount rates
used to calculate pension and related liabilities;
increased competitive pressures, both
domestically and internationally, which may, among other things,
affect the performance of the companys parks and resorts
operations, divert consumers from our creative or other
products, or to other products or other forms of entertainment,
or lead to increased expenses in such areas as television
programming acquisition and motion picture production and
marketing;
legal and regulatory developments that may affect
particular business units, such as regulatory actions affecting
environmental activities, consumer products, theme park safety,
broadcasting or internet activities or the protection of
intellectual property; the imposition by foreign countries of
trade restrictions or motion picture or television content
requirements or quotas, and changes in domestic or international
tax laws or currency controls;
adverse weather conditions or natural disasters,
such as hurricanes and earthquakes, which may, among other
things, impair performance at the companys parks and
resorts;
technological developments that may affect the
distribution of the companys creative products or create
new risks to the companys ability to protect its
intellectual property;
labor disputes, which may lead to increased costs
or disruption of operations in any of the companys
business units;
changing public and consumer tastes and
preferences, which may, among other things, affect the
companys entertainment, broadcasting and consumer products
businesses generally or the companys parks and resorts
operations specifically, or result in increases in broadcasting
losses or loss of advertising revenue;
changes in or termination of long-term contracts
for the acquisition or distribution of media programming or
products, which may impact the availability of programming or
product, the cost of acquired content, the ability to distribute
content, or the revenue recognized from the distribution of
content; and
international, political, health concerns and
military developments that may affect among other things, travel
and leisure businesses generally or the companys parks and
resorts
-52-
table of contents
operations specifically, or result in increases
in broadcasting costs or loss of advertising revenue.
this list of factors that may affect future
performance and the accuracy of forward-looking statements is
illustrative, but by no means exhaustive. accordingly, all
forward-looking statements should be evaluated with the
understanding of their inherent uncertainty.
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
the company is exposed to the impact of interest
rate changes, foreign currency fluctuations and changes in the
market values of its investments.
policies and procedures
in the normal course of business, we employ
established policies and procedures to manage the companys
exposure to changes in interest rates, foreign currencies and
the fair market value of certain investments in debt and equity
securities using a variety of financial instruments.
our objectives in managing exposure to interest
rate changes are to limit the impact of interest rate volatility
on earnings and cash flows and to lower overall borrowing costs.
to achieve these objectives, we primarily use interest rate
swaps to manage net exposure to interest rate changes related to
the companys portfolio of borrowings. by policy, the
company maintains fixed-rate debt as a percentage of its net
debt between a minimum and maximum percentage.
our objective in managing exposure to foreign
currency fluctuations is to reduce earnings and cash flow
volatility in order to allow management to focus on core
business issues and challenges. accordingly, the company enters
into various contracts that change in value as foreign exchange
rates change to protect the value of its existing foreign
currency assets, liabilities, commitments and forecasted foreign
currency revenues. the company utilizes option strategies and
forward contracts that provide for the sale of foreign
currencies to hedge probable, but not firmly committed,
revenues. the company also uses forward contracts to hedge
foreign currency assets and liabilities. the principal foreign
currencies hedged are the euro, british pound, japanese yen and
canadian dollar. cross-currency swaps are used to effectively
convert foreign currency denominated borrowings to u.s. dollar
denominated borrowing. by policy, the company maintains hedge
coverage between minimum and maximum percentages of its
forecasted foreign exchange exposures generally for periods not
to exceed five years. the gains and losses on these contracts
offset changes in the value of the related exposures.
in addition, we use various financial instruments
to minimize the exposure to changes in fair market value of
certain investments in debt and equity securities.
it is the companys policy to enter into
foreign currency and interest rate derivative transactions and
other financial instruments only to the extent considered
necessary to meet its objectives as stated above. the company
does not enter into these transactions for speculative purposes.
value at risk
we utilize a value-at-risk
(var)model to determine the maximum potential one-day loss
in the fair value of interest rate, foreign exchange and
qualifying equity sensitive financial instruments. the var model
estimates are made assuming normal market conditions and a 95%
confidence level. various modeling techniques can be used in a
var computation. the companys computations are based on
the interrelationships between movements in various interest
rates, currencies and equity prices (a
variance/co-variance technique). these
interrelationships were determined by observing interest rate,
foreign currency and equity market changes over the preceding
quarter for the calculation of var amounts at year-end and over
each of the four quarters for the calculation of average var
amounts during the year ended september30, 2003. the model
includes all of the companys debt as well as all interest
rate and foreign exchange derivative contracts and qualifying
-53-
table of contents
equity investments. the values of foreign
exchange options do not change on a one-to-one basis with the
underlying currencies, as exchange rates vary. therefore, the
hedge coverage assumed to be obtained from each option has been
adjusted to reflect its respective sensitivity to changes in
foreign currency values. forecasted transactions, firm
commitments and receivables and payables denominated in foreign
currencies, which certain of these instruments are intended to
hedge, were excluded from the model.
the var model is a risk analysis tool and does
not purport to represent actual losses in fair value that will
be incurred by the company, nor does it consider the potential
effect of favorable changes in market factors. see note 13 to
the consolidated financial statements regarding the
companys financial instruments at september30, 2003
and 2002.
var on a combined basis increased from
$33million at september30, 2002 to $51million
at september30, 2003. the majority of this increase was in
interest rate sensitive instruments, due to the fact that the
company has taken advantage of the current low interest rate
environment by replacing variable rate debt with fixed-rate debt
obligations. the market value of fixed-rate debt is more
sensitive to changes in interest rates than floating-rate debt
and accordingly, is driving the increase in the var.
the estimated maximum potential one-day loss in
fair value, calculated using the var model, is as follows:
interest rate
currency
sensitive
sensitive
equity sensitive
financial
financial
financial
combined
(in millions)
instruments
instruments
instruments
portfolio
var as of september30,2003
$
$
$
$
average var during the year ended
september30,2003
$
$
$
$
highest var during the year ended
september30,2003
$
$
$
$
lowest var during the year ended
september30,2003
$
$
$
$
var as of september30,2002
$
$
$
$
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary
data
see index to financial statements and
supplemental data on page62.
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants
on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
-54-
table of contents
item 9a.
controls and procedures
we have established disclosure controls and
procedures to ensure that material information relating to the
company, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known
to the officers who certify the companys financial reports
and to other members of senior management and the board of
directors.
based on their evaluation as of
september30, 2003, the principal executive officer and
principal financial officer of the walt disney company have
concluded that the walt disney companys disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in rules13a-14[c] and
15d-14[c] under the securities exchange act of 1934) are
effective to ensure that the information required to be
disclosed by the walt disney company in reports that it files or
submits under the securities exchange act of 1934 is recorded,
processed, summarized and reported within the time periods
specified in sec rules and forms.
in fiscal 2002, the company initiated a
company-wide implementation of new integrated finance and human
resources applications software, related information technology
systems, and enterprise wide shared services (the new systems).
a limited number of the companys businesses were using
these new systems at september 30, 2002. during fiscal 2003, the
company continued its implementation and at september30,
2003, a substantial number of the companys business units
were using the new systems. as a result of subsequent
implementations, as of the date of this report, the majority of
the companys businesses are using the new systems. the
implementation has involved changes in systems that included
internal controls, and accordingly, these changes have required
changes to our system of internal controls. we have reviewed
each system as it is being implemented and the controls affected
by the implementation of the new systems, and made appropriate
changes to affected internal controls as we implemented the new
systems. we believe that the controls as modified are
appropriate and functioning effectively.
-55-
table of contents
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the
company
information regarding section16
(a)compliance, the audit committee, the companys
code of ethics and background of the directors appearing under
the captions stock ownership, governance of
the company and election of directors in the
companys proxy statement for the 2004 annual meeting of
shareholders is hereby incorporated by reference.
information regarding executive officers is
included in part i of this form10-k as permitted by
general instruction g(3).
item 11.
executive compensation
information appearing under the captions
how are directors compensated? and executive
compensation (other than the report of the compensation
committee) in the 2004 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by
reference.
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder matters
information setting forth the security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management appearing under the
caption stock ownership in the 2004 proxy statement
is hereby incorporated by reference.
item 13.
certain relationships and related
transactions
information regarding certain related
transactions appearing under the captions governance of
the company and executive compensation in the
2004 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by reference.
item 14.
principal accountant fees and
services
information appearing under the captions
fees to independent auditors for fiscal 2003 and
2002 in the 2004 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by
reference.
-56-
table of contents
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and
reports on form8-k
(a)
exhibits and financial statements and schedules
(1)financial statements and schedules
see indices to financial statements and
supplemental data at page62.
(2)exhibits
the documents set forth below are filed herewith
or incorporated herein by reference to the location indicated.
exhibit
location
3(a)
amended and restated certificate of incorporation
of thecompany
annexc to the joint proxy statement/
prospectus included in the registration statement on
forms-4 (no.333-88105) of the company, filed
sept.30, 1999
3(b)
bylaws of thecompany
exhibit3 to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended mar.30, 2000
4(a)
form of registration rights agreement entered
into or to be entered into with certain stockholders
exhibitb to exhibit2.1 to the current
report on form8-k of disney enterprises, inc.
(dei), dated july31, 1995
4(b)
five-year credit agreement, dated as of
mar.8,2000
exhibit4(b) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2000
4(c)
amendment no.1 dated october24, 2003
to five-year creditagreement
filed herewith
4(d)
indenture, dated as of nov.30, 1990,
between dei and bankers trust company, astrustee
exhibit2 to the current report on
form8-k of dei, dated jan.14, 1991
4(e)
indenture, dated as of mar. 7, 1996, between the
company and citibank, n.a., astrustee
exhibit4.1(a) to the current report on
form8-k of the company, dated mar.7, 1996
4(f)
senior debt securities indenture, dated as of
september24, 2001, between the company and wells fargo
bank, n.a., astrustee
exhibit4.1 to the current report on
form8-k of the company, dated september24, 2001
4(g)
other long-term borrowing instruments are omitted
pursuant to item601(b)(4) (iii)of
regulations-k. the company undertakes to furnish copies of
such instruments to the commission uponrequest
10(a)
(i)agreement on the creation and the
operation of euro disneyland en france, dated mar.25,
1987, and (ii)letter relating thereto of the chairman of
disney enterprises, inc., dated mar. 24,1987
exhibits10(b) and 10(a), respectively, to
the current report on form8-k of dei, dated apr.4,
10(b)
composite limited recourse financing facility
agreement, dated as of apr.27, 1988, between dei and tdl
funding company, asamended
exhibit10(b) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
-57-
table of contents
exhibit
location
10(c)
employment agreement, dated june29, 2000,
between the company and michaeld. eisner
exhibit10(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended june30, 2000
10(d)
employment agreement, dated jan.24, 2000,
between the company and roberta. iger
exhibit10 to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended mar.30, 2000
10(e)
amendment, dated april15, 2002, to the
employment agreement between the company and roberta. iger
exhibit10(e) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2002
10(f)
consulting agreement dated as of
february22, 2003 between the company and louism.
meisinger
exhibit10(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended march31, 2003
10(g)
employment agreement, dated september26,
2003 between the company and alann. braverman
filed herewith
10(h)
employment agreement, dated september26,
2003 between the company and thomaso. staggs
filed herewith
10(i)
directors retirementpolicy
exhibit10(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended december31, 2002
10(j)
form of indemnification agreement for certain
officers anddirectors
annex c to the proxy statement for the 1988
annual meeting of dei
10(k)
1995 stock option plan for non-employee directors
exhibit20 to the forms-8 registration
statement (no.33-57811) of dei, dated feb.23, 1995
10(l)
amended and restated 1990 stock incentive plan
andrules
appendixb-2 to the joint proxy statement/
prospectus included in the forms-4 registration statement
(no.33-64141) of dei, dated nov.13, 1995
10(m)
amended and restated 1995 stock incentive plan
andrules
exhibit4.3 to the forms-8
registration statement (no.333-74624) of the company,
dated december6, 2001
10(n)
(i)1987 stock incentive plan and rules and
(ii)1984 stock incentive plan andrules
exhibits1(a), 1(b), 2(a) and 2(b),
respectively, to the prospectus contained in the forms-8
registration statement (no.33-26106) of dei, dated
dec.20, 1988
10(o)
contingent stock award rules under deis
1984 stock incentiveplan
exhibit10(t) to the form10-k of dei
for the period ended september30, 1986
10(p)
amendment, dated june26, 2000, to the
companys stock incentiveplans
exhibit10(b) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended june30, 2000
10(q)
bonus performance plan for executive officers
exhibit10(1) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1998
-58-
table of contents
exhibit
location
10(r)
2002 executive performanceplan
annex1 to the proxy statement for the 2002
annual meeting of the company
10(s)
amended and restated 1997 non-employee directors
stock and deferred compensationplan
annexii to the proxy statement for the 2003
annual meeting of the company
10(t)
key employees deferred compensation and
retirementplan
exhibit10(u) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(u)
group personal excess liability insurance plan
exhibit10(o) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(v)
family income assurance plan (summary description)
exhibit10(p) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(w)
employee stock option plan of capital cities/
abc, inc., asamended
exhibit 10(f) to the 1992 form10-k of
capital cities/abc, inc.
10(x)
1991 stock option plan of capital cities/ abc,
inc., asamended
exhibit6(a)(i) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended mar.31, 1996
subsidiaries of thecompany
filed herewith
consent of pricewaterhousecoopersllp
included herein at page63
31(a)
rule13a-14(a) certification of chief
executive officer of the company in accordance with
section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
filed herewith
31(b)
rule13a-14(a) certification of chief
financial officer of the company in accordance with
section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
filed herewith
32(a)
section1350 certification of chief
executive officer of the company in accordance with
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002*
furnished herewith
32(b)
section1350 certification of chief
financial officer of the company in accordance with
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002*
furnished herewith
*
a signed original of this written statement
required by section906 has been provided to the company
and will be retained by the company and furnished to the
securities and exchange commission or its staff upon request.
(b)reports on form8-k
during the quarter ended september30, 2003,
the company filed the following report on form8-k:
(1)
current report on form8-k filed
july31, 2003 setting forth the earnings release for the
fiscal quarter ended june30, 2003
-59-
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13
or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the walt disney company
(registrant)
date: december 12,2003
by: /s/ michael d. eisner
(michael d. eisner,
chairman of the board and chief executive officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
principal executive officer
/s/ michael
d.eisner
(michael d.eisner)
chairman of the board and chief
executiveofficer
december 12,2003
principal operating officer
/s/ robert a.iger
(robert a.iger)
president and chief operatingofficer
december 12,2003
principal financial and accounting
officers
/s/ thomas
o.staggs
(thomas o.staggs)
senior executive vice president and chief
financialofficer
december 12,2003
/s/ john j.garand
(john j.garand)
executive vice president-planning andcontrol
december 12, 2003
directors
/s/ john e.bryson
(john e.bryson)
director
december 12,2003
/s/ michael d.eisner
(michael d.eisner)
director
december 12,2003
/s/ judith l.estrin
(judith l.estrin)
director
december 12,2003
/s/ robert a.iger
(robert a.iger)
director
december 12,2003
/s/ monica c.lozano
(monica c.lozano)
director
december 12,2003
/s/ robert w.matschullat
(robert w.matschullat)
director
december 12,2003
-60-
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ george j.mitchell
(george j.mitchell)
director
december 12,2003
/s/ thomas s.murphy
(thomas s.murphy)
director
december 12,2003
/s/ leo j.
odonovan,s.j.
(leo j.
odonovan,s.j.)
director
december 12,2003
/s/ raymond l.watson
(raymond l.watson)
director
december 12,2003
/s/ gary l.wilson
(gary l.wilson)
director
december 12,2003
-61-
table of contents
the walt disney company and
subsidiaries
index to financial statements and supplemental
data
page
report of independent auditors and consent of
independentauditors
consolidated financial statements of the walt
disney company andsubsidiaries
consolidated statements of income for the years
ended september30, 2003, 2002 and 2001
consolidated balance sheets as of
september30, 2003 and2002
consolidated statements of cash flows for the
years ended september30, 2003, 2002 and 2001
consolidated statements of shareholders
equity for the years ended september30, 2003, 2002
and2001
notes to consolidated financialstatements
quarterly financial summary (unaudited)
all schedules are omitted for the reason that
they are not applicable or the required information is included
in the financial statements or notes.
-62-
table of contents
report of independent auditors
to the board of directors and shareholders of the
walt disney company
in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets and the related consolidated statements of
income, shareholders equity, and cash flows present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
walt disney company and its subsidiaries (the company) at
september30, 2003 and 2002, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended september30, 2003, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america. these financial statements are the responsibility of
the companys management; our responsibility is to express
an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits. we
conducted our audits of these statements in accordance with
auditing standards generally accepted in the united states of
america, which require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
as discussed in note 2, the company adopted eitf
no.00-21, revenue arrangements with multiple
deliverables as of october1, 2002, changing the timing
of revenue from certain contracts. additionally, the company
adopted statement of financial accounting standards
no.142, goodwill and other intangible assets as of
october1, 2001 and, accordingly, ceased amortizing
goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets as of that date.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
los angeles, california
november18, 2003
consent of independent auditors
we hereby consent to the incorporation by
reference in the registration statements on forms-8 (nos.
33-26106, 33-35405, 33-39770, 33-57811, 333-91571, 333-31012 and
333-74624), forms-3 (33-67870) and forms-3/ a
(333-52659 and 333-34167) of the walt disney company of our
report dated november18, 2003 related to the consolidated
financial statements of the walt disney company which appears in
this form10-k.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
los angeles, california
december 10, 2003
-63-
table of contents
consolidated statements of income
(in millions, except per share data)
year ended september 30,
revenues
$
27,061
$
25,329
$
25,172
costs andexpenses
(24,330
)
(22,924
)
(21,573
)
amortization of intangibleassets
(18
)
(21
)
(767
)
gain on sale ofbusinesses
net interestexpense
(793
)
(453
)
(417
)
equity in the income ofinvestees
restructuring and impairmentcharges
(16
)
(1,454
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accountingchanges
2,254
2,190
1,283
incometaxes
(789
)
(853
)
(1,059
)
minorityinterests
(127
)
(101
)
(104
)
income before the cumulative effect of
accountingchanges
1,338
1,236
cumulative effect of accounting changes:
filmaccounting
(228
)
derivativeaccounting
(50
)
multiple element revenueaccounting
(71
)
net income (loss)
$
1,267
$
1,236
$
(158
)
earnings (loss)attributed to disney common
stock(1)
$
1,267
$
1,236
$
(41
)
earnings per share attributed to disney common
stock before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes:(1)
diluted
$
0.65
$
0.60
$
0.11
basic
$
0.65
$
0.61
$
0.11
cumulative effect of accounting changes per
diluted share of disney common stock:
filmaccounting
$
$
$
(0.11
)
derivativeaccounting
(0.02
)
multiple element revenueaccounting
(0.03
)
$
(0.03
)
$
$
(0.13
)
earnings (loss)per share attributed to
disney common stock:(1)
diluted
$
0.62
$
0.60
$
(0.02
)
basic
$
0.62
$
0.61
$
(0.02
)
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding for disney common stock:
diluted
2,067
2,044
2,100
basic
2,043
2,040
2,085
loss attributed to internet group
commonstock
$
(117
)
loss per share attributed to internet group
common stock (basic anddiluted)
$
(2.72
)
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding for internet group commonstock
(1)
including disneys retained interest in the
internet group of approximately 72% through january28,
2001 (the last date prior to the announcement of the conversion
of the internet group common stock) and 100% thereafter.
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-64-
table of contents
consolidated balance sheets
(in millions, except per share data)
september 30,
assets
currentassets
cash and cashequivalents
$
1,583
$
1,239
receivables
4,238
4,049
inventories
televisioncosts
deferred incometaxes
other currentassets
total currentassets
8,314
7,849
film and televisioncosts
6,205
5,959
investments
1,849
1,810
parks, resorts and other property, at cost
attractions, buildings andequipment
19,499
18,917
accumulateddepreciation
(8,794
)
(8,133
)
10,705
10,784
projects inprogress
1,076
1,148
land
12,678
12,780
intangible assets,net
2,786
2,776
goodwill
16,966
17,083
otherassets
1,190
1,788
$
49,988
$
50,045
liabilities and shareholders
equity
currentliabilities
accounts payable and other
accruedliabilities
$
5,044
$
5,173
current portion ofborrowings
2,457
1,663
unearned royalties and otheradvances
1,168
total currentliabilities
8,669
7,819
borrowings
10,643
12,467
deferred incometaxes
2,712
2,597
other long-termliabilities
3,745
3,283
minorityinterests
commitments and contingencies (note14)
shareholdersequity
preferred stock, $.01 parvalue
authorized 100million shares,
issued none
common stock
common stock disney, $.01 par value
authorized 3.6billion shares,
issued 2.1billionshares
12,154
12,107
common stock internet group, $.01 par
value
authorized 1.0billion shares,
issued none
retainedearnings
13,817
12,979
accumulated other comprehensiveloss
(653
)
(85
)
25,318
25,001
treasury stock, at cost, 86.7million and
81.4million disneyshares
(1,527
)
(1,395
)
shares held by twdc stock compensation fund ii,
at cost none and 6.6million disneyshares
(161
)
23,791
23,445
$
49,988
$
50,045
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-65-
table of contents
consolidated statements of cash
flows
(in millions)
year ended september 30,
operating activities
net income (loss)
$
1,267
$
1,236
$
(158
)
depreciation
1,059
1,021
amortization of intangibleassets
deferred incometaxes
equity in the income ofinvestees
(334
)
(225
)
(300
)
cash distributions received from
equityinvestees
minorityinterests
change in film and televisioncosts
(369
)
(97
)
(13
)
gain on sale ofbusinesses
(16
)
(34
)
(22
)
gain on sale of knight-ridder, inc.shares
(216
)
restructuring and impairmentcharges
1,247
write-off of aircraft leveragedlease
cumulative effect of accountingchanges
other
(23
)
(55
)
1,370
1,077
3,451
changes in workingcapital
receivables
(194
)
(535
)
inventories
(6
)
(35
)
other currentassets
(28
)
(86
)
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
(435
)
televisioncosts
(149
)
(27
)
(245
)
cash provided byoperations
2,901
2,286
3,048
investing activities
investments in parks, resorts and
otherproperty
(1,049
)
(1,086
)
(1,795
)
acquisitions (net of cashacquired)
(130
)
(2,845
)
(480
)
dispositions
proceeds from sale ofinvestments
purchases ofinvestments
(14
)
(9
)
(88
)
other
(47
)
(37
)
(24
)
cash used by investingactivities
(1,034
)
(3,176
)
(2,015
)
financing activities
borrowings
1,635
4,038
3,070
reduction ofborrowings
(2,059
)
(2,113
)
(2,807
)
commercial paper borrowings,net
(721
)
(33
)
(186
)
repurchases of commonstock
(1,073
)
dividends
(429
)
(428
)
(438
)
exercise of stock options andother
cash (used)provided by
financingactivities
(1,523
)
1,511
(1,257
)
increase (decrease)in cash and
cashequivalents
(224
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning ofyear
1,239
cash and cash equivalents, end ofyear
$
1,583
$
1,239
$
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
interestpaid
$
$
$
income taxespaid
$
$
$
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-66-
table of contents
consolidated statements of shareholders
equity
(in millions, except per share data)
twdc
accumulated
stock
other
compen-
common
compre-
sation
shares
stock
hensive
fund
total
retained
income
treasury
shareholders
dis
dig
dis
dig
earnings
(loss)(1)
stock
dis
dig
equity
balance at september 30,2000
2,086
$
9,920
$
2,181
$
12,767
$
(28
)
$
(689
)
$
(40
)
$
(11
)
$
24,100
common stock issued (cancellation)
(1
)
(22
)
(22
)
exercise of stock options
common stockrepurchased
(64
)
(2
)
(706
)
(357
)
(10
)
(1,073
)
conversion of digshares
(42
)
2,159
(2,159
)
(21
)
dividends ($0.21 per disneyshare)
(438
)
(438
)
other comprehensive income (net of tax expense of
$23million)
netloss
(158
)
(158
)
balance at september 30,2001
2,038
12,096
12,171
(1,395
)
(210
)
22,672
exercise of stock options
dividends ($0.21 per disneyshare)
(428
)
(428
)
other comprehensive loss (net of tax benefit of
$56 million)
(95
)
(95
)
netincome
1,236
1,236
balance at september 30,2002
2,041
12,107
12,979
(85
)
(1,395
)
(161
)
23,445
exercise of stock options and restricted stock
dividends ($0.21 per disneyshare)
(429
)
(429
)
expiration of the twdc stock
compensationfund
(161
)
other comprehensive loss (net of tax benefit of
$334 million)
(568
)
(568
)
netincome
1,267
1,267
balance at september 30,2003
2,044
$
12,154
$
$
13,817
$
(653
)
$
(1,527
)
$
$
$
23,791
(1)
accumulated other comprehensive loss at
september30, 2003 is as follows:
market value adjustments for investments
andhedges
$
(108
)
foreign currency translation andother
additional pension liabilityadjustment
(608
)
$
(653
)
comprehensive income (loss)is as follows:
net income (loss)
$
1,267
$
1,236
$
(158
)
cumulative effect of adoption of sfas 133, net
oftax
market value adjustments for investments and
hedges, net oftax
(77
)
(101
)
(18
)
foreign currency translation and other, net
oftax
(4
)
additional pension liability adjustment, net of
tax (see note9)
(564
)
(44
)
comprehensive income (loss)
$
$
1,141
$
(120
)
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-67-
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial
statements
(tabular dollars in millions, except per share
amounts)
1description of the business and
segment information
the walt disney company, together with the
subsidiaries through which the companys businesses are
conducted (the company), is a diversified worldwide
entertainment company with operations in the following business
segments: media networks, parks and resorts, studio
entertainment and consumer products.
description of the business
media networks
the company operates the abc television network
and the abc radio networks, which have affiliated stations
providing coverage to households throughout the united states.
the company also owns television and radio stations, most of
which are affiliated with either the abc television network or
the abc radio networks. the companys cable/satellite and
international broadcast operations are principally involved in
the production and distribution of cable television programming,
the licensing of programming to domestic and international
markets and investing in foreign television broadcasting,
production and distribution entities. primary cable/satellite
programming services, which operate through consolidated
subsidiary companies, are the espn-branded networks, disney
channel, international disney channel, soapnet, toon disney, abc
family channel and fox kids channels in europe and latin
america. other programming services that operate through joint
ventures, and are accounted for under the equity method, include
a&e television networks, lifetime entertainment services and
e! entertainment television. the company also produces original
television programming for network, first-run syndication, pay
and international syndication markets along with original
animated television programming for network, pay and
international syndication markets, stage plays and musical
recordings. additionally, the company operates abc-, espn-, and
disney-branded internet web site businesses.
parks and resorts
the company owns and operates the walt disney
world resort in florida and the disneyland resort in california.
the walt disney world resort includes the magic kingdom, epcot,
disney-mgm studios, disneys animal kingdom, sixteen resort
hotels, a retail, dining and entertainment complex, a sports
complex, conference centers, campgrounds, golf courses, water
parks and other recreational facilities. in addition, disney
cruise line is operated out of port canaveral, florida. the
disneyland resort includes disneyland, disneys california
adventure, three resort hotels and downtown disney. disney
regional entertainment operates sports-themed espn zone dining
and entertainment facilities. the company earns royalties on
revenues generated by the tokyo disneyland resort, which
includes two theme parks and two disney-branded hotels, near
tokyo, japan, and is owned and operated by an unrelated japanese
corporation. the company manages and has a 39% investment in
euro disney s.c.a. (euro disney), a publicly held french entity
that operates disneyland resort paris, which includes the
disneyland park, the walt disney studio park, seven themed
hotels, two convention centers, the disney village, a shopping,
dining and entertainment center and a 27 hole golf facility. the
company also manages and has a 43% interest in hong kong
disneyland which is under construction and is targeted to open
in 2005/2006. the companys walt disney imagineering unit
designs and develops new theme park concepts and attractions, as
well as resort properties. the company also manages and markets
vacation ownership interests through the disney vacation club.
included in parks and resorts is the companys nhl
franchise, the mighty ducks of anaheim.
-68-
table of contents
studio entertainment
the company produces and acquires live-action and
animated motion pictures for distribution to the theatrical,
home video and television markets. the company distributes these
products through its own distribution and marketing companies in
the united states and most foreign markets primarily under the
walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures, miramax and dimension
banners. the company also produces stage plays and musical
recordings.
consumer products
the company licenses the name walt
disney, as well as the companys characters and,
visual and literary properties, to various manufacturers,
retailers, show promoters and publishers throughout the world.
the company also engages in direct retail distribution,
principally through the disney stores, and produces books and
magazines for the general public in the united states and
europe. in addition, the company produces computer software
products for the entertainment market, as well as film, video
and computer software products for the educational marketplace.
the companys direct marketing business operates the disney
catalog, which markets disney-themed merchandise through the
direct mail channel. catalog offerings include merchandise
developed exclusively for the disney catalog and
disneystore.com, as well as products from the disney store,
other internal disney businesses and disney licensees.
segment information
the operating segments reported below are the
segments of the company for which separate financial information
is available and for which operating results are evaluated
regularly by the chief executive officer in deciding how to
allocate resources and in assessing performance.
segment operating results evaluated include
earnings before corporate and unallocated shared expenses,
amortization of intangible assets, gain on sale of businesses,
net interest expense, equity in the income of investees,
restructuring and impairment charges, income taxes and minority
interests. corporate and unallocated shared expenses principally
consist of corporate functions, executive management and certain
unallocated administrative support functions.
the following segment results include allocations
of certain costs, including certain information technology
costs, pension, legal and other shared services, which are
allocated based on consumption. in addition, while all
significant intersegment transactions have been eliminated,
studio entertainment revenues and operating income include an
allocation of consumer products revenues, which is meant to
reflect a portion of consumer products revenues attributable to
certain film properties. these allocations are agreed-upon
amounts between the businesses and may differ from amounts that
would be negotiated in an arms-length transaction.
revenues
medianetworks
$
10,941
$
9,733
$
9,569
parks andresorts
6,412
6,465
7,004
studio entertainment
thirdparties
7,312
6,622
5,952
intersegment
7,364
6,691
6,009
consumer products
thirdparties
2,396
2,509
2,647
intersegment
(52
)
(69
)
(57
)
2,344
2,440
2,590
total consolidatedrevenues
$
27,061
$
25,329
$
25,172
-69-
table of contents
segment operating income
medianetworks
$
1,213
$
$
1,758
parks andresorts
1,169
1,586
studioentertainment
consumerproducts
total segment operatingincome
$
3,174
$
2,822
$
4,005
reconciliation of segment operating income to
income before income taxes, minority interests and the
cumulative effect of accounting changes
segment operatingincome
$
3,174
$
2,822
$
4,005
corporate and unallocated sharedexpenses
(443
)
(417
)
(406
)
amortization of intangibleassets
(18
)
(21
)
(767
)
gain on sale ofbusinesses
net interestexpense
(793
)
(453
)
(417
)
equity in the income ofinvestees
restructuring and impairmentcharges
(16
)
(1,454
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accountingchanges
$
2,254
$
2,190
$
1,283
capital expenditures
medianetworks
$
$
$
parks andresorts
1,278
studioentertainment
consumerproducts
corporate
total consolidated capitalexpenditures
$
1,049
$
1,086
$
1,795
depreciation expense
medianetworks
$
$
$
parks andresorts
studioentertainment
consumerproducts
corporate
total consolidated depreciationexpense
$
1,059
$
1,021
$
intangible asset amortization
expense
medianetworks
$
$
$
parks andresorts
studioentertainment
consumerproducts
total consolidated amortizationexpense
$
$
$
identifiable assets
media networks(1)(2)
$
25,883
$
26,038
parks and resorts(1)
11,067
11,305
studioentertainment
7,832
7,879
consumerproducts
1,125
corporate(3)
4,240
3,698
total consolidatedassets
$
49,988
$
50,045
supplemental revenue data
media networks
advertising
$
6,319
$
5,566
$
5,988
subscriptions
3,682
3,294
2,466
parks and resorts
merchandise, food andbeverage
1,987
1,987
2,046
admissions
1,887
1,819
2,050
-70-
table of contents
revenues
united states andcanada
$
22,124
$
20,770
$
20,895
europe
3,171
2,724
2,599
asiapacific
1,331
1,325
1,232
latin america andother
$
27,061
$
25,329
$
25,172
segment operating income
united states andcanada
$
2,113
$
1,739
$
3,045
europe
asiapacific
latin america andother
(48
)
(10
)
$
3,174
$
2,822
$
4,005
identifiable assets
united states andcanada
$
47,177
$
47,241
europe
2,200
2,355
asiapacific
latin america andother
$
49,988
$
50,045
(1)
identifiable assets include amounts associated
with equity method investments, including notes and other
receivables, as follows:
medianetworks
$
$
parks andresorts
(2)
includes goodwill and other intangible assets
totaling $19,344 in 2003 and $19,360 in 2002.
(3)
primarily deferred tax assets, other investments,
fixed and other assets.
2summary of significant accounting
policies
principles of consolidation
the consolidated financial statements of the
company include the accounts of the walt disney company and its
subsidiaries after elimination of intercompany accounts and
transactions. in december1999, dvd financing, inc. (dfi),
a subsidiary of disney vacation development, inc. and an
indirect subsidiary of the company, completed a receivable sale
transaction. in connection with this sale, dfi prepares separate
financial statements, although its separate assets and
liabilities are also consolidated in these financial statements.
accounting changes
sfas 150
in may2003, the financial accounting
standards board (fasb)issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.150 (sfas 150), accounting for
certain financial instruments with characteristics of both
liabilities and equity. sfas 150, establishes standards for
how an issuer classifies and measures certain financial
instruments with characteristics of both liabilities and equity.
the adoption of sfas 150 in the fiscal fourth quarter of 2003
did not have a material impact on the companys results of
operation or financial position.
sfas 149
in april2003, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.149 (sfas149),
amendment of statement 133 on derivative instruments and
hedging activities. sfas149 amends and clarifies
financial accounting and reporting for derivative instruments
and for hedging activities under
-71-
table of contents
statement of financial accounting standards
no.133, accounting for derivative instruments and
hedging activities (sfas133). the adoption of
sfas149 in the fiscal fourth quarter of 2003 did not have
a material impact on the companys results of operation or
financial position.
eitf 00-21
the company adopted emerging issues task force
(eitf)no.00-21, revenue arrangements with
multiple deliverables (eitf00-21) in the fiscal fourth
quarter of 2003. this new accounting rule addresses revenue
recognition for revenues derived from a single contract that
contains multiple products or services. the rule provides
additional requirements to determine when such revenues may be
recorded separately for accounting purposes. historically, the
company has recognized the nfl broadcast portion of espns
affiliate revenue when the nfl games were aired, as espns
affiliate contracts provided a basis for allocating such revenue
between nfl and non-nfl programming. since the cost of the nfl
rights has also been recognized as the games were aired, the
company recognized both the nfl revenues and nfl costs in the
quarters the games were aired.
under eitf00-21s requirements for
separating the revenue elements of a single contract, the
company will no longer allocate espns affiliate revenue
between nfl and non-nfl programming for accounting purposes. as
a consequence, the company will no longer match all nfl revenue
with nfl costs as espn affiliate revenue (including the nfl
portion) will be recognized ratably throughout the year, while
nfl contract costs will continue to be recognized in the
quarters the games are aired. this accounting change impacts
only the timing of revenue recognition and has no impact on cash
flow. as a result of this change, the media networks segment
will report significantly reduced revenue and profitability in
the first fiscal quarter when the majority of the nfl games are
aired, with commensurately increased revenues and profits in the
second and third fiscal quarters.
the company elected to adopt this new accounting
rule using the cumulative effect approach. in the fiscal fourth
quarter of 2003, the company recorded an after-tax charge of
$71million for the cumulative effect of a change in
accounting as of the beginning of fiscal year 2003. this amount
represents the revenue recorded for nfl games in the fourth
quarter of fiscal year 2002, which would have been recorded
ratably over fiscal 2003 under the new accounting method. the
impact in the fourth quarter reflects the recognition of the
remaining $34million of the $71million cumulative
effect, offset by the $36 million impact of not recognizing nfl
revenue that, under the pre-eitf 00-21 method, the company would
have recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2003 as the games
were
-72-
table of contents
aired. this amount will be recognized during
fiscal year 2004. the following table shows the quarterly effect
on fiscal year 2003 of this new accounting method.
three months
three months
three months
three months
ended
ended
ended
ended
year ended
dec 31, 2002
mar 31, 2003
june 30, 2003
sept 30, 2003
sept 30, 2003
net
net
net
net
net
income
eps(1)
income
eps(1)
income
eps(1)
income
eps(1)
income
eps(1)
results prior to eitf00-21adoption
$
$
0.13
$
$
0.11
$
$
0.19
$
$
0.20
$
1,302
$
0.63
quarterly impact of accountingchange
(149
)
(0.07
)
0.04
0.05
(2
)
(0.00
)
0.02
0.06
0.15
0.24
0.20
1,338
0.65
cumulative effect of accountingchange
(71
)
(0.03
)
(71
)
(0.03
)
results subsequent to
eitf00-21adoption
$
$
0.02
$
$
0.15
$
$
0.24
$
$
0.20
$
1,267
$
0.62
(1)
eps amounts are based on diluted shares
outstanding and may not add due to rounding
the following table provides a reconciliation of
reported net earnings to adjusted earnings had eitf 00-21 been
followed in the fiscal 2002 and 2001:
earnings
earnings
amount
per share
amount
per share
reported earnings attributed to disney common
stock before the cumulative effect of accounting changes
$
1,236
$
0.60
$
$
0.11
eitf 00-21 adjustment (net oftax)
(46
)
(0.02
)
adjusted netincome
$
1,190
$
0.58
$
$
0.11
fin46
in january2003, the fasb issued fasb
interpretation no.46, consolidation of variable
interest entities (fin46) and amended it in
october2003, such that it is now effective for the company
in the first fiscal quarter of 2004. variable interest entities
(vies) are entities that lack sufficient equity to finance their
activities without additional financial support from other
parties or whose equity holders lack adequate decision making
ability based on criteria set forth in the interpretation. all
vies, with which the company is involved, must be evaluated to
determine the primary beneficiary of the risks and rewards of
the vie. the primary beneficiary is required to consolidate the
vie for financial reporting purposes.
the company has equity interests in certain
entities, including euro disney s.c.a. (euro disney) and
hongkong international theme parks limited (hong kong
disneyland), which are currently not consolidated, but under
current rules are accounted for under the equity or cost method
of accounting. the current fin46 guidance is still
evolving with several proposed amendments and clarifications
recently issued through an exposure draft release. while we
continue to evaluate the total impact of fin46, based on
the current exposure draft, the company anticipates that it will
likely be required to consolidate euro disney and hong kong
disneyland in the first quarter of fiscal 2004. see note 4 for
the impact of consolidating euro disney and hong kong
disneyland. the company also has variable interests in certain
other entities, including, but not limited to, financing
arrangements for film rights and certain capital assets. these
entities may be considered vies under fin46 and we may be
required to consolidate certain of them.
-73-
table of contents
management believes that recognition of any
additional liabilities as a result of consolidating any vies
would not increase the level of claims on the general assets of
the company; rather, they would represent claims against the
additional assets recognized by the company as a result of
consolidating the vies. conversely, we believe that any
additional assets recognized as a result of consolidating any
vies would not represent additional assets of the company that
could be used to satisfy claims by the creditors of the company.
in addition, the potential consolidation of vies in which the
company is not the majority equity holder will generally result
in an increase in the minority interest in our financial
statements.
fin45
in november2002, the fasb issued fasb
interpretation no.45, guarantors accounting and
disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect
guarantees of indebtedness of others (fin45).
fin45 requires a guarantor to recognize a liability, at
the inception of the guarantee, for the fair value of
obligations it has undertaken in issuing the guarantee and also
requires more detailed disclosures with respect to guarantees.
fin45 is effective for guarantees issued or modified after
december31, 2002 and requires additional disclosures for
existing guarantees. the adoption of fin45 did not have a
material impact on the companys results of operations or
financial position. the company has provided additional
disclosure with respect to guarantees in note14.
sfas 146
the company adopted statement of financial
accounting standards no.146, accounting for costs
associated with exit or disposal activities (sfas 146)
effective october1, 2002, which did not have a material
impact on its consolidated results of operations and financial
position. sfas 146 requires that a liability for a cost
associated with an exit or disposal activity be recognized at
fair value when the liability is incurred, rather than when the
exit or disposal plan was committed to as was generally the case
under previous rules.
sfas144
the company adopted statement of financial
accounting standards no.144, accounting for the
impairment or disposal of long-lived assets (sfas144),
effective october1, 2001, which did not have a material
impact on the companys consolidated results of operations
and financial position. sfas144 establishes a single
accounting model for the impairment or disposal of long-lived
assets, including discontinued operations.
sfas143
the company adopted statement of financial
accounting standards no.143, accounting for obligations
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets
(sfas143) on october1, 2002, which did not have a
material impact on its consolidated results of operations and
financial position. sfas143 establishes standards for the
recognition and measurement of an asset retirement obligation
and its associated asset retirement cost.
sfas142
effective october1, 2001, the company
adopted statement of financial accounting standards
no.142, goodwill and other intangible assets
(sfas142). sfas 142 addresses the financial accounting
and reporting for acquired goodwill and other intangible assets.
as a result of adopting sfas142, goodwill and a
substantial amount of the companys intangible assets are
no longer amortized. pursuant to sfas142, goodwill and
other intangible assets must be tested for impairment on an
annual basis. during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2003, the
company updated its impairment review, which indicated that
there was no impairment. see note 6.
-74-
table of contents
sfas141
in july2001, the fasb issued statement of
financial accounting standards no.141, business
combinations (sfas141), which requires all business
combinations initiated after june30, 2001 be accounted for
under the purchase method.
sop 00-2
effective october1, 2000, the company
adopted two new accounting pronouncements, aicpa statement of
position no.00-2, accounting by producers or
distributors of films (sop00-2) and sfas133,
subsequently amended by statement of financial accounting
standards no.138 (sfas138).
sop 00-2 establishes new accounting standards for
producers and distributors of films, which resulted in changes
in revenue recognition and accounting for exploitation costs,
including advertising and marketing expenses and development and
overhead costs. as a result of the adoption of sop00-2,
the company recorded a one-time after-tax charge of
$228million, or $0.11 per share, representing the
cumulative effect of the adoption. the charge represents costs
that were capitalized as of september30, 2000, that would
have been expensed under the new rules. the adoption of
sop00-2 did not have a material impact on operating
results.
sfas133
sfas133 and sfas138 require that
derivatives be recorded on the balance sheet at fair value.
changes in derivative fair values that are designated as fair
value hedges are recognized in earnings as offsets to the
changes in fair value of related hedged assets, liabilities and
firm commitments. changes in the fair value of derivatives that
are designated as cash flow hedges are deferred and recorded as
a component of accumulated other comprehensive income
(aoci)until the hedged transactions occur and are
recognized in earnings. the ineffective portion of a hedging
derivatives change in fair value is immediately recognized
in earnings. derivatives that are executed for risk management
purposes but not designated as hedges under sfas133 and
sfas138 are recorded at their market value and recognized
in current earnings.
as a result of adopting sfas133 as of
october1, 2000, and in accordance with the transition
provisions, the company recorded (1)an after-tax charge of
$50million, or $0.02 per share, in its consolidated
statements of income representing the cumulative effect of the
adoption, and (2)an after-tax unrealized gain of
$60million in aoci. the adoption of sfas133 did not
have a material impact on operating results.
use of estimates
the preparation of financial statements in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and
footnotes thereto. actual results may differ from those
estimates.
revenue recognition
broadcast advertising revenues are recognized
when commercials are aired. revenues from television
subscription services related to the companys primary
cable programming services are recognized as services are
provided.
revenues from advance theme park ticket sales are
recognized when the tickets are used. revenues from corporate
sponsors at the theme parks are generally recorded over the
period of the applicable agreements commencing with the opening
of the related attraction.
revenues from the theatrical distribution of
motion pictures are recognized when motion pictures are
exhibited. revenues from video sales are recognized on the date
that video units are made widely available for sale by
retailers. revenues from the licensing of feature films and
television program-
-75-
table of contents
ming are recorded when the material is available
for telecasting by the licensee and when certain other
conditions are met.
merchandise licensing advance and guarantee
payments are recognized when the underlying royalties are earned.
internet advertising revenues are recognized on
the basis of impression views in the period the advertising is
displayed, provided that no significant obligations remain and
collection of the resulting receivable is probable. direct
marketing and internet-based merchandise revenues are recognized
upon shipment to customers.
advertising expense
advertising costs are expensed as incurred.
advertising expense incurred for the years ended
september30, 2003, 2002, and 2001 totaled
$2.5billion, $2.3billion and $2.2billion,
respectively.
cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on hand
and marketable securities with original maturities of three
months or less.
investments
debt securities that the company has the positive
intent and ability to hold to maturity are classified as
held-to-maturity and reported at amortized cost.
debt securities not classified as held-to-maturity and
marketable equity securities are classified as either
trading or available-for-sale, and are
recorded at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included
in earnings or stockholders equity, respectively. all
other equity securities are accounted for using either the cost
method or the equity method.
the company continually reviews its investments
to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost
basis is other than temporary. if the decline in fair value is
judged to be other than temporary, the cost basis of the
security is written down to fair value and the amount of the
write-down is included in the consolidated statements of income.
translation policy
the company uses the u.s. dollar predominately as
its functional currency for international studio and licensing
operations. the local currency is the functional currency for
euro disney, hong kong disneyland and international locations of
the disney stores.
for u.s. dollar functional currency locations,
foreign currency assets and liabilities are remeasured into u.s.
dollars at end-of-period exchange rates, except for property,
plant and equipment, other assets and deferred revenue, which
are remeasured at historical exchange rates. revenue and
expenses are remeasured at average exchange rates in effect
during each period, except for those expenses related to the
previously noted balance sheet amounts, which are remeasured at
historical exchange rates. gains or losses from foreign currency
remeasurement are included in net earnings.
for the local currency functional locations,
their related cumulative translation adjustments are included as
a component of accumulated other comprehensive income.
inventories
carrying amounts of merchandise, materials and
supplies inventories are generally determined on a moving
average cost basis and are stated at the lower of cost or market.
-76-
table of contents
film and television costs
film and television costs include capitalizable
direct negative costs, production overhead, interest and
development costs and are stated at the lower of cost, less
accumulated amortization, or fair value. acquired programming
costs for the companys television and cable/satellite
networks are stated at the lower of cost, less accumulated
amortization, or net realizable value. acquired television
broadcast program licenses and rights are recorded when the
license period begins and the program is available for use.
marketing, distribution, and general and administrative costs
are expensed as incurred.
film and television production and participation
costs are expensed based on the ratio of the current
periods gross revenues to estimated remaining total gross
revenues from all sources on an individual production basis.
television network series costs and multi-year sports rights are
charged to expense based on the ratio of the current
periods gross revenues to estimated remaining total gross
revenues from such programs or straight-line, as appropriate.
estimated remaining gross revenue from all sources for film and
television productions includes revenue that will be earned
within ten years of the date of the initial theatrical release
for film productions. for television network series, we include
revenues that will be earned within 10years of the
delivery of the first episode, or if still in production, five
years from the date of delivery of the most recent episode. for
acquired film libraries, remaining revenues include amounts to
be earned for up to 20years from the date of acquisition.
television network and station rights for theatrical movies and
other long-form programming are charged to expense primarily on
an accelerated basis related to the usage of the programs.
development costs for projects that have been determined will
not go into production or have not been set for production
within three years are written-off.
estimates of total gross revenues can change
significantly due to a variety of factors, including the level
of market acceptance of film and television products,
advertising rates and subscriber fees. accordingly, revenue
estimates are reviewed periodically and amortization is
adjusted, if necessary. such adjustments could have a material
effect on results of operations in future periods. the net
realizable value of network television broadcast program
licenses and rights is reviewed using a daypart methodology. a
daypart is defined as an aggregation of programs broadcast
during a particular time of day or programs of a similar type.
the companys dayparts are early morning, daytime, late
night, primetime, news, children and sports (includes network
and cable). the net realizable values of other cable programming
are reviewed on an aggregated basis for each cable channel.
capitalized software costs
the company expenses costs incurred in the
preliminary project stage of developing or acquiring internal
use software, such as research and feasibility studies, as well
as costs incurred in the post-implementation/operational stage,
such as maintenance and training. capitalization of software
development costs occurs only after the preliminary project
stage is complete, management authorizes the project, and it is
probable that the project will be completed and the software
will be used for the function intended. as of september30,
2003, capitalized software costs totaled $240million. the
capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over
the estimated useful life of the software, which ranges from
3-10years.
-77-
table of contents
parks, resorts and other property
parks, resorts and other property are carried at
historical cost. depreciation is computed on the straight-line
method over estimated useful lives as follows:
attractions
2540 years
buildings andimprovements
40 years
leaseholdimprovements
life of lease
landimprovements
2540 years
furniture, fixtures and equipment
210 years
goodwill and other intangible assets
the company performs an annual impairment test
for goodwill and other intangible assets. goodwill and other
intangible assets are allocated to various reporting units,
which are either the operating segment or one reporting level
below the operating segment. the companys reporting units
for purposes of applying the provisions of sfas142 are:
cable networks, television broadcasting, radio, studio
entertainment, consumer products and parks and resorts.
sfas142 requires the company to compare the
fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount on an
annual basis to determine if there is potential goodwill
impairment. if the fair value of the reporting unit is less than
its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent
that the fair value of the goodwill within the reporting unit is
less than its carrying value.
if the carrying amount of an intangible asset
exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized. fair
values for goodwill and other intangible assets are determined
based on discounted cash flows, market multiples or appraised
values as appropriate.
for purposes of performing our impairment test,
we used a present value technique (discounted cash flow) to
determine the fair value for all of the reporting units except
for the television broadcasting group. the television
broadcasting reporting unit includes the abc television network
and owned and operated television stations. these businesses
have been grouped together because their respective cash flows
are dependent on one another. for purposes of our impairment
test, we used a present value technique to value the owned and
operated television stations and a revenue multiple to value the
television network. we did not use a present value technique or
a market multiple approach to value the television network as a
present value technique would not capture the full fair value of
the television network and there have been no recent comparable
sale transactions for a television network. we applied what we
believe to be the most appropriate valuation methodologies for
each of the reporting units. if we had established different
reporting units or utilized different valuation methodologies
the impairment test results could differ.
amortizable intangible assets are amortized on a
straight-line basis over estimated useful lives as follows:
copyrights
1031 years
other
450 years
risk management contracts
in the normal course of business, the company
employs a variety of financial instruments to manage its
exposure to fluctuations in interest rates, foreign currency
exchange rates and investments in equity and debt securities,
including interest rate and cross-currency swap agreements;
forward, option and swaption contracts, and interest
rate caps.
the company formally documents all relationships
between hedging instruments and hedged items, as well as its
risk management objectives and strategies for undertaking
various hedge transactions. there are two types of derivatives
into which the company enters: hedges of fair value exposure and
hedges of cash flow exposure. hedges of fair value exposure are
entered into in order to
-78-
table of contents
hedge the fair value of a recognized asset,
liability, or a firm commitment. hedges of cash flow exposure
are entered into in order to hedge a forecasted transaction
(e.g., forecasted revenue) or the variability of cash flows to
be paid related to a recognized liability (e.g. floating rate
debt).
the company designates and assigns the financial
instruments as hedges of forecasted transactions, specific
assets, or specific liabilities. when hedged assets or
liabilities are sold or extinguished or the forecasted
transactions being hedged are no longer expected to occur, the
company recognizes the gain or loss on the designated hedging
financial instruments.
option premiums and unrealized losses on forward
contracts and the accrued differential for interest rate and
cross-currency swaps to be received under the agreements are
recorded on the balance sheet as other assets. unrealized gains
on forward contracts and the accrued differential for interest
rate and cross-currency swaps to be paid under the agreements
are included in liabilities. realized gains and losses from
hedges are classified in the income statement consistent with
the accounting treatment of the items being hedged. the company
accrues the differential for interest rate and cross-currency
swaps to be paid or received under the agreements as interest
and exchange rates shift as adjustments to interest expense over
the lives of the swaps. gains and losses on the termination of
effective swap agreements, prior to their original maturity, are
deferred and amortized to interest expense over the remaining
term of the underlying hedged transactions.
cash flows from hedges are classified in the
consolidated statements of cash flows under the same category as
the cash flows from the related assets, liabilities or
forecasted transactions (see notes 7 and 13).
earnings per share
the company presents both basic and diluted
earnings per share (eps) amounts. basic eps is calculated by
dividing net income by the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding during the year. diluted eps is based upon
the weighted average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding during the year which is calculated using the
treasury stock method for stock options and assumes conversion
of the companys convertible senior notes (see
note7). common equivalent shares are excluded from the
computation in periods in which they have an anti-dilutive
effect. stock options for which the exercise price exceeds the
average market price over the period have an anti-dilutive
effect on eps and, accordingly, are excluded from the
calculation.
a reconciliation of net income and the weighted
average number of common and common equivalent shares
outstanding for calculating diluted earnings per share is as
follows:
year ended
september30,
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes attributed to disney commonstock
$
1,338
$
1,236
$
interest expense on convertible senior notes (net
oftax)
$
1,348
$
1,236
$
weighted average number of common shares
outstanding (basic)
2,043
2,040
2,085
weighted average dilutive stockoptions
weighted average assumed conversion of
convertible seniornotes
weighted average number of common and common
equivalent shares outstanding (diluted)
2,067
2,044
2,100
for the years ended september30, 2003, 2002
and 2001, options for 184 million, 156million, and
81million, respectively, were excluded from the diluted
eps calculation for common stock because they were anti-dilutive.
-79-
table of contents
stock options
the company uses the intrinsic-value method of
accounting for stock-based awards granted to employees and,
accordingly, does not recognize compensation expense for its
stock-based awards to employees in the consolidated statements
of income.
the following table reflects pro forma net income
(loss)and earnings (loss)per share had the company
elected to adopt the fair value approach of statement of
financial accounting standards no.123, accounting for
stock-based compensation:
net income (loss)attributed to disney
common stock:
asreported
$
1,267
$
1,236
$
(41
)
less stock option expense, net oftax
(294
)
(306
)
(284
)
pro forma after optionexpense
$
$
$
(325
)
diluted earnings (loss)per share attributed
to disney common stock:
asreported
$
0.62
$
0.60
$
(0.02
)
pro forma after optionexpense
0.48
0.45
(0.15
)
basic earnings (loss)per share attributed
to disney common stock:
asreported
$
0.62
$
0.61
$
(0.02
)
pro forma after optionexpense
0.48
0.46
(0.15
)
these pro forma amounts may not be representative
of future disclosures since the estimated fair value of stock
options is amortized to expense over the vesting period, and
additional options may be granted in future years.
reclassifications
certain reclassifications have been made in the
2002 and 2001 financial statements to conform to the 2003
presentation.
3significant acquisitions and
dispositions
on october24, 2001, the company acquired
fox family worldwide, inc. (ffw) for $5.2billion, which
was funded with $2.9billion of new long-term borrowings
plus the assumption of $2.3billion of ffw long-term debt.
upon the closing of the acquisition, the company changed
ffws name to abc family worldwide, inc. (abc family).
among the businesses acquired were the fox family channel, which
has been renamed abc family channel, a programming service that
currently reaches approximately 86million cable and
satellite television subscribers throughout the u.s.; a 76%
interest in fox kids europe, which reaches more than
33million subscribers across europe; fox kids channels in
latin america, and the saban library and entertainment
production businesses.
our motivation for the acquisition was to acquire
a fully integrated cable channel as well as a significant
international cable presence and therefore increase shareholder
value. we believe that we can reach this objective through the
use of new strategies that include cross promotion with our
other television properties, repurposing a portion of the
programming of the abc television network, utilizing programming
from the disney and abc libraries, developing original
programming and by reducing operating costs.
the acquisition of abc family has been accounted
for in accordance with sfas141. the cost of the
acquisition was allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities
assumed based on estimates of their respective fair values at
the date of acquisition. fair values were determined by internal
studies and
-80-
table of contents
independent third party appraisals. the goodwill
that arose from the acquisition of abc family reflected the
value to disney of acquiring a fully-distributed family branded
cable property to complement its existing properties that are
primarily targeted toward children (toon disney, disney channel)
and adults (espn). the acquisition of abc family resulted in the
company having a broader array of cable offerings. although most
of the purchase price was allocated to goodwill, some value was
allocated to long-term contracts with cable and satellite
multiple systems operators (msos) based on the estimated fair
value of those contracts that were in effect at the date of the
acquisition. no value was allocated to lapsed contractual
relationships with the msos as renewal of such relationships
would require significant effort and substantive negotiations in
a highly competitive marketplace.
the following table summarizes the final purchase
price allocation of abc family.
receivables
$
programmingcosts
otherassets
intangibleassets
goodwill
4,996
totalassets
6,069
accounts payable and accruedliabilities
(555
)
otherliabilities
(269
)
minorityinterest
(49
)
totalliabilities
(873
)
fair value of net assetsacquired
5,196
borrowings and preferred stockassumed
(2,371
)
cash purchase price, net of cashacquired
$
2,825
the $5.0billion of goodwill was assigned to
the cable networks reporting unit within the media networks
segment. none of this amount is expected to be deductible for
tax purposes.
the companys consolidated results of
operations have incorporated abc familys activity on a
consolidated basis from october24, 2001, the date of
acquisition. on an unaudited pro forma basis, adjusting only for
the assumption that the acquisition of abc family and related
incremental borrowings had occurred at the beginning of fiscal
2001, revenues for the year ended september30, 2002 and
2001 were $25,360million and $25,803million,
respectively. as-reported and unaudited pro forma net
incomeand earningsper share for fiscal 2002 were
approximately the same. the unaudited pro forma earnings per
share impact on fiscal 2001 was approximately $0.01 dilutive,
assuming that the incremental acquisition goodwill had not been
amortized in the prior year pursuant to the new goodwill
accounting rules. the unaudited pro forma information is not
necessarily indicative of the results of operations had the
acquisition actually occurred at the beginning of fiscal 2001,
nor is it necessarily indicative of future results.
in fiscal 2003, the company sold the anaheim
angels baseball team, which resulted in a pre-tax gain of
$16million. in fiscal 2002, the company sold the disney
store operations in japan generating a pre-tax gain of
$34million and in fiscal 2001, the company sold infoseek
japan k.k. generating a $22million pre-tax gain. these
gains are reported in the line gain on sale of
businesses in the consolidated statements of income.
on march20, 2001, the company converted all
of its outstanding internet group common stock into disney
common stock, resulting in the issuance of approximately
8.6million shares of disney common stock.
-81-
table of contents
4investments
investments consist of the following:
investments, at equity(1)
$
1,051
$
investments, at cost(2)
investment in leveragedleases
notes receivable and otherinvestments
$
1,849
$
1,810
(1)
equity investments consist of investments in
affiliated companies over which the company has significant
influence or ownership of 20% or more but less than or equal to
50%
(2)
cost investments consist of marketable securities
classified as available-for-sale and investments in companies
over which the company does not have significant influence and
ownership of less than 20%
euro disney
the company has a 39% interest in euro disney
s.c.a., which operates the disneyland resort paris. as of
september30, 2003, the companys investment in and
accounts and notes receivable from euro disney totaled
$494million, including $117million drawn under a
line of credit which is due in june2004. the maximum
amount available under the line is 168million euros
($192million at september30, 2003 exchange rates).
the slowdown in the european travel and tourism
industry has negatively affected euro disneys results of
operations and cash flow. in response to this situation, euro
disney initiated discussions with its lenders and the company to
obtain waivers of its fiscal 2003 loan covenants and to obtain
supplemental financing to address euro disneys cash
requirements.
as a result of an agreement entered into on
march28, 2003, the company did not charge euro disney
royalties and management fees for the period from
january1, 2003 to september30, 2003. during the last
three quarters of fiscal 2002, the companys royalty and
management fee income from euro disney totaled $27million.
additionally, the company agreed to allow euro disney to pay its
royalties and management fees annually in arrears for fiscal
2004, instead of quarterly.
on november3, 2003, euro disney obtained
waivers from its lenders, effective through march31, 2004,
with respect to covenants for fiscal 2003. the agreement is
expected to give euro disney, its lenders and the company time
to find a resolution to euro disneys financial situation.
in conjunction with the bank waivers, the company has provided a
new 45million euros ($52million at
september30, 2003 exchange rates) subordinated credit
facility, which can be drawn on through march31, 2004 only
after euro disneys existing line of credit with the
company is fully drawn. repayment of any amount drawn down on
the new credit facility is subject to euro disney meeting
certain financial thresholds or the prior repayment of all of
euro disneys existing debt to its lenders.
euro disney is currently engaged in discussions
with its agent banks and the company to obtain supplemental
financing to address its cash requirements. such financing may
include an extension or change in the terms associated with the
companys credit line or additional commitments from the
company. if a resolution to euro disneys future financing
needs is not obtained by march31, 2004, the waivers would
expire and euro disneys lenders could accelerate the
maturity of euro disneys debt. should that occur, euro
disney would be unable to meet all of its debt obligations. the
company believes that euro disney will ultimately obtain the
requisite loan modifications and additional financing; however,
there can be no assurance that this will be the case. should
euro disney be unable to obtain loan modifications and/or
additional financing, some or all of the
-82-
table of contents
companys $494million euro disney
investment and receivables would likely become impaired.
additionally, it is possible that financing modifications and/or
the form of the resolution could result in a partial impairment
of the companys euro disney investment and receivables.
in connection with a financial restructuring of
euro disney in 1994, euro disney associes s.n.c. (disney snc), a
wholly owned affiliate of the company, entered into a lease
arrangement with a financing company with a noncancelable term
of 12years related to substantially all of the disneyland
park assets, and then entered into a 12-year sublease agreement
with euro disney on substantially the same terms. remaining
lease rentals at september30, 2003 of approximately
$544million receivable from euro disney under the sublease
approximate the amounts payable by disney snc under the lease.
at the conclusion of the sublease term, euro disney will have
the option of assuming disney sncs rights and obligations
under the lease for a payment of $90million over the
ensuing 15months. if euro disney does not exercise its
option, disney snc may purchase the assets, continue to lease
the assets or elect to terminate the lease. in the event the
lease is terminated, disney snc would be obligated to make a
termination payment to the lessor equal to 75% of the
lessors then outstanding debt related to the disneyland
park assets, which payment would be approximately
$1.3billion. disney snc would then have the right to sell
or lease the assets on behalf of the lessor to satisfy the
remaining debt, with any excess proceeds payable to disney snc.
notwithstanding euro disneys financial difficulties, the
company believes it is unlikely that disney snc would be
required to pay the 75% lease termination payment as the company
currently expects that in order for euro disney to continue its
business it will either exercise its assumption option in 2006
or that the assumption of the lease by euro disney will
otherwise be provided for in the resolution to euro
disneys financial situation.
-83-
table of contents
a summary of u.s. gaap financial information for
euro disney as of and for the years ended september30,
2003 is as follows:
results of operations:
revenues
$
1,077
$
$
cost andexpenses
(1,032
)
(891
)
(871
)
net interest expense andother
(101
)
(75
)
(80
)
loss before incometaxes
(56
)
(57
)
(46
)
incometaxes
netloss
$
(56
)
$
(57
)
$
(46
)
balance sheet:
cash and cashequivalents
$
$
other currentassets
total currentassets
parks, resorts and other property,net
2,951
2,687
other non-currentassets
$
3,373
$
3,012
accounts payable and other
accruedliabilities
$
$
current portion of borrowings(1)
2,528
other currentliabilities
total currentliabilities
3,015
borrowings
2,126
other non-currentliabilities
shareholdersequity
$
3,373
$
3,012
(1)
all of euro disneys borrowings are
classified as current as of september30, 2003 as they are
subject to acceleration if a long-term solution to euro
disneys financing needs is not achieved by march 31, 2004.
hong kong disneyland
in 1999, the company and the government of the
hong kong special administrative region signed a master project
agreement for the development and operation of hong kong
disneyland. phase i of the development, which will be located on
309 acres of land on lantau island, includes the hong kong
disneyland theme park and one or more hotels. subject to the
governments completion of infrastructure by specified
target dates, hong kong disneyland is currently targeted to open
in 2005/2006. the master project agreement permits further
phased buildout of the development under certain circumstances.
construction and operation of the project will be
the responsibility of hongkong international theme parks
limited, an entity in which the hong kong government owns a 57%
interest and a subsidiary of the company owns the remaining 43%.
a separate hong kong subsidiary of the company is responsible
for managing hong kong disneyland. based on the current exchange
rate between the hong kong and u.s. dollars, the companys
equity contribution obligation is limited to u.s.
$316million. as of september30, 2003 the company had
contributed u.s. $73million and the remaining
$243million is payable over the next three years. once
hong kong disneyland commences
-84-
table of contents
operations, the company will be entitled to
receive management fees and royalties in addition to the
companys equity interest.
other equity investments
in addition to the companys investments in
euro disney and hong kong disneyland, the company has other
equity investments, primarily comprised of cable investments
such as a&e television networks (37.5% owned), lifetime
entertainment services (50% owned) and e! entertainment
television (39.6% owned).
a summary of combined financial information for
the other equity investments (including hong kong disneyland) is
as follows:
results of operations:
revenues
$
3,458
$
3,111
$
3,161
netincome
$
$
$
balance sheet:
currentassets
$
1,924
$
1,938
non-currentassets
1,696
1,419
$
3,620
$
3,357
currentliabilities
$
$
non-currentliabilities
shareholdersequity
1,873
1,684
$
3,620
$
3,357
impact of fin 46 on equity
investments
as discussed in note2, the implementation
of fin46 will likely require the company to consolidate
both euro disney and hong kong disneyland for financial
reporting purposes in the first quarter of fiscal 2004. the
following tables present consolidated results of operations and
financial position for the company as of and for the year ended
september30, 2003 as if euro disney and hong kong
disneyland had been consolidated based on our current analysis
and understanding of fin46.
hong kong
as reported
euro disney
disneyland
adjustments
as adjusted
results of operations:
revenues
$
27,061
$
1,077
$
$
(10
)
$
28,133
cost andexpenses
(24,330
)
(1,032
)
(7
)
(25,360
)
amortization of intangiblesassets
(18
)
(18
)
gain on sale ofbusiness
net interestexpense
(793
)
(101
)
(894
)
equity in the income ofinvestees
restructuring and impairmentcharges
(16
)
(16
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accountingchange
2,254
(56
)
(2
)
2,219
incometaxes
(789
)
(776
)
minorityinterests
(127
)
(105
)
cumulative effect of accountingchange
(71
)
(71
)
netincome/(loss)
$
1,267
$
(56
)
$
(2
)
$
$
1,267
-85-
table of contents
hong kong
as reported
euro disney
disneyland
adjustments
as adjusted
balance sheet:
cash and cashequivalents
$
1,583
$
$
$
$
1,762
other currentassets
6,731
(9
)
6,922
total currentassets
8,314
(9
)
8,684
investments
1,849
(623
)
1,226
fixedassets
12,678
2,951
16,153
intangibleassets
2,786
2,786
goodwill
16,966
16,966
otherassets
7,395
7,532
totalassets
$
49,988
$
3,373
$
$
(632
)
$
53,347
current portion of borrowings(1)
$
2,457
$
2,528
$
$
(388
)
$
4,597
other currentliabilities
6,212
(85
)
6,675
total currentliabilities
8,669
3,015
(473
)
11,272
borrowings
10,643
10,880
deferred incometaxes
2,712
2,712
other long-termliabilities
3,745
(71
)
3,963
minorityinterest
shareholdersequity
23,791
(389
)
23,791
total liabilities and
shareholdersequity
$
49,988
$
3,373
$
$
(632
)
$
53,347
(1)
all of euro disneys borrowings are
classified as current as they are subject to acceleration if a
long-term solution to euro disneys financing needs is not
achieved by march31, 2004.
investments, at cost
as of september30, 2003 and 2002, the
company held $17million and $14 million, respectively, of
securities classified as available-for-sale. as of
september30, 2003 and 2002, the company also held
$89million and $148 million, respectively, of non-publicly
traded cost method investments. realized gains and losses are
determined principally on an average cost basis. in 2003, 2002
and 2001, the company recognized $8million,
$239million and $87million, respectively, in net
gains on sales of securities. included in fiscal 2002 is a
$216million gain on the sale of the remaining shares of
knight ridder stock that the company had received in connection
with the disposition of certain publishing operations that had
been acquired in connection with the acquisition of abc.
in addition, in 2003, 2002 and 2001, the company
recorded non-cash charges of $23million, $2million
and $241million, respectively, to reflect
other-than-temporary losses in value of certain investments. in
2003, 2002 and 2001, unrealized gains on available-for-sale
securities were $3million, $1million and
$47million, respectively.
investment in leveraged leases
during the first quarter of fiscal 2003, the
company wrote off its aircraft leveraged lease investment with
united airlines, which filed for bankruptcy protection,
resulting in a pre-tax charge of $114million, or $0.04 per
share. based on the bankruptcy filing, we believe it is unlikely
that the company will recover this investment. the pre-tax
charge of $114million for the write-off is reported in
net interest expense in the consolidated statements
of income. as of september30, 2003, our remaining aircraft
leveraged lease investment totaled approximately
$175million, consisting of $119million and
$56million, with delta air lines and fedex, respectively.
given the current status of the airline industry, we continue to
monitor the recoverability of these investments, particularly
the delta air lines leases. the inability of delta air lines to
make their lease payments, or the termination of our lease
through a bankruptcy proceeding, could result in a material
charge for the write-down of some or all of our investment and
could accelerate income tax payments.
-86-
table of contents
the companys leveraged lease investment
includes the impact of certain income tax benefits that are
projected to be realized in the future under the current u.s.
income tax laws. as discussed more fully in note8, the
u.s. congress is considering a change in the applicable income
tax law. since the impact of this matter upon the company
depends upon the specific provisions of any tax legislation
ultimately enacted by congress, it is not possible to predict
the impact on our results of operations or financial position.
5film and television costs
theatrical film costs
released, lessamortization
$
2,359
$
2,384
completed, notreleased
in-process
1,236
in development or pre-production
4,564
4,140
television costs
released, lessamortization
completed, not released
in-process
in development or pre-production
1,381
1,357
television broadcastrights
1,123
6,773
6,620
less currentportion
non-currentportion
$
6,205
$
5,959
based on managements total gross revenue
estimates as of september30, 2003, approximately 37% of
completed and unamortized film and television costs (excluding
amounts allocated to acquired film and television libraries) are
expected to be amortized during fiscal 2004. approximately 73%
of unamortized film and television costs for released
productions (excluding acquired film libraries) are expected to
be amortized during the next three years. by september30,
2007, approximately 80% of the total released and unamortized
film and television costs are expected to be amortized. as of
september30, 2003, the company estimated that
approximately $303million of accrued participation
liabilities will be payable in fiscal year 2004.
at september30, 2003, acquired film and
television libraries have remaining unamortized film costs of
$532million which are generally amortized straight-line
over a remaining period of approximately 5-14years.
the following table provides detail of film and
television cost spending and amortization:
film and television costspending
$
(2,915
)
$
(2,315
)
$
(2,273
)
film and television costamortization
2,546
2,218
2,260
film and televisioncost
$
(369
)
$
(97
)
$
(13
)
-87-
table of contents
6goodwill and intangible assets
the following table provides a reconciliation of
reported net loss for fiscal 2001 to adjusted earnings had
statement of financial accounting standards no.142
goodwill and other intangible assets, been applied as of
the beginning of fiscal 2001:
earnings
amount
per share
reported net loss attributed to disney
commonstock
$
(41
)
$
(0.02
)
cumulative effect of accountingchanges
0.13
reported earnings attributed to disney common
stock before the cumulative effect of accountingchanges
0.11
add back amortization (net of tax):
goodwill
0.29
indefinite life intangibleassets
0.02
adjusted earnings attributed to disney common
stock before the cumulative effect of accountingchanges
$
$
0.42
the changes in the carrying amount of goodwill
for the year ended september30, 2003, are as follows:
media
network
other
total
balance as of october1,2002
$
17,008
$
$
17,083
goodwill acquired during theperiod
capital cities/ abc, inc. acquisition adjustment
andother
(136
)
(136
)
balance as of
september30,2003
$
16,890
$
$
16,966
during the first quarter of fiscal 2003, certain
preacquisition tax contingencies related to the companys
1996 acquisition of capital cities/ abc, inc. were favorably
resolved. reserves recorded for these exposures were reversed
against goodwill.
-88-
table of contents
7borrowings
the companys borrowings at
september30, 2003 and 2002, including interest rate swaps
designated as hedges, are summarized below.
interest rate and
stated
cross-currency swaps(2)
effective
interest
interest
swap
rate(1)
pay variable
pay fixed
rate(3)
maturities
commercialpaper
$
$
$
$
u.s. medium-termnotes
8,114
8,042
6.07%
1,510
4.94%
2006-2022
convertible seniornotes
1,323
2.13%
2.57%
other us dollardenominated debt
1,303
5.74%
5.74%
privately placeddebt
7.02%
3.02%
european medium-termnotes
1,519
1,646
2.84%
1,099
2.42%
2004-2007
preferredstock
7.56%
4.19%
capital cities/ abc and abc familydebt
1,085
9.08%
9.08%
other(4)
13,100
14,130
5.16%
3,054
4.23%
less current portion(4)
2,457
1,663
total long-termborrowings
$
10,643
$
12,467
$
2,952
$
(1)
the stated interest rate represents the
weighted-average coupon rate for each category of borrowings.
for floating rate borrowings, interest rates are based upon the
rates at september30, 2003; these rates are not
necessarily an indication of future interest rates.
(2)
amounts represent notional values of interest
rate swaps.
(3)
the effective interest rate reflects the impact
of interest rate and cross-currency swaps on the stated rate of
interest.
(4)
includes market value adjustments for current and
non-current debt with qualifying hedges totaling
$471million and $353million at september30,
2003 and 2002, respectively.
commercial paper
the company currently maintains u.s. and european
commercial paper programs with a combined program size of
$4.5billion. as of september30, 2003, the company
had established bank facilities totaling $4.5billion to
support commercial paper borrowings, with half of the facilities
scheduled to expire in february2004 and the other half in
march2005. the company plans to renew or extend these bank
facilities prior to their scheduled expiration. under the bank
facilities, the company has the option to borrow at libor-based
rates plus a spread depending on the companys senior
unsecured debt rating. the companys bank facilities
contain only one financial covenant, relating to interest
coverage, which the company met on september30, 2003 by a
significant margin. as of september 30, 2003, the company had
not borrowed against the facilities. the company also has the
ability to issue up to $350million of letters of credit
under the $2.25billion facility expiring in 2004, which if
utilized, reduces available borrowing under this facility. as of
september30, 2003, $163million of letters of credit
had been issued under this facility and $2.087billion was
available for borrowing. at september30, 2003, no
commercial paper debt was outstanding.
$7.5 billion shelf registration
statement
in august2001, the company filed a u.s.
shelf registration statement with the securities and exchange
commission (sec)that allows the company to issue from time
to time up to $7.5billion of securities, including debt
securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares,
warrants and purchase contracts. at september30, 2003,
$3.049billion of debt had been issued under the
companys u.s. medium-term note program (described below)
and $2.628 billion of debt had been
-89-
table of contents
issued under other u.s. dollar denominated debt
programs of which $708million has been repaid to date
(also described below). the remaining unused capacity under the
shelf registration is $1.823billion. our ability to issue
debt is subject to market conditions and other factors impacting
our borrowing capacity.
u.s. medium-term note program
in september2001, the company established a
$6.5billion u.s. medium-term note program under the u.s.
shelf registration statement described above for the issuance of
various types of debt instruments, such as fixed or floating
rate notes, u.s. dollar or foreign currency denominated notes,
redeemable notes, global notes and dual currency or other
indexed notes. in total, the company has issued
$3.049billion under the current program. the remaining
capacity under the program may be further reduced from time to
time to the extent that the company issues securities outside of
the existing u.s. medium-term note program but under the current
shelf registration statement. at september30, 2003, the
total debt outstanding under the current and prior u.s.
medium-term note programs was $8.114billion. the
maturities of current outstanding borrowings range from 1 to
90years and stated interest rates range from 0.84% to
7.55%.
other u.s. dollar denominated debt
from time to time, the company may issue bonds or
notes separately from the u.s. medium-term note program, under
shelf registration statements in effect at the time. at
september30, 2003, the total debt outstanding from these
offerings, which includes global bonds, quarterly interest bonds
(quibs), and convertible senior notes (described below) was
$1.920billion. the maturities of these outstanding
borrowings range from 1 to 28years and the stated interest
rates range from 2.1% to 7.0%.
convertible senior notes
in april2003, the company issued
$1.323billion of convertible senior notes due on
april15, 2023. these convertible senior notes are
registered under the $7.5billion shelf registration
statement. the notes bear interest at a fixed annual rate of
2.125% and are redeemable at the companys option any time
after april15, 2008 at a price of 100% of the principal
amount of the notes. the notes are redeemable at the
investors option at a price of 100% of principal amount on
april15, 2008, april15, 2013 and april15,
2018, and upon the occurrence of certain fundamental changes,
such as a change in control. the notes are convertible into
common stock, under certain circumstances, at an initial
conversion rate of 33.9443shares of common stock per
$1,000 principal amount of notes. this is equivalent to an
initial conversion price of $29.46. the conversion rate is
subject to adjustment if certain events occur, such as the
payment of dividends on the companys common stock
exclusively in the companys common stock, the issuance to
all holders of the companys common stock of rights or
warrants that allow the holders to purchase shares of the
companys common stock during a specified period of time,
and subdivision, combinations or certain reclassifications of
the companys common stock.
privately placed debt
in 1996, the company raised $850million of
privately placed financing. the notes pay 7.02% interest per
annum and amortize semi-annually. the outstanding principal as
of september30, 2003 was $343million.
european medium-term note program
in july2002, the company renewed its
european medium-term note program for the issuance of various
types of debt instruments such as fixed or floating rate notes,
u.s. dollar or foreign currency denominated notes, redeemable
notes, index linked and dual currency notes. at such time, the
program size was increased from $3.0billion to
$4.0billion. in 2003, no new debt was issued by the
company under the program. the remaining capacity to issue under
the program is $2.481billion, which is subject to market
conditions and other factors impacting our borrowing capacity.
the
-90-
table of contents
remaining capacity under the program replenishes
as outstanding debt under the program matures. at
september30, 2003, the total debt outstanding under the
program was $1.519billion. the maturities of current
outstanding borrowings range from 1 to 4years and stated
interest rates range from 0.72% to 6.26%. the company has
outstanding borrowings under the program denominated in u.s.
dollars, hong kong dollars, singapore dollars and japanese yen.
preferred stock
as a result of the abc family acquisition in
october2001, the company assumed seriesa preferred
stock with a 9% coupon and quarterly dividend payments valued at
approximately $400million with an effective cost of
capital of 5.25%. the seriesa preferred stock is callable
starting august1, 2007, and matures august1, 2027.
in july1999, a subsidiary of the company
issued $102million of auction market preferred stock
(amps). these are perpetual, non-cumulative, non-redeemable
instruments. quarterly distributions, if declared, are at the
rate of 5.427% per annum, for the first five years. amps will be
remarketed through an auction procedure in july2004. the
company is required to submit a valid bid for all the amps at
that time. based on the companys current credit rating,
the holders may require the company to remarket the amps at an
earlier date. the company has not received notification from the
amps holders to conduct an earlier auction.
the seriesa preferred stock and the amps
are classified as borrowings given their substantive similarity
to debt instruments. at september30, 2003, the total
balance outstanding was $485million.
capital cities/ abc and abc family publicly
traded debt
as a result of the abc family acquisition in
october2001, the company assumed $475million of
9 1/4% senior notes due 2007, valued at $502million
and $560million of 10 1/4% senior discount notes due
2007, valued at $589million (collectively, the abc
family notes). at september30, 2002, the remaining
fair value of the abc family notes was $892million, as the
company had repurchased $194million of the notes prior to
the stated maturity date. the abc family notes were redeemable
by abc family starting november1, 2002 and semi-annually
thereafter. abc family exercised its right to redeem the notes
and, accordingly, all of the outstanding abc family notes were
redeemed on november1, 2002 at a price of 104.625% for the
senior notes and 105.125% of the principal amount for the senior
discount notes.
as a result of the capital cities/ abc, inc.
acquisition in 1996, the company assumed various debt previously
issued by capital cities/ abc, inc. at september30, 2003,
the outstanding balance was $191million with maturities
ranging from 6 to 18years and stated interest rates
ranging from 8.75% to 9.645%.
borrowings, excluding commercial paper and market
value adjustments, have the following scheduled maturities:
$
2,393
1,737
1,524
1,409
thereafter
5,506
$
12,629
the company capitalizes interest on assets
constructed for its parks, resorts and other property and on
theatrical and television productions. in 2003, 2002 and 2001,
total interest capitalized was $33 million, $36 million and $94
million, respectively.
-91-
table of contents
8income taxes
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
domestic (including u.s.exports)
$
1,802
$
1,832
$
1,126
foreignsubsidiaries
$
2,254
$
2,190
$
1,283
income tax (benefit) provision
current
federal
$
(55
)
$
$
state
foreign (includingwithholding)
1,001
deferred
federal
(8
)
state
$
$
$
1,059
components of deferred tax assets and
liabilities
deferred tax assets
accruedliabilities
$
(1,255
)
$
(1,345
)
foreignsubsidiaries
(269
)
(233
)
retirementbenefits
(193
)
loss and creditcarryforwards
(80
)
(206
)
other,net
(17
)
(52
)
total deferred taxassets
(1,814
)
(1,836
)
deferred tax liabilities
depreciable, amortizable and otherproperty
3,036
2,967
licensing revenues
leveraged leases
investment in euro disney
retirement benefits
total deferred taxliabilities
3,778
3,735
net deferred tax liability before
valuationallowance
1,964
1,899
valuationallowance
net deferred taxliability
$
2,038
$
1,973
reconciliation of effective income tax
rate
federal income taxrate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
nondeductible amortization of
intangibleassets
18.1
state taxes, net of federalbenefit
2.3
2.6
7.5
dispositions
0.4
1.4
impairment of intangibleassets
20.6
foreign sales corporation and
extraterritorialincome
(3.1
)
(3.1
)
(1.9
)
other, including tax reserves and
relatedinterest
0.4
4.4
1.8
35.0
%
38.9
%
82.5
%
-92-
table of contents
deferred tax assets at september30, 2003
and 2002 were reduced by a valuation allowance relating to a
portion of the tax benefits attributable to certain net
operating losses (nols) reflected on state tax returns of
infoseek and its subsidiaries for periods prior to the infoseek
acquisition on november18, 1999 where applicable state
laws limit the utilization of such nols. in addition, deferred
tax assets at september30, 2003 were reduced by a
valuation allowance relating to a portion of the tax benefits
attributable to certain nols reflected on tax returns of abc
family worldwide, inc. and its subsidiaries for periods prior to
the abc family acquisition on october24, 2001 (see
note3). since the valuation allowances associated with
both acquisitions relate to acquired deferred tax assets, the
subsequent realization of these tax benefits would result in
adjustments to the allowance amount being applied as reductions
to goodwill.
at september30, 2003, approximately
$210million of nol carryforwards were available to offset
future taxable income through the year 2022. since the
acquisition of abc family constituted an ownership change as
defined under section382 of the internal revenue code, the
utilization of abc familys pre-ownership change nols is
subject to an annual limitation. however, such annual limitation
will not impair the realization of these nols.
in 2003, 2002, and 2001, income tax benefits
attributable to employee stock option transactions of
$5million, $8million and $48million,
respectively, were allocated to shareholders equity.
in 2003 the company derived tax benefits of
$71million from an exclusion provided under u.s. income
tax laws with respect to certain extraterritorial income (eti)
attributable to foreign trading gross receipts. the world trade
organization (wto) has ruled that this eti exclusion represents
a prohibited export subsidy under the wto agreement on subsidies
and countervailing measures. based upon this ruling, a wto
arbitration panel has determined that the european union (eu)
may impose up to $4billion per year in trade sanctions
against the u.s., although the eu has yet to impose such
sanctions. president bush has stated that the u.s. will change
its tax laws in order to comply with the wto ruling. various
legislative proposals providing for the repeal of the eti
exclusion have introduced broad-based international tax reforms,
but the bush administration and congress have not yet agreed
upon a solution to this issue. since the impact of this matter
upon the company depends upon the actions of the eu and the
specific provisions of any tax legislation ultimately enacted by
congress, it is not possible to predict the impact on future
financial results. however, if the eti exclusion is repealed and
legislation that would replace the eti exclusion benefit is not
enacted, the impact on the companys tax provision could be
significant.
as a matter of course, the company is regularly
audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. from time
to time, these audits result in proposed assessments. the
internal revenue service (irs)has completed its
examination of the companys federal income tax returns for
1993 through 1995 and has proposed assessments that challenge
certain of the companys tax positions. the company has
negotiated the settlement of a number of these proposed
assessments, and is pursuing an administrative appeal before the
irs with regard to the remainder. if the remaining proposed
assessments are upheld through the administrative and legal
process, they could have a material impact on the companys
earnings and cash flow. however, the company believes that its
tax positions comply with applicable tax law and intends to
defend its positions vigorously. the company believes it has
adequately provided for any reasonably foreseeable outcome
related to these matters. accordingly, although their ultimate
resolution may require additional cash tax payments, the company
does not anticipate any material earnings impact from these
matters. during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2003, the company
favorably resolved certain state income tax audit issues and the
corresponding release of $56million of related tax
reserves is reflected in the current year income tax provision.
-93-
table of contents
9pension and other benefit programs
the company maintains pension and postretirement
medical benefit plans covering most of its domestic employees
not covered by union or industry-wide plans. employees hired
after january1, 1994 and abc employees generally hired
after january1, 1987 are not eligible for postretirement
medical benefits. with respect to its qualified defined benefit
pension plans, the companys policy is to fund, at a
minimum, the amount necessary on an actuarial basis to provide
for benefits in accordance with the requirements of the employee
retirement income security act of 1974. pension benefits are
generally based on years of service and/or compensation. the
following chart summarizes the balance sheet impact, as well as
the benefit obligations, assets, funded status and rate
assumptions associated with the pension and postretirement
medical benefit plans.
postretirement
pension plans
medical plans
reconciliation of funded status of the plans
and the amounts included in the companys consolidated
balance sheets:
projected benefit obligations
beginningobligations
$
(2,889
)
$
(2,632
)
$
(680
)
$
(585
)
servicecost
(115
)
(98
)
(23
)
(22
)
interestcost
(204
)
(157
)
(48
)
(43
)
planamendments
(14
)
actuariallosses
(651
)
(76
)
(302
)
(67
)
benefitspaid
endingobligations
$
(3,747
)
$
(2,889
)
$
(1,035
)
$
(680
)
fair value of plans assets
beginning fairvalue
$
2,660
$
2,953
$
$
actual return on plans assets
(197
)
(20
)
contributions
benefits paid
(112
)
(88
)
(18
)
(19
)
expenses
(15
)
(14
)
ending fair value
$
2,655
$
2,660
$
$
funded status of theplans
$
(1,092
)
$
(229
)
$
(838
)
$
(481
)
unrecognized netloss
1,231
unrecognized prior service cost (benefit)
(20
)
(20
)
contributions after measurementdate
net balance sheetimpact
$
$
$
(323
)
$
(260
)
amounts recognized in the balance sheet
consist of:
prepaid benefitcost
$
$
$
$
accrued benefitliability
(843
)
(194
)
(340
)
(287
)
additional minimum pensionliability
adjustment
$
$
$
(323
)
$
(260
)
-94-
table of contents
the components of net periodic benefit cost are
as follows:
postretirement
pension plans
benefit plans
servicecosts
$
$
$
$
$
$
interestcosts
expected return on planassets
(262
)
(241
)
(237
)
(19
)
(21
)
(21
)
amortization of prior year servicecosts
(1
)
recognized net actuarialloss
(1
)
(18
)
net periodic benefit cost (credit)
$
$
$
(24
)
$
$
$
assumptions:
discountrate
5.85
%
7.20
%
7.50
%
5.85
%
7.20
%
7.50
%
rate of return on plansassets
7.50
%
8.50
%
9.50
%
7.50
%
8.50
%
9.50
%
salaryincreases
3.75
%
4.65
%
5.00
%
n/a
n/a
n/a
annual increase in cost ofbenefits
n/a
n/a
n/a
10.00
%
10.00
%
10.00
%
net periodic benefit cost for the current year is
based on assumptions from the prior year.
as a result of pension plan asset performance
below expected returns and a reduction of the discount rate to
5.85%, a number of the companys pension plans were
underfunded at september30, 2003, having accumulated
benefit obligations exceeding the fair value of plan assets. for
these plans, the fair value of plan assets aggregated
$2.6billion, the accumulated benefit obligations
aggregated $3.4billion and the projected benefit
obligations aggregated $3.7billion. as a result, the
company recorded an additional minimum pension liability
adjustment of $899million representing the amount by which
the accumulated benefit obligations for these plans exceeded the
related fair value of plan assets, adjusted for previously
recorded amounts on the companys balance sheet. the
after-tax adjustment of $564million was recorded as a
reduction of shareholders equity through accumulated other
comprehensive income in fiscal 2003. in the prior year, there
were fewer underfunded plans. these underfunded plans had
aggregate plan assets of $324million, accumulated benefit
obligations of $471 million and projected benefit obligations of
$495million. the additional minimum pension liability
adjustment recorded in fiscal 2002 was $70million with a
corresponding after-tax reduction of shareholders equity
of $44 million.
the companys accumulated pension benefit
obligations at september30, 2003 and 2002 were
$3.5billion and $2.6billion, respectively, of which
98.6% and 98.5%, respectively, were vested.
the market values of the companys shares
held by the pension plan master trust for these plans as of
september30, 2003 and 2002 were $56million and
$42million, respectively.
in addition, the company contributes to various
pension and other plans under union and industry-wide
agreements. in 2003, 2002 and 2001, the cost recognized under
these plans were $37million, $41million and
$40million, respectively.
the accumulated postretirement benefit
obligations and fair value of plan assets for postretirement
plans with accumulated postretirement benefit obligations in
excess of plan assets were $1,035million and
$197million, respectively for 2003, and $680million
and $199million, respectively for 2002.
certain actuarial assumptions, such as the
assumed health care cost trend rates, the assumed discount rate
and the long-term rate of return, have a significant effect on
the amounts reported for postretirement medical benefit and net
periodic pension expense as well as the respective benefit
obligation amounts. the company reviews external data and its
own historical trends for health care costs to determine the
health care cost trend rates for the postretirement medical
benefit plans. for
-95-
table of contents
2003, we assumed a 10.00% annual rate of increase
in the per capita cost of covered health care claims with the
rate decreasing in even increments over 7years until
reaching 5.0%. the assumed discount rate for pension plans
represents the market rate for high-quality fixed income
investments or a long-term high quality corporate bond rate. for
2003, we reduced our rate to 5.85% to reflect market interest
rate conditions. the long-term rate of return for plan assets is
based on current and expected asset allocations, as well as
historical and expected returns on various categories of plan
assets. we assumed an expected return on plans assets of 8.5%
for 2003.
the effect of a one percentage point decrease and
a one percentage point increase in the assumed long-term health
care cost trend rate, assumed discount rate and the long-term
rate of return on plan assets would have had the following
effects on the results for fiscal year 2003:
pension plans
expected
long-term
assumed health care
rate of
cost trend rate
assumed discount rate
return
total service
postretirement
total service
projected
and interest
medical
and interest
benefit
net
costs
obligations
costs
obligations
periodic cost
1% pointdecrease
$
(20
)
$
(186
)
$
$
$
1% pointincrease
(26
)
(541
)
(31
)
the company has savings and investment plans that
allow eligible employees to allocate up to 20% of salary through
payroll deductions depending on the plan in which the employee
participates. the company matches 50% of the employees
pre-tax contributions, up to plan limits. in 2003, 2002 and
2001, the costs of these plans were $32million,
$29million and $32million, respectively.
10shareholders equity
the company declared an annual dividend of $0.21
per share on december2, 2003 related to fiscal 2003. the
dividend is payable on january6, 2004 to shareholders of
record on december12, 2003. the company paid a
$429million dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the
first quarter of fiscal 2003 applicable to fiscal 2002, and paid
a $428million dividend ($0.21 per disney share) during the
first quarter of fiscal 2002 applicable to fiscal 2001.
in december1999, pursuant to the
companys repurchase program, the company established the
twdc stock compensation fundii to acquire shares of
company common stock for the purpose of funding certain future
stock-based compensation. the fund expired on december12,
2002. on that date, the 5,359,485 shares of the companys
common stock still owned by the fund were transferred back to
the company and were classified as treasury stock.
under its share repurchase program, the company
is authorized to repurchase approximately 330million
shares as of september30, 2003. no shares were repurchased
during the current year. during fiscal 2001, the company
repurchased a total of 63.9million shares of disney common
stock for approximately $1.1billion.
11stock incentive plans
under various plans, the company may grant stock
options and other awards to executive, management and creative
personnel at exercise prices equal to or exceeding the market
price at the date of grant. effective in january2003,
options for common stock become exercisable over a four-year
period from the grant date and expire 10years after the
date of grant. options granted prior to
-96-
table of contents
january2003 generally vest over a five-year
period from the grant date. at the discretion of the
compensation committee, options can occasionally extend up to
10years and expire no more than 15years after date
of grant. shares available for future option grants at
september30, 2003 totaled 76million.
the following table summarizes information about
stock option transactions (shares in millions):
weighted
weighted
weighted
average
average
average
exercise
exercise
exercise
shares
price
shares
price
shares
price
outstanding at beginning ofyear
$
27.48
$
29.54
$
27.24
awardscanceled
(14
)
44.41
(14
)
33.64
(13
)
36.30
awardsgranted
17.34
21.99
29.71
awardsexercised
(3
)
14.57
(2
)
18.02
(9
)
18.72
awardsexpired
(10
)
47.73
(6
)
34.72
options converted(1)
102.61
outstanding at september30
$
26.44
$
27.48
$
29.54
exercisable at september30
$
27.86
$
26.89
$
25.64
(1)
represents conversion of all outstanding dig
options into options to purchase dis options on march20,
2001 (see note 3).
the following table summarizes information about
stock options outstanding at september30, 2003 (shares in
millions):
outstanding
exercisable
range of
weighted average
weighted
weighted
exercise
number
remaining years
average
number
average
prices
of options
of contractual life
exercise price
of options
exercise price
$10 $14
2.3
$
13.91
$
13.69
$15 $19
7.9
17.38
17.89
$20 $24
6.2
21.84
21.63
$25 $29
5.5
27.08
27.10
$30 $34
6.7
31.49
31.80
$35 $39
4.9
37.31
37.48
$40 $44
7.1
41.20
40.56
$45 $395
6.4
111.40
113.59
the company granted restricted stock units to
certain executives during fiscal year 2003 and 2002. units
awarded to three executives in 2002 vest upon the achievement of
certain performance conditions. the remaining units are not
performance related and generally vest 50% two years from grant
date with the remaining 50% vesting four years from the grant
date. units are forfeited if the grantee terminates employment
prior to vesting. during the years ended september30, 2003
and 2002, the company granted restricted stock units of 2.9
million and 1.9million, respectively and recorded
compensation expense of $20.4million and
$3.4million, respectively.
the weighted average fair values of options at
their grant date during 2003, 2002 and 2001, where the exercise
price equaled the market price on the grant date, were $6.71,
$8.02 and $10.25,
-97-
table of contents
respectively. the estimated fair value of each
disney option granted is calculated using the black-scholes
option-pricing model. the weighted average assumptions used in
the model were as follows:
risk-free interestrate
3.4%
4.8%
5.0%
expected years untilexercise
6.0
6.0
6.0
expected stockvolatility
40%
30%
27%
dividendyield
1.21%
0.96%
0.70%
12detail of certain balance sheet
accounts
current receivables
accountsreceivable
$
4,018
$
3,960
other
allowance for doubtfulaccounts
(169
)
(243
)
$
4,238
$
4,049
other current assets
prepaidexpenses
$
$
other
$
$
parks, resorts and other property, at
cost
attractions, buildings andimprovements
$
9,251
$
8,984
leasehold improvements
furniture, fixtures and equipment
7,507
7,126
land improvements
2,142
2,120
19,499
18,917
accumulated depreciation
(8,794
)
(8,133
)
projects in progress
1,076
1,148
land
$
12,678
$
12,780
intangible assets
copyrights
$
$
stadium facilityleases
other amortizable intangibleassets
accumulatedamortization
(47
)
(153
)
amortizable intangibleassets
fcclicenses
1,486
1,375
trademarks
other indefinitelife intangibleassets
$
2,786
$
2,776
other non-current assets
receivables
$
$
other prepaidexpenses
prepaid benefitcosts
other
$
1,190
$
1,788
-98-
table of contents
accounts payable and other accrued
liabilities
accountspayable
$
4,095
$
3,820
payroll and employeebenefits
income taxpayable
other
$
5,044
$
5,173
other long-term liabilities
deferredrevenues
$
$
capital leaseobligations
program licenses andrights
participationliabilities
accrued benefitliability
1,183
other
1,212
1,299
$
3,745
$
3,283
13financial instruments
interest rate risk management
the company is exposed to the impact of interest
rate changes. the companys objective is to manage the
impact of interest rate changes on earnings and cash flows and
on the market value of its investments and borrowings. in
accordance with policy, the company maintains its fixed rate
debt expressed as a percentage of its net debt between a minimum
and maximum percentage.
the company typically uses pay floating and pay
fixed interest rate swaps to facilitate its interest rate risk
management activities. pay-floating swaps effectively convert
fixed rate medium and long-term obligations to variable rate
instruments indexed to libor. these swap agreements expire in
three to 19 years. pay-fixed swaps effectively convert floating
rate obligations to fixed rate instruments. the pay-fixed swaps
expire in one to eight years. as of september30, 2003 and
2002 respectively, the company held $711million and
$300million of pay-fixed swaps that do not qualify as
hedges. the changes in market values of all swaps that do not
quality as hedges have been included in earnings.
the impact of interest rate risk management
activities was not significant for fiscal 2003, 2002 and 2001.
the net amount of deferred gains and losses in aoci from
interest rate risk management transactions at september30,
2003 was immaterial while the balance at september30, 2002
was a loss of $41million.
foreign exchange risk management
the company transacts business globally and is
subject to risks associated with changing foreign exchange
rates. the companys objective is to reduce earnings and
cash flow fluctuations associated with foreign exchange rate
changes thereby enabling management to focus attention on core
business issues and challenges.
the company enters into various contracts that
change in value as foreign exchange rates change to protect the
value of its existing foreign currency assets, liabilities, firm
commitments and forecasted, but not firmly committed foreign
currency revenues. the company uses option strategies and
forward contracts to hedge forecasted revenues. in accordance
with policy, the company hedges a minimum percentage (not to
exceed a maximum percentage) of its forecasted transactions for
periods generally not to exceed five years. the company also
uses forward contracts to hedge foreign currency assets,
liabilities and firm commitments. the gains and losses on these
contracts offset gains
-99-
table of contents
or losses on the related forecasted transaction,
asset, liability or firm commitment. the principal currencies
hedged are the european euro, british pound, japanese yen and
canadian dollar. cross-currency swaps are used to effectively
convert foreign currency-denominated borrowings to u.s. dollars.
gains and losses on contracts hedging forecasted
foreign currency revenues are initially recorded to aoci, and
reclassified to current earnings when such revenues are
recognized, offsetting changes in the value of the foreign
currency revenues. at september30, 2003 and 2002, the
company had pre-tax deferred gains of $23million and
$66million, respectively, and pre-tax deferred losses of
$203million and $85million, respectively, related to
foreign currency hedge transactions.
deferred amounts to be recognized can change with
market conditions and will be substantially offset by changes in
the value of the related hedged transactions. the company
expects to reclassify a pre-tax loss of $134million to
earnings over the next twelve months. the company reclassified a
$62million after-tax loss and a $27million after-tax
gain from aoci to earnings during fiscal 2003 and 2002,
respectively, which was offset by net gains and losses on items
being hedged.
at september30, 2003 and 2002, changes in
value related to cash flow hedges included in aoci were a
pre-tax loss of $175million and $19million,
respectively. in addition, the company reclassified deferred
losses related to certain cash flow hedges from aoci to
earnings, due to the uncertainty of the timing of the original
forecasted transaction. during fiscal 2003 and 2002, the company
recorded the change in fair market value related to fair value
hedges and the ineffectiveness related to cash flow hedges to
earnings. these amounts were not material. the impact of foreign
exchange risk management activities on operating income in 2003
and in 2002 was a net loss of $273million and a gain of
$44million, respectively.
investment risk management
during 2002 and 2001, the company hedged certain
investment holdings using forward sale contracts. the contracts,
with notional amounts totaling $530million in 2002 and
2001, were terminated in october 2001. during 2003, the company
did not hedge investment holdings using forward sale contracts.
fair value of financial instruments
at september30, 2003 and 2002, the
companys financial instruments included cash, cash
equivalents, investments, receivables, accounts payable,
borrowings and interest rate, forward and foreign exchange risk
management contracts.
at september30, 2003 and 2002, the fair
values of cash and cash equivalents, receivables and accounts
payable approximated carrying values because of the short-term
nature of these instruments. the estimated fair values of other
financial instruments subject to fair value disclosures,
-100-
table of contents
determined based on broker quotes or quoted
market prices or rates for the same or similar instruments, and
the related carrying amounts are as follows:
carrying
fair
carrying
fair
amount
value
amount
value
investments
$
$
$
$
borrowings
(13,100
)
(13,692
)
(14,130
)
(14,735
)
risk management contracts:
foreign exchangeforwards
$
(131
)
$
(131
)
$
$
foreign exchangeoptions
(22
)
(22
)
interest rateswaps
forward salecontracts
cross-currencyswaps
(28
)
(28
)
$
$
$
$
credit concentrations
the company continually monitors its positions
with, and the credit quality of, the financial institutions that
are counterparties to its financial instruments, and does not
anticipate nonperformance by the counterparties. the company
would not realize a material loss as of september30, 2003
in the event of nonperformance by any single counterparty. the
company enters into transactions only with financial institution
counterparties that have a credit rating of a- or better. the
companys current policy regarding agreements with
financial institution counterparties is generally to require
collateral in the event credit ratings fall below a- or in the
event aggregate exposures exceed limits as defined by contract.
in addition, the company limits the amount of investment credit
exposure with any one institution. as of september30,
2003, counterparties had pledged a total of $49million of
cash collateral.
the companys trade receivables and
investments do not represent a significant concentration of
credit risk at september30, 2003 due to the wide variety
of customers and markets into which the companys products
are sold, their dispersion across many geographic areas, and the
diversification of the companys portfolio among
instruments and issuers.
14commitments and contingencies
the company has various contractual commitments
for the purchase of broadcast rights for feature films, sports
and other programming, aggregating approximately
$11.6billion, including approximately $900million
for available programming as of september30, 2003, and
approximately $8.8billion related to sports programming
rights, primarily nfl, nba, college football and mlb.
the company has various real estate and equipment
operating leases, including retail outlets and distribution
centers for consumer products, broadcast equipment and office
space for general and administrative purposes. rental expense
for the operating leases during 2003, 2002 and 2001, including,
common-area maintenance and contingent rentals, was
$556million, $548million and $556million,
respectively.
the company also has contractual commitments
under various creative talent and employment agreements
including obligations to actors, producers, sports personnel,
television and radio personalities and executives.
as disclosed in footnote 4, the company is
committed to make equity contributions to hong kong disneyland
totaling $243million over the next three years.
-101-
table of contents
contractual commitments, for broadcast
programming rights, future minimum lease payments under the
non-cancelable operating leases, creative talent and other
commitments totaled at $15.4billion at september30,
2003, payable as follows:
broadcast
operating
creative
programming
leases
talent
other
total
$
3,971
$
$
$
$
4,929
2,926
3,686
2,352
2,797
1,092
1,385
1,077
thereafter
1,033
1,488
$
11,625
$
2,150
$
1,115
$
$
15,362
the company has certain non-cancelable capital
leases primarily for land and broadcast equipment. future
payments under these leases as of september 30, 2003 are as
follows:
$
thereafter
total minimumobligations
less amount representinginterest
(591
)
present value of net minimumobligations
currentportion
long-termportion
$
the company has guaranteed certain special
assessment and water/sewer revenue bond series issued by the
celebration community development district and the enterprise
community development district (collectively, the districts).
the bond proceeds were used by the districts to finance the
construction of infrastructure improvements and the water and
sewer system in the mixed-use, residential community of
celebration, florida. as of september 30, 2003, the remaining
debt service obligation guaranteed by the company was
$103million, of which $62million was principal. the
company is responsible to satisfy any shortfalls in debt service
payments, debt service and maintenance reserve funds, and to
ensure compliance with specified rate covenants. to the extent
that the company has to fund payments under its guarantees, the
districts have an obligation to reimburse the company from
district revenues.
the company has also guaranteed certain bond
issuances by the anaheim public authority for a total of
$111million. the guarantee also extends to future interest
payments that will total $296million over the 40-year life
of the bond. the bond proceeds were used by the city of anaheim
to finance construction of infrastructure and a public parking
facility adjacent to the disneyland resort. revenues from sales,
occupancy and property taxes from the disneyland resort and
non-disney hotels are used by the city of anaheim to repay the
bonds. in the event of a debt service shortfall, the company
will be responsible to fund the shortfall. to the extent that
subsequent tax revenues exceed the debt service payments in
subsequent periods, the company would be reimbursed for any
previously funded shortfalls.
to date, tax revenues have exceeded the debt
service payments for both the celebration and anaheim bonds.
-102-
table of contents
the company has guaranteed payment of certain
facility and equipment leases on behalf of a third-party service
provider that supplies the company with broadcasting
transmission, post production, studio and administrative
services in the u.k. if the third-party service provider
defaults on the leases, the company would be responsible for the
remaining obligation unless the company finds another service
provider to take over the leases. as of september30, 2003,
the remaining facility and equipment lease obligation was
$72million. these leases expire in march2014.
stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney
company. in this lawsuit, filed on
february27, 1991 and pending in the los angeles county
superior court, the plaintiff claims that a company subsidiary
defrauded it and breached a 1983 licensing agreement with
respect to certain winnie the pooh properties, by failing to
account for and pay royalties on revenues earned from the sale
of winnie the pooh movies on videocassette and from the
exploitation of winnie the pooh merchandising rights. the
plaintiff seeks damages for the licensees alleged breaches
as well as confirmation of the plaintiffs interpretation
of the licensing agreement with respect to future activities.
the plaintiff also seeks the right to terminate the agreement on
the basis of the alleged breaches. the company disputes that the
plaintiff is entitled to any damages or other relief of any
kind, including termination of the licensing agreement. if each
of the plaintiffs claims were to be confirmed in a final
judgment, damages as argued by the plaintiff could total as much
as several hundred million dollars and adversely impact the
value to the company of any future exploitation of the licensed
rights. however, given the number of outstanding issues and the
uncertainty of their ultimate disposition, management is unable
to predict the magnitude of any potential determination of the
plaintiffs claims. on april24, 2003, the matter was
removed to the united states district court for the central
district of california, which, on may19, 2003, dismissed
certain claims and remanded the matter to the los angeles
superior court. the company has appealed from the district
courts order to the court of appeals for the ninth
circuit. in the meanwhile, the superior court has assigned the
case to a different judge in the courts complex litigation
pilot program. pre-trial proceedings continue in the state court.
-103-
table of contents
milne and disney enterprises, inc.v.
stephen slesinger, inc. on
november5, 2002, clare milne, the granddaughter of
a.a.milne, author of the winnie the pooh books, and
the companys subsidiary disney enterprises, inc. filed a
complaint against stephen slesinger, inc. (ssi) in
the united states district court for the central district of
california. on november4, 2002, ms.milne served
notices to ssi and the companys subsidiary terminating
a.a.milnes prior grant of rights to winnie the
pooh, effective november5, 2004, and granted all of those
rights to the companys subsidiary. in their lawsuit,
ms.milne and the companys subsidiary seek a
declaratory judgment, under united states copyright law, that
ms.milnes termination notices were valid; that
ssis rights to winnie the pooh in the united states will
terminate effective november5, 2004; that upon termination
of ssis rights in the united states, the 1983 licensing
agreement that is the subject of the stephen slesinger, inc.
v. the walt disney company lawsuit will terminate by
operation of law; and that, as of november5, 2004, ssi
will be entitled to no further royalties for uses of winnie the
pooh. in january2003, ssi filed (a)an answer denying
the material allegations of the complaint and
(b)counterclaims seeking a declaration (i)that
ms.milnes grant of rights to disney enterprises,
inc. is void and unenforceable and (ii)that disney
enterprises, inc. remains obligated to pay ssi royalties under
the 1983 licensing agreement. ssi also filed a motion to dismiss
the complaint or, in the alternative, for summary judgment. on
may8, 2003, the court ruled that milnes termination
notices are invalid and dismissed ssis counterclaims as
moot. following further motions, on august1, 2003, ssi
filed an amended answer and counterclaims and a third-party
complaint against harriet hunt (heir to e.h. shepard,
illustrator of the original winnie the pooh stories), who had
served a notice of termination and a grant of rights similar to
ms.milnes. by order dated october27, 2003, the
court certified an interlocutory appeal from its may 8 order to
the court of appeals for the ninth circuit and milne and disney
have petitioned the court of appeal accordingly.
management believes that it is not currently
possible to estimate the impact, if any, that the ultimate
resolution of these matters will have on the companys
results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
kohnv. the walt disney company, et
al. on august15, 2002, aaron
kohn filed a class action lawsuit against the company, its chief
executive officer and its chief financial officer in the united
states district court for the central district of california on
behalf of a putative class consisting of purchasers of the
companys common stock between august15, 1997 and
may15, 2002. subsequently, at least nine substantially
identical lawsuits were also filed in the same court, each
alleging that the defendants violated federal securities laws by
not disclosing the pendency and potential implications of the
stephen slesinger, inc. lawsuit described above prior to
the companys filing of its quarterly report on
form10-q in may2002. the plaintiffs claim that this
alleged nondisclosure constituted a fraud on the market that
artificially inflated the companys stock price, and
contend that a decline in the stock price resulted from the
may2002 disclosure. the plaintiffs seek compensatory
damages and/or rescission for themselves and all members of
their defined class. several of the plaintiffs have filed
motions asking the court to appoint lead plaintiffs and counsel,
and to consolidate the related actions into a single case. on
december10, 2002, plaintiffs motion to consolidate
the related actions into a single case was granted, and their
motion for appointment of lead plaintiffs and counsel was
granted on february21, 2003. on or about april7,
2003, plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended class action
complaint and on may22, 2003, defendants moved to dismiss
the complaint. the court granted defendants motion and the
case was dismissed with prejudice on october24, 2003.
the company, together with, in some instances,
certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant or
co-defendant in various other legal actions involving copyright,
breach of contract and various other claims incident to the
conduct of its businesses. management does not expect the
company to suffer any material liability by reason of such
actions.
-104-
table of contents
15restructuring and impairment
charges
the company recorded restructuring and impairment
charges for the years ended september30, 2003, 2002 and
2001 summarized as follows:
go.com intangible assetsimpairment
$
$
$
go.com severance, fixed asset write-offs
andother
investmentimpairments
workforce reduction andother
chicago disneyquestclosure
assetimpairment
disney storeclosures
total restructuring and impairmentcharges
$
$
$
1,454
the company operates 474 disney stores in north
america and europe. during fiscal 2003, the company announced
that it was pursuing strategic options for the disney store,
including the possible sale of stores in north america and
europe, in order to focus on its core competencies and
activities intended to increase capital returns. in connection
with preparing the chain for sale, the company expects to close
a certain number of underperforming stores in north america.
during fiscal 2003, the company recorded charges
totaling $16million, principally reflecting fixed asset
write-downs related to the stores it expects to close (and
certain related facilities) and the cost of certain
administrative headcount reductions. fixed assets associated
with the stores identified for closure have been written down to
their fair value, determined on the basis of estimated future
discounted cash flows through the expected date of the closures.
the charges are reported in restructuring and impairment charges
in the consolidated statements of income.
as store closures occur, the company expects to
incur additional charges related to lease termination costs and
other actions that may be taken in connection with the
disposition of the stores. total future base rent commitments
for the disney stores in north america and europe totaled
approximately $395million as of september30, 2003.
of these commitments, it is anticipated that the company will
bear the cost of those associated with the stores that will be
closed, and that a buyer would assume those associated with
stores that are sold. total future base rent commitments for the
stores that the company expects to close were approximately
$54million as of september30, 2003. in conjunction
with the sale negotiations, the company will undertake
negotiations with lessors to seek favorable lease termination
terms for stores that will be closed, but will likely incur
charges related to the lease terminations in the second and
third quarters of fiscal 2004. it is not possible at this time
to determine what amount will ultimately be paid to terminate
these leases. the disney store results are in the consumer
products operating segment.
management believes that the company will recover
its investment in stores that will be sold; however, it is
possible that certain stores currently identified for sale may
ultimately be closed which could result in additional charges.
in 2001, the company recorded restructuring and
impairment charges totaling $1.45billion. the go.com
charge was for the closure of the go.com portal business and
includes a non-cash write-off of intangible assets totaling
$820million. the investment impairment was a non-cash
charge for other-than-temporary declines in the fair value of
certain internet investments. the workforce reduction charges
are primarily for severance costs and are discussed more fully
below. the disneyquest and disney store closure charges were for
the closure of the chicago facility and approximately 100 disney
stores and includes the write-down of fixed assets and leasehold
improvements, leasehold termination costs, severance and other
related closure costs. the asset
-105-
table of contents
impairment charge was for certain long-lived
assets, primarily at the disney store and disney catalog. these
assets were evaluated for impairment under a held for use model
due to declining cash flows. fair value was generally determined
based on discounted cash flows.
during the third quarter of fiscal 2001, the
company initiated a plan to eliminate 4,000 full-time jobs
through a combination of voluntary and involuntary reductions.
the reduction affected employees in all business units and
geographic regions. the $111million of costs associated
with the workforce reduction consist primarily of severance
costs and write-offs of idled facilities. as of
september30, 2003, the company had completed its workforce
reduction.
-106-
table of contents
quarterly financial summary
(in millions, except per share data)
(unaudited)
december 31
march 31
june 30
september 30
2003(1)
revenues
$
7,170
$
6,500
$
6,377
$
7,014
segment operatingincome
1,048
income before the cumulative effect of
accountingchange
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting change:
diluted
$
0.06
$
0.15
$
0.24
$
0.20
basic
0.06
0.15
0.25
0.20
revenues
$
7,016
$
5,856
$
5,795
$
6,662
segment operatingincome
netincome
earnings per share:
diluted
$
0.21
$
0.13
$
0.18
$
0.09
basic
0.21
0.13
0.18
0.09
adjusted fiscal 2002 earnings per share had
eitf00-21 been applied as of the beginning of fiscal
2002(2):
diluted
$
0.12
$
0.17
$
0.22
$
0.07
basic
0.12
0.17
0.22
0.07
(1)
income and earnings per share before the
cumulative effect of accounting change does not reflect one-time
after-tax charges for the adoption of eitf00-21 totaling
$71million ($0.03 per share) in the first quarter of 2003.
see note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
(2)
see note2 to the consolidated financial
statements for more detail on the impact of the adoption of
eitf00-21.
-107-
