10-k
v03881e10vk.htm
the walt disney company - september 30, 2004
e10vk
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of
the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended september30, 2004
commission file number 1-11605
incorporated in delaware
500 south buena vista street, burbank, california 91521
(818) 560-1000
i.r.s. employer identification no.
95-4545390
securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
name of each exchange
title of each class
on which registered
common stock, $.01 par value
new york stock exchange
pacific stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to
section12(g) of the act: none.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months, and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.
yesno
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to rule 405 of regulations-k is
not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.
[]
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
an accelerated filer (as defined in rule12b-2 of the act).
yesno
the aggregate market value of common stock held
by non-affiliates (based on the closing price on the last
business day of the registrants most recently completed
second fiscal quarter as reported on the new york stock
exchange-composite transactions) was $51.3billion. all
executive officers and directors of the registrant and all
persons filing a schedule13d with the securities and
exchange commission in respect to registrants common stock
have been deemed, solely for the purpose of the foregoing
calculation, to be affiliates of the registrant.
there were 2,043,283,262shares of common
stock outstanding as of december6, 2004.
documents incorporated by reference
certain information required for part iii of this
report is incorporated herein by reference to the proxy
statement for the 2005 annual meeting of the companys
shareholders.
the walt disney company and
subsidiaries
table of contents
page
part i
item 1.
business
item 2
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a
vote of security holders
executive officers of the
company
part ii
item 5.
market for the
companys common equity, related stockholder matters and
issue repurchases of equity securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative
disclosures about market risk
item 8.
financial statements and
supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements
with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
item 9b.
other information
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive
officers of the company
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of
certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
item 13.
certain relationships and
related transactions
item 14.
principal accountant fees
and services
part iv
item 15.
exhibits and financial
statement schedules
signatures
consolidated financial
information  the walt disney company
ex-10.aa
ex-10.bb
ex-10.cc
ex-21
ex-23
ex-31.a
ex-31.b
ex-32.a
ex-32.b
table of contents
[this page intentionally left blank]
table of contents
part i
item 1.business
the walt disney company, together with its
subsidiaries, is a diversified worldwide entertainment company
with operations in four business segments: media networks, parks
and resorts, studio entertainment and consumer products. for
convenience, the terms company and we
are used to refer collectively to the parent company and the
subsidiaries through which our various businesses are actually
conducted.
information on revenues, operating income,
identifiable assets and supplemental revenue of the
companys business segments and by geographical area
appears in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements
included in item8 hereof. the company employed
approximately 129,000 people as of september30, 2004.
media networks
the media networks segment is comprised of
television broadcast, radio and cable operations. the television
broadcast businesses include the abc television network as well
as ten owned stations. radio operations consist of the abc radio
networks and 71 owned stations. cable operations consist
primarily of the espn and disney channel networks.
domestic broadcast television
networks
the company operates the abc television network,
which as of september30, 2004 had 226 primary affiliated
stations operating under agreements reaching 99% of all u.s.
television households. the abc television network broadcasts
programs in dayparts as follows: early morning,
daytime, late night, prime time, news, children and sports.
generally, the television network produces its
own programs or acquires broadcast rights from other producers
and rights holders for network programming, and pays varying
amounts of compensation to affiliated stations for broadcasting
the programs and commercial announcements included therein.
network operations derives substantially all of its revenues
from the sale to advertisers of time in network programs for
commercial announcements. the ability to sell time for
commercial announcements and the rates received are primarily
dependent on the size and nature of the audience that the
network can deliver to the advertiser as well as overall
advertiser demand for time on network broadcasts.
domestic broadcast television
stations
we own nine very high frequency
(vhf)television stations, five of which are located in the
top ten markets in the united states and one ultra high
frequency (uhf)television station. our television
stations, all of which are affiliated with the abc television
network, transmitting both analog and digital signals, reach 24%
of the nations television households.
-1-
table of contents
markets, frequencies and other station details
are as follows:
television
analog
market
market
tv station
channel
ranking(1)
new york, ny
wabc-tv
los angeles, ca
kabc-tv
chicago, il
wls-tv
philadelphia, pa
wpvi-tv
san francisco, ca
kgo-tv
houston, tx
ktrk-tv
raleigh-durham, nc
wtvd-tv
fresno, ca
kfsn-tv
flint, mi
wjrt-tv
toledo, oh
wtvg-tv
(1)
based on nielsen media research, u.s. television
household estimates, january1, 2004
cable/satellite networks and international
broadcast operations
our cable/satellite and international broadcast
operations are principally involved in the distribution of
television programming, the licensing of programming to domestic
and international markets and investing in foreign television
broadcasting, production and distribution entities.
generally, the cable networks produce their own
programs or acquire programming rights from other producers and
rights holders for network programming. cable operations derive
substantially all of their revenues from affiliate fees charged
to cable service providers and/or the sale to advertisers of
time in network programs for commercial announcements. the
amounts that we can charge for our cable services are largely
dependent on competition and the quality and quantity of
programming that we can provide. the ability to sell time for
commercial announcements and the rates received are primarily
dependent on the size and nature of the audience that the
network can deliver to the advertiser as well as overall
advertiser demand.
cable properties, the companys ownership
percentage and subscribers as of september30, 2004 are set
forth in the following table:
subscribers
property
ownership %
(in millions)
espn
80.0
espn2
80.0
espn classic
80.0
espnews
80.0
disney channel
100.0
international disney channels
100.0
toon disney
100.0
soapnet
100.0
abc family channel
100.0
jetix europe
75.1
jetix latin america
100.0
a&e
37.5
the history channel
37.5
the biography channel
37.5
-2-
table of contents
subscribers
property
ownership %
(in millions)
history international
37.5
a&e international
37.5
lifetime television
50.0
lifetime movie network
50.0
lifetime real women
50.0
e! entertainment television
39.6
style
39.6
the company has various other international
investments in broadcast and cable properties in addition to
those listed in the above table.
espn. espn, inc.
operates five domestic television sports networks: espn, espn2,
espn classic, espnews (which is a stand-alone network or a
wraparound service for some regional sports networks) and espn
deportes (a spanish language network launched in january 2004).
espn also operates a high-definition television simulcast
service, espnhd. espn, inc. owns, has equity interests in,
or has distribution agreements with 29international
networks, reaching households in more than 190countries
and territories. in addition, espn holds a 50% equity interest
in espn star sports, which delivers sports programming
throughout most of asia, a 70% equity interest in espn classic
europe, llc., which delivers classic sports programming
throughout europe, and a 29.92% equity interest in ctv specialty
television, inc., which owns the sports network, le rseau
des sports, espn classic canada, the nhl network and discovery
canada, among other media properties in canada.
espn also operates several other brand
extensions, including espn.com, an internet sports content
provider; espn regional television; espn radio, which is
distributed through the abc radio networks; espn the magazine;
bass, the largest fishing organization in the world; espn
enterprises, which develops branded licensing opportunities, and
the espn zone sports-themed dining and entertainment facilities
which are included in the parks and resorts segment. espn also
provides content for newer technologies such as broadband,
wireless, and video-on-demand.
disney channel.
disney channel is a cable and
satellite television service. shows developed for initial
exhibition on disney channel include comedy series such as the
live-action series thats so raven and phil of
the future; animated programming including brandy &
mr.whiskers and dave the barbarian, both
produced by walt disney television animation; and educational
preschool series like higglytown heroes, jojos circus
for the channels playhouse disney programming block,
as well as projects for its popular disney channel original
movie franchise. the balance of the programming consists of
products acquired from third parties and products from our owned
theatrical film and television programming library.
disney channel also reaches outside of the united
states of america via its international operations. programming
on these operations consists primarily of the companys
theatrical film and television programming library, products
acquired from third parties and locally produced programming. we
continue to explore the development of disney channel in other
countries around the world.
-3-
table of contents
international disney channels, and launch dates
are set forth in the following table:
channel
launch date
taiwan
march 1995
uk
october 1995
australia
june 1996
malaysia(1)
october 1996
france
march 1997
middle east
april 1997
spain
april 1998
italy
october 1998
germany
october 1999
philippines(1)
january 2000
singapore(1)
february 2000
brunei(1)
february 2000
north latin america(2)
july 2000
south latin america(2)
july 2000
brazil
april 2001
portugal
november 2001
south korea(1)
march 2002
indonesia(1)
july 2002
sweden(3)
february 2003
norway(3)
february 2003
denmark(3)
february 2003
japan
november 2003
new zealand(4)
december 2003
hong kong(1)
march 2004
india
december 2004
(1)
represents feed extensions from the asia regional
channel.
(2)
represents feed extensions from the latin america
regional channel.
(3)
represents feed extensions from the scandinavian
regional channel.
(4)
represents feed extensions from the australian
regional channel.
toon disney. toon
disney which was launched in 1998, is intended to appeal to
children and features an array of family-friendly, predominantly
animated programming from the disney library and is the
primetime home of jetix. this year, toon disney added several
new series in the jetix block including spider-man, power
rangers dinothunder, beyblade vforce, digimon and the
original animated series super robot monkey team hyperforce
go!, produced by walt disney television animation.
soapnet. soapnet was
launched in january 2000 and offers a wide variety of soap opera
and related programming 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
soapnets primetime schedule features same-day repeat
telecasts of the top-rated daytime series including all my
children, days of our lives, one life to live and general
hospital. in addition, the network provides inside access to
stars and storylines with original programs, including the
emmy-nominated one-hour talk show, soap talk and the
biography show soapography. soapnet also offers primetime
classics including melrose place,
-4-
table of contents
dynasty, dallas and
knots landing, as well as former daytime series port
charles, ryans hope and another world.
abc family. in
october 2001, the company acquired fox family worldwide, inc.,
which was renamed abc family worldwide, inc. abc family operates
the abc family channel, a television programming service, jetix
europe (formerly known as fox kids europe), and jetix latin
america (formerly known as fox kids latin america.) abc family
channel programming consists of product acquired from third
parties and the abc television network and products from our
owned theatrical film library along with original programming.
original programming includes romantic comedy movies, reality
series, scripted half-hour comedies, entertainment specials and
action series.
a&e. the a&e
television networks are television programming services devoted
to cultural and entertainment programming. the networks include
a&e, a&e international, the history channel, history
international, a network that provides viewers with a window
into non-u.s. perspectives, and the biography channel, launched
in 1998, which is dedicated to exploration of the lives of
exceptional people.
lifetime. lifetime
entertainment services owns lifetime television, which is
devoted to womens lifestyle programming. during 1998,
lifetime launched the lifetime movie network, a 24-hour channel.
lifetime real women is lifetime televisions other sister
channel.
e! entertainment. e!
entertainment television is a television programming service
focused on the entertainment world. e! entertainment television
also launched style, in 1998, a 24-hour television service
devoted to style, beauty and home design.
the companys share of the financial results
of a&e, lifetime, e! entertainment as well as other
broadcast and cable equity investments is reported under the
heading equity in the income of investees in the
companys consolidated statements of income.
television production and
distribution
we also develop and produce television
programming for distribution to global broadcasters and cable
and satellite operators, including the major television
networks, disney channel and other cable and satellite networks,
under the buena vista television, buena vista production,
touchstone television and walt disney television labels. program
development is carried out in collaboration with a number of
independent writers, producers and creative teams, with a focus
on the development, production and distribution of half-hour
comedies and one-hour dramas for network primetime broadcast.
the one-hour drama alias and the half-hour comedies my
wife and kids, according to jim, scrubs (for
nbc), 8simple rules, less than perfect and
hope and faith were all renewed for the 2004/2005
television season. in addition, according to jim will
enter the syndication market in 2006. new primetime series that
premiered in the fall of 2004 included the half-hour comedy
rodney, and the one-hour dramas kevin hill (for
upn), lost, life as we know it and
desperate housewives. planned midseason shows include the
one-hour drama greys anatomy. for the abc family
channel, the company produces the successful childrens
program, power ranger dino thunder, the latest version of
the popular power rangers franchise.
under the walt disney television and buena vista
television labels the company develops and produces animated
childrens television programming for distribution to
global broadcasters, including disney channel, the abc
television network, and other cable broadcasters.
the fall 2004 season on disney channel sees the
return of disneys kim possible and disneys
lilo & stitch with new episodes. upcoming disney channel
series premieres include disneys american dragon: jake
long in early 2005. the 2004/2005 abc saturday morning
television season returns under the name abc kids. abc kids is a
line-up of animated and live-action series that include,
lizzie mcguire, power rangers, the proud family,
disneys lilo and stitch, thats so raven,
disneys fillmore, disneys kim possible as well
as phil of the future.
-5-
table of contents
the company also licenses its animated television
properties in a number of foreign television markets. in
addition, we syndicate certain of our television programs
abroad, including the disney club, a weekly series produced for
foreign markets.
the company also produces original television
movies for the wonderful world of disney, which the abc
network airs on saturday evenings.
we also produce a variety of primetime specials
for exhibition on network television, as well as live-action
syndicated programming, which includes live! with regis and
kelly and the tony danza show, daily talk shows,
ebert & roeper, a weekly motion picture review
program, and game shows, such as who wants to be a
millionaire.
domestic broadcast radio networks and
stations
we also operate the abc radio networks, which
provide programming to nearly 4,800affiliated radio
stations reaching approximately 124million domestic
listeners weekly. we own 51 standard am radio stations and
20fm radio stations. the abc radio networks produce and
distribute to affiliates a variety of programs and formats,
including abc news radio and other news network programming,
syndicated talk and music programs, abc sports programming and
24-hour music formats. in addition, the abc radio networks
produce radio disney, a 24-hour music and talk format intended
to appeal to children and their parents. radio disney is carried
in 57markets, covering more than 61percent of the
u.s.market. abc radio networks also distributes the espn
radio format, which is carried on more than 700stations,
including 275full-time (five of which are owned by the
company), making it the largest radio sports network in the
united states.
of the companys 41owned radio
stations located in the top 20 u.s.advertising markets, 23
carry predominantly locally originated music and talk
programming, 13 carry the radio disney format and four carry the
espn radio format. of the companys 30radio stations
in the non-top-20 markets, 27carry the radio disney
format. our radio stations reach 16million people weekly
in the top 20united states advertising markets.
the business model for the radio networks is
substantially the same as the abc television network.
markets, frequencies and other station details
are as follows:
radio
radio
market
market
station
frequency
ranking(1)
new york, ny
wabc
am
new york, ny
wplj
fm
new york, ny
wepn
am
los angeles, ca
kabc
am
los angeles, ca
kspn
am
los angeles, ca
kdis
am
los angeles, ca
klos
fm
chicago, il
wls
am
chicago, il
wmvp
am
chicago, il
wrdz
am
chicago, il
wzzn
fm
san francisco, ca
kgo
am
san francisco, ca
ksfo
am
san francisco, ca
kmky
am
dallas-fort worth, tx
wbap
am
dallas-fort worth, tx
kmki
am
-6-
table of contents
radio
radio
market
market
station
frequency
ranking(1)
dallas-fort worth, tx
ktys
fm
dallas-fort worth, tx
kscs
fm
dallas-fort worth, tx
kesn
fm
philadelphia, pa
wwjz
am
houston, tx
kmic
am
washington, d.c.
wmal
am
washington, d.c.
wrqx
fm
washington, d.c.
wjzw
fm
boston, ma
wmki
am
detroit, mi
wjr
am
detroit, mi
wdvd
fm
detroit, mi
wdrq
fm
atlanta, ga
wdwd
am
atlanta, ga
wkhx
fm
atlanta, ga
wyay
fm
miami, fl
wmym
am
seattle, wa
kkdz
am
phoenix, az
kmik
am
minneapolis, mn
kdiz
am
minneapolis, mn
kqrs
fm
minneapolis, mn
kxxr
fm
minneapolis, mn(2)
wgvx
fm
minneapolis, mn(2)
wgvy
fm
minneapolis, mn(2)
wgvz
fm
st. louis, mo
wsdz
am
tampa, fl
wwmi
am
denver, co
kddz
am
pittsburgh, pa
weae
am
portland, or
kdzr
am
portland, or
kksl
am
cleveland, oh
wwmk
am
sacramento, ca
kiid
am
kansas city, mo
kphn
am
san antonio, tx
krdy
am
salt lake city, ut
kwdz
am
milwaukee, wi
wksh
am
providence, ri
wddz
am
charlotte, nc
wgfy
am
orlando, fl
wdyz
am
norfolk, va
whkt
am
norfolk, va
wpmh
am
indianapolis, in
wrdz
fm
new orleans, la
wbyu
am
west palm beach, fl
wmne
am
hartford, ct
wdzk
am
jacksonville, fl
wbwl
am
louisville, ky
wdrd
am
richmond, va
wdzy
am
-7-
table of contents
radio
radio
market
market
station
frequency
ranking(1)
albany, ny
wddy
am
tulsa, ok
kmus
am
albuquerque, nm
kaly
am
little rock, ar
kdis
fm
mobile, al
wqua
fm
wichita, ks
kqam
am
flint, mi
wfdf
am
(1)
based on 2004 arbitron radio market rank
(2)
the three radio signals are operated as a single
station
internet
the internet operations of the media networks
segment develop, publish and distribute content for online and
wireless services intended to appeal to broad consumer interest
in sports, news, family and entertainment. internet web sites
and products include abc.com, abcnews.com, disney.com, espn.com
and enhanced tv. the companys internet operations derive
revenue from a combination of advertising and sponsorships,
subscription services and e-commerce.
abc.com is the official web site of the abc
television network, while abcnews.com draws on the knowledge and
expertise of abc news correspondents throughout the world.
abcnews.com offers subscription broadband services that provide
on-demand access to leading abc news shows, such as world
news tonight with peter jennings and nightline,
through alliances with aol broadband, comcast and real
networks.
disney.com is a centralized disney web site which
integrates many of the companys disney-branded internet
sites including sites for the disney channel, the disney store
online, walt disney parks and resorts, and walt disney pictures.
enhanced tv provides interactive television
programming and advertising services during abc telecasts, such
as monday night football.
espn.com delivers comprehensive sports news,
information and video to millions of fans each month. espn.com
averages 16million users per month.
competition
the abc television network, disney channel, espn,
abc family channel and our other broadcast and cable/satellite
services compete for viewers primarily with other television
networks, independent television stations and other video media,
such as cable and satellite television programming services,
videocassettes and dvds and the internet. in the sale of
advertising time, the broadcasting operations compete with other
television networks, independent television stations, suppliers
of cable/satellite services and other advertising media such as
newspapers, magazines, billboards and the internet. the abc
radio networks likewise compete with other radio networks and
radio programming services, independent radio stations and other
advertising media.
the companys television and radio stations
compete with other television and radio stations, cable and
satellite programming services, videocassettes, dvds and other
advertising media such as newspapers, magazines, billboards and
the internet. competition occurs primarily in individual market
areas. a television or radio station in one market generally
does not compete directly with stations in other market areas.
-8-
table of contents
the growth in the cable/satellite industrys
share of viewers has resulted in increased competitive pressures
for advertising revenues. the companys cable/satellite
networks also face competition for carriage by cable and
satellite service operators and distributors. the companys
contractual agreements with cable and satellite operators are
renewed or renegotiated from time to time in the ordinary course
of business. consolidation and other market conditions in the
cable and satellite distribution industry and other factors may
adversely affect the companys ability to obtain and
maintain contractual terms for the distribution of its various
cable and satellite programming services that are as favorable
as those currently in place.
the companys media networks segment also
competes for the acquisition of sports and other programming.
the market for programming is very competitive, particularly the
markets for sports programming. the company currently has sports
rights agreements with the four major professional sports
organizations nfl, nba, mlb and nhl as
well as for other sporting events, including, the college
football bowl championship series, various college football and
basketball conferences, the pga tour, and the indy racing league
including the indianapolis500. the current agreement with
the nfl expires after the telecast of the 2006 pro bowl.
events of this kind for which the company secures
rights from third parties are an integral part of our
programming strategy and, when combined with news and
information and original programming, enable us to deliver a
full complement of sports assets to our fans, advertisers and
distributors.
federal regulation
television and radio broadcasting are subject to
extensive regulation by the fcc under federal laws and
regulations, including the communications act of 1934, as
amended. violation of fcc regulations can result in substantial
monetary forfeitures, limited renewals of licenses and, in
egregious cases, denial of license renewal or revocation of a
license. fcc regulations that affect our media networks segment
include the following:
licensing of television and radio stations.
each of the television and radio
stations we own must be licensed by the fcc. these licenses are
granted for periods of up to eight years, and we must obtain
renewal of licenses as they expire in order to continue
operating the stations. we must also obtain fcc approval
whenever we seek to have a license transferred in connection
with the acquisition of a station. the fcc may decline to renew
or approve the transfer of a license in certain circumstances.
although we have generally received such renewals and approvals
in the past, there can be no assurance that we will always
obtain necessary renewals and approvals in the future.
television and radio station ownership limits.
the fcc imposes limitations on the
number of television stations and radio stations we can own in a
specific market, on the combined number of television and radio
stations we can own in a single market and on the aggregate
percentage of the national audience that can be reached by
television stations we own. currently:
fcc regulations permit us to own an additional
television station in all of the markets in which we have
television stations except toledo, ohio, flint, michigan, and
raleigh durham, north carolina. we do not own more
than one television station in any of the ten markets in which
we own a television station.
federal statutes permit our stations in the
aggregate to reach a maximum of 39% of the national audience
(and fcc regulations attribute uhf television stations with only
50% of the television households in their market). our stations
reached approximately 24percent of the national audience,
(approximately 23percent when calculated using the
fccs attribution rule).
-9-
table of contents
fcc regulations in some cases impose restrictions
on our ability to acquire additional radio or television
stations in the markets in which we own radio stations, but we
do not believe any such limitations are material to our current
business plans.
in july 2003, the fcc adopted revised limits on
television and radio station ownership. the rules adopted in
this order generally would relax existing ownership restrictions
and would permit entities to own more television and radio
stations in some markets, but would also eliminate the 50%
discount for calculating households reached by uhf television
stations operated by the top four broadcast television networks
(including abc). the effectiveness of the new rules, however,
was stayed by a federal court order, and the fcc has been
ordered to review the rules. as a result, most of the revised
rules adopted by the fcc in july 2003 are not in effect.
although it is possible that the fcc may implement more liberal
media ownership rules than those currently in effect (other than
those governed by statute), we cannot predict whether the
revised rules will be implemented and if so, when such rules
will become effective.
dual networks. fcc
rules currently prohibit any of the four major television
networks abc, cbs, fox and nbc from
being under common ownership or control. the new fcc rules, if
implemented, would not modify this limitation.
regulation of programming.
the fcc regulates programming by,
among other things, banning indecent programming and
imposing restrictions and commercial time limits on political
advertising. broadcasters face a heightened risk of being found
in violation of the indecency prohibition because of recent fcc
decisions, coupled with the spontaneity of live programming.
recently, the fcc has indicated that it is stepping up
enforcement activities as they apply to indecency, and has
indicated it would consider license revocation for serious
violations. moreover, legislation has been introduced in
congress that would increase penalties for broadcasting indecent
programming.
federal legislation and fcc rules also limit the
amount of commercial matter that may be shown on broadcast or
cable channels during programming designed for children
12years of age and younger. in addition, broadcast
channels are generally required to provide a minimum of three
hours per week of programming that has as a significant
purpose meeting the educational and informational needs of
children 17years of age and younger. fcc rules also give
television station owners the right to reject or refuse network
programming in certain circumstances or to substitute
programming that the licensee reasonably believes to be of
greater local or national importance.
cable and satellite carriage of broadcast
television stations. with respect to
cable systems operating within a television stations
designated market area, fcc rules require that every three years
each television station elect either must carry
status, pursuant to which cable operators must carry a local
television station in the stations market, or
retransmission consent status, pursuant to which the
cable operator is required to negotiate with the television
station to obtain the consent of the television station for
carriage of its signal. under the satellite home improvement
act, satellite carriers are permitted to retransmit a local
television stations signal into its local market with the
consent of the local television station. if a satellite carrier
elects to carry one local station in a market, the satellite
carrier must carry the signals of all local television stations
that also request carriage. certain of these satellite carriage
provisions are set to expire on december31, 2004; however,
congress is currently considering legislation that would extend
this term to december31, 2009. we cannot predict whether
this legislation, or other similar legislation, will become law.
digital television.
fcc rules currently require full-power
analog television stations, such as ours, to provide digital
service on a second broadcast channel granted specifically for
the phase-in of digital broadcasting. fcc rules also regulate
digital broadcasting to ensure continued quality carriage of
mandated free over-the-air program service. all of the com-
-10-
table of contents
panys stations have launched digital
facilities, and we are evaluating various options with respect
to use of digital channels. under current law, all broadcasters
are required to operate exclusively in digital mode and
permanently surrender one of their two channels by
december31, 2006. however, the fcc has the authority in
certain circumstances to extend this deadline in a particular
market upon the request of a station. on september7, 2004,
the fcc established intermediate deadlines by which stations
must proceed with the transition to digital, but deferred any
determination as to how it would interpret its authority to
extend the december31, 2006 deadline in a particular
market.
the foregoing is a brief summary of certain
provisions of the communications act and other legislation and
of specific fcc rules and policies. this summary focuses on
provisions material to our business. reference should be made to
the communications act, other legislation, fcc rules and public
notices and rulings of the fcc for further information
concerning the nature and extent of the fccs regulatory
authority.
fcc laws and regulations are subject to change,
and the company generally cannot predict whether new
legislation, court action or regulations, or a change in the
extent of application or enforcement of current laws and
regulations, would have an adverse impact on our operations.
parks and resorts
the company owns and operates the walt disney
world resort and disney cruise line in florida, the disneyland
resort in california, espn zone facilities in several states and
the mighty ducks of anaheim. the company manages and has
ownership interests in the disneyland resort paris in france
(also referred to as euro disney) and hong kong disneyland,
which is under construction and scheduled to open in fiscal
2005. the companys ownership interests in disneyland
resort paris and hong kong disneyland are 41% and 43%,
respectively. the company adopted financial accounting standards
board (fasb) interpretation no.46r consolidation of
variable interest entities (fin 46r) in fiscal 2004 and as a
result, consolidated the balance sheets of euro disney and hong
kong disneyland as of march31, 2004, and the income and
cash flow statements beginning april1, 2004 (see notes 2
and 4 to the consolidated financial statements for further
discussion). the company also licenses the operations of the
tokyo disney resort in japan. the companys walt disney
imagineering unit designs and develops new theme park concepts
and attractions as well as resort properties.
the businesses in the parks and resorts segment
generate revenues predominately from the sale of admissions to
the theme parks, room nights at the hotel and rentals at the
resort properties. costs consist primarily of the fixed cost
base for physical properties and base level staffing necessary
to operate the theme park and resort properties. in addition to
the fixed cost base, there is a variable cost component that
increases or decreases with the volume of business.
walt disney world resort
the walt disney world resort is located
15miles southwest of orlando, florida on approximately
30,500acres of land owned by company subsidiaries. the
resort includes theme parks (the magic kingdom, epcot,
disney-mgm studios and disneys animal kingdom); hotels;
vacation ownership units; a retail, dining and entertainment
complex; a sports complex; conference centers; campgrounds; golf
courses; water parks and other recreational facilities designed
to attract visitors for an extended stay.
the entire walt disney world resort is marketed
through a variety of national, international and local
advertising and promotional activities. several attractions in
each of the theme parks are sponsored by corporate participants.
magic
kingdom the magic kingdom,
which opened in 1971, consists of seven themed lands: main
street usa, adventureland, fantasyland, frontierland, liberty
square, mickeys toontown fair
-11-
table of contents
and tomorrowland. each land provides a unique
guest experience, featuring themed rides and attractions, live
disney character interaction, restaurants, refreshment areas and
merchandise shops. additionally, there are daily parades and a
nighttime fireworks extravaganza wishes.
epcot
epcot, which opened in 1982, consists of two major themed areas:
future world and world showcase. future world dramatizes certain
historical developments and addresses the challenges facing the
world today through major pavilions devoted to showcasing
science and technology improvements, communication, energy,
transportation, using your imagination, life and health, nature
and food production, the ocean environment, and space. world
showcase presents a community of nations focusing on the
culture, traditions and accomplishments of people around the
world. countries represented with pavilions include the united
states, canada, china, france, germany, italy, japan, mexico,
morocco, norway and the united kingdom. both areas feature
themed rides and attractions, restaurants and merchandise shops.
disney-mgm
studios the disney-mgm
studios, which opened in 1989, consists of a theme park, a radio
studio and a film and television production facility. the park
centers on hollywood as it was during the 1930s and
1940s and provides various attractions, themed food
service and merchandise facilities. the production facility
consists of three sound stages, merchandise shops and a back lot
area and currently hosts both feature film and television
productions. disney-mgm studios also features fantasmic!,
a nighttime entertainment spectacular.
disneys animal
kingdom disneys
animal kingdom, which opened in 1998, consists of a 145-foot
tree of life centerpiece surrounded by six themed areas:
dinoland u.s.a., africa, rafikis planet watch, asia,
discovery island and camp minnie mickey. each themed
area contains adventure attractions, entertainment shows,
restaurants and merchandise shops. the park features more than
300 species of mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians and 4,000
varieties of trees and plants on more than 500 acres of land.
resort
facilities as of
september30, 2004, the company owned and operated 17
resort hotels at the walt disney world resort, with a total of
approximately 22,000 rooms and 318,000 square feet of conference
meeting space. in addition, disneys fort wilderness
camping and recreational area offers approximately 800 campsites.
the disney vacation club (dvc)offers
ownership interests in 7 resort facilities, located at the walt
disney world resort, as well as in vero beach, florida, and
hilton head island, south carolina. available units at each
facility are offered for sale under a vacation ownership plan
and are operated as rental property until the units are sold.
disneys saratoga spring resort & spa in orlando,
florida opened its first phase of vacation ownership properties
in may 2004. upon the completion of saratoga springs, the walt
disney world resort will have nearly 2,100 vacation ownership
units.
recreational amenities and activities available
at the walt disney world resort include five championship golf
courses, miniature golf courses, full-service spas, tennis,
sailing, water skiing, swimming, horseback riding and a number
of other noncompetitive sports and leisure time activities. the
resort also includes two water parks: blizzard beach and typhoon
lagoon.
we have also developed a 120-acre retail, dining
and entertainment complex known as downtown disney, which
consists of the marketplace, pleasure island and west side. in
addition to more than 20 specialty retail shops and restaurants,
the downtown disney marketplace is home to the
50,000-square-foot world of disney retail store featuring
disney-branded merchandise. pleasure island, a nighttime
entertainment center adjacent to the downtown disney
marketplace, includes restaurants, nightclubs and shopping
facilities. downtown disney west side is situated on 66 acres on
the west side of pleasure island and includes a disneyquest
facility, cirque du soleil, house of blues and several retail,
dining and entertainment operations.
disneys wide world of sports, which opened
in 1997, is a 220 acre sports complex providing professional
caliber training and competition, festival and tournament events
and interactive sports
-12-
table of contents
activities. the complexs venues accommodate
more than 30 different sporting events, including baseball,
tennis, basketball, softball, track and field, football and
soccer. its stadium is the spring training site for mlbs
atlanta braves and has a seating capacity of 9,000.
additionally, the complex is the pre-season training site of the
nfls tampa bay buccaneers, and the nbas orlando
magic. the amateur athletic union hosts approximately 30
championship events per year at the facility.
in the downtown disney resort area, seven
independently operated hotels are situated on property leased
from the company. these hotels have a capacity of approximately
3,700 rooms. additionally, two hotels, the walt disney world
swan and the walt disney world dolphin, with an aggregate
capacity of approximately 2,300 rooms, are independently
operated on property leased from the company near epcot.
disneyland resort
the company owns 456 acres and has under
long-term lease an additional 56 acres of land in anaheim,
california. the disneyland resort includes two theme parks
(disneyland and disneys california adventure), three
hotels and a retail, dining and entertainment district designed
to attract visitors for an extended stay.
the entire disneyland resort is marketed through
international, national and local advertising and promotional
activities as a destination resort. a number of the attractions
and restaurants at each of the theme parks are sponsored by
other corporations through long-term agreements.
disneyland
disneyland, which opened in 1955, consists of main street usa
and seven principal areas: adventureland, critter country,
fantasyland, frontierland, new orleans square, tomorrowland and
toontown. these areas feature themed rides and attractions,
restaurants, refreshment stands and merchandise shops.
disneys california
adventure disneys
california adventure, which opened in 2001, is adjacent to
disneyland and includes four principal areas: golden state,
hollywood pictures backlot, paradise pier and a bugs
land. these areas include rides, attractions, shows,
restaurants, merchandise shops and refreshment stands.
resort
facilities disneyland
resort includes three company-owned hotels: the 1,000-room
disneyland hotel, 500-room disneys paradise pier hotel and
disneys grand californian hotel, a deluxe 750-room hotel
located adjacent to disneys california adventure.
the resort also includes downtown disney, a
themed 310,000 square foot outdoor complex of entertainment,
dining and shopping venues, located adjacent to both disneyland
park and disneys california adventure.
disneyland resort paris
disneyland resort paris is a 4,800 acre
development located in marne-la-valle, approximately 20
miles east of paris, france. euro disney s.c.a. (euro disney)
and its subsidiaries operate the disneyland resort paris, which
includes the disneyland park; the walt disney studios park;
seven themed hotels with approximately 5,800 rooms; two
convention centers; the disney village, a shopping, dining and
entertainment center; and a 27-hole golf facility. of the 4,800
acres comprising the site, 2,400 acres have been developed to
date. the project is being developed pursuant to a 1987 master
agreement with the french governmental authorities.
disneyland park, which opened in 1992, consists
of main street and four principal themed areas: adventureland,
discoveryland, fantasyland and frontierland. these areas include
themed rides, attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops
and refreshment stands.
walt disney studios park opened in march 2002
adjacent to disneyland park. the park takes guests into the
worlds of cinema, animation and television and includes four
principal themed areas:
-13-
table of contents
front lot, animation courtyard, production
courtyard and backlot. these areas each include themed rides,
attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and
refreshment stands.
development of the site also continues with the
val deurope project, a newly constructed planned community
being built near disneyland resort paris. the first two phases
of the city of val deurope include a town center, which
consists of a shopping center; a 150 room hotel; office,
commercial and residential space; and a regional train station.
these new developments are operated by third parties on land
leased or purchased from euro disney. in july 2003 euro disney
signed an agreement with a third party developer beginning the
third phase of val deurope. included in this phase will be
expansion of disney village and projects aimed at increasing val
deuropes capacity to welcome new residents.
in addition, there are several new on-site hotels
which were opened in 2003 and 2004 that are owned and operated
by third party developers that provide approximately 1,860
rooms. agreements have been signed with additional third party
developers to provide approximately 350 additional on-site hotel
rooms and/or time share units over the next two years.
euro disney is currently in the process of a
financial restructuring that, if completed, will provide for an
increase in capital and refinancing of its borrowings. subject
to certain deferrals, euro disney is required to pay royalties
and management fees to the company. (see note 4 to the
consolidated financial statements for further discussion).
the company receives a royalty and management fee
based on the performance of the operations of the park. payment
of the royalties and management fees were deferred during fiscal
year 2004. the financial restructuring provides for payment of
these fees on completion of the restructuring anticipated in
fiscal year 2005.
hong kong disneyland
in 1999, the company and the government of the
hong kong special administrative region signed a master project
agreement for the development and operation of hong kong
disneyland. phase i of the development, which will be located on
311 acres of land on lantau island, includes the hong kong
disneyland theme park and two hotels. hong kong disneyland is
currently targeted to open in fiscal 2005. the master project
agreement permits further phased buildout of the development
under certain circumstances.
construction and operation of the project will be
the responsibility of hongkong international theme parks
limited, an entity in which the hong kong government owns a 57%
interest and a subsidiary of the company owns the remaining 43%.
a separate hong kong subsidiary of the company is responsible
for managing hong kong disneyland. based on the current exchange
rate between the hong kong and u.s. dollars, the companys
equity contribution obligation is limited to u.s.
$314million. as of september30, 2004 the company had
contributed u.s. $168million and the remaining
$146million is payable over the next two years. once hong
kong disneyland commences operations, company subsidiaries will
be entitled to receive management fees and royalties in addition
to the companys equity interest.
tokyo disney resort
tokyo disney resort is located on approximately
494 acres of land, six miles east of downtown tokyo, japan. the
resort includes two theme parks (tokyo disneyland and tokyo
disneysea); two disney-branded hotels; five independently
operated hotels; several merchandise shops; and ikspiari, a
retail, dining and entertainment complex. the company earns
royalties on revenues generated by the tokyo disney resort,
which is owned and operated by oriental land co., ltd. (olc), a
japanese corporation in which the company has no investment. olc
markets the tokyo disney resort primarily through a variety of
local, domestic and international advertising and promotional
activities. long-term corporate partners sponsor many of the
theme park attractions.
-14-
table of contents
tokyo disneyland, which opened in 1983, was the
first disney theme park to open outside the united states. tokyo
disneyland consists of seven principal areas: adventureland,
critter country, fantasyland, tomorrowland, toontown,
westernland and world bazaar.
tokyo disneysea, adjacent to tokyo disneyland,
opened in 2001. the park is divided into seven unique
ports of call, including mediterranean harbor,
american waterfront, port discovery, lost river delta, mermaid
lagoon, mysterious island and arabian coast. the resort includes
the 502-room tokyo disney sea hotel miracosta, the 504-room
disney ambassador hotel, the disney resort line monorail and the
bon voyage merchandise location and ikspiari, a retail, dining
and entertainment complex.
disney cruise line
disney cruise line, which is operated out of port
canaveral, florida, is a cruise vacation line that includes two
85,000-ton ships, the disney magic and the disney
wonder. both ships cater to children, families and adults,
with distinctly themed areas and activities for each group. each
ship features 877 staterooms, 71% of which are outside
staterooms providing guests with ocean views. cruise vacations
often include a visit to disneys castaway cay, a
1,000-acre private bahamian island. the company packages three,
four, and seven day cruise vacations with visits to the walt
disney world resort and also offers cruise-only options.
espn zone
the espn zone concept combines three interactive
areas under one roof for a complete sports and entertainment
experience: the studio grill, offering dining in an espn studio
environment; the screening room, offering fans an exciting
sports viewing environment; and the sports arena, challenging
guests with a variety of interactive and competitive
attractions. the company currently operates eight espn zone
restaurants.
walt disney imagineering
walt disney imagineering provides master
planning, real estate development, attraction and show design,
engineering support, production support, project management and
other development services, including research and development
for the companys operations.
the mighty ducks of anaheim
the company owns and operates the nhls
mighty ducks of anaheim. the company sold the anaheim angels
l.p. in may 2003.
seasonality and competition
all of the theme parks and the associated resort
facilities are operated on a year-round basis. historically, the
theme parks and resort business experiences fluctuations in
theme park attendance and resort occupancy resulting from the
seasonal nature of vacation travel and local entertainment
excursions. peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur
during the summer months when school vacations occur and during
early-winter and spring holiday periods.
the companys theme parks and resorts
compete with all other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism
and recreational activities. the profitability of the
leisure-time industry is influenced by various factors that are
not directly controllable, such as economic conditions including
business cycle and exchange rate fluctuations, travel industry
trends, amount of available leisure time, oil and transportation
prices and weather patterns.
studio entertainment
the studio entertainment segment produces and
acquires live-action and animated motion pictures, animated
direct-to-video programming, musical recordings and live stage
plays.
-15-
table of contents
the company distributes produced and acquired
films (including its film and television library) to the
theatrical, home entertainment, pay-per-view, video-on-demand,
pay television and free-to-air television markets. each of these
markets is discussed in more detail below.
theatrical distribution
walt disney pictures and television, a subsidiary
of the company, produces and acquires live-action motion
pictures that are distributed primarily under the walt disney
pictures and touchstone pictures banners. another subsidiary,
miramax film corp., acquires and produces motion pictures that
are distributed under the miramax and dimension banners. the
company also produces and distributes animated motion pictures
under the banner walt disney pictures, and co-finances and
distributes animated motion pictures developed in conjunction
with pixar, inc. the companys relationship with pixar is
discussed in more detail below in the section labeled
relationship with pixar.
during fiscal 2005, we expect to distribute in
domestic markets approximately 18 feature films under the walt
disney pictures and touchstone pictures banners and
approximately 19 films under the miramax and dimension banners.
these expected releases include several live-action family films
and full-length animated films, with the remainder targeted to
teenagers, families and/or adults. as of september30,
2004, the company had released 832 full-length live-action
features (primarily color), 69 full-length animated color
features, approximately 540 cartoon shorts and 53 live action
shorts under the walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures,
hollywood pictures, miramax and dimension banners.
we distribute and market our filmed products
principally through our own distribution and marketing companies
in the united states and major foreign markets. films released
theatrically in the u.s. can be released simultaneously
theatrically in international territories or generally up to six
months later.
the company incurs significant marketing and
advertising costs before and throughout the theatrical release
of a film in an effort to generate public awareness of the film,
to increase the publics intent to view the film and to
help generate significant consumer interest in the subsequent
home entertainment and other ancillary markets. these costs are
expensed as incurred, and therefore we typically incur losses in
the theatrical markets on a film, including the quarters before
the theatrical release of the film.
home entertainment
in the domestic market, we distribute home
entertainment releases from each of our motion picture banners.
in the international market, we distribute each of our motion
picture banners both directly and through independent foreign
distribution companies. in addition, we develop, acquire and
produce original programming for direct-to-video release.
the domestic and international home entertainment
window typically starts four to six months after each theatrical
release with the issuance of dvd and vhs versions of each title.
domestically, most titles are sold simultaneously to both
rentailers, such as blockbuster inc., and retailers,
such as best buy co., inc. upon a titles home
entertainment release, consumers are afforded the option to rent
for a limited period of time typically, two to seven days, or
purchase the titles outright (sell-through).
in the international home entertainment market,
titles are either released simultaneously in the rental and
sell-through channels or with a rental window before
sell-through, depending on local market regulations, dvd
hardware penetration and dvd software demand. the international
market has experienced a trend in the compression of, or in some
cases the disappearance of, the rental window.
-16-
table of contents
as of september30, 2004, under the banners
walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures,
miramax and dimension, 1,121 produced and acquired titles,
including 937 live action titles and 184 cartoon shorts and
animated features, were available to the domestic home
entertainment marketplace and 2,481 produced and acquired
titles, including 2,006 live action titles and 475 cartoon
shorts and animated features, were available to the
international home entertainment market.
television distribution
pay-per-view:
generally about two months after the home entertainment window
begins, the studios television distributor, buena vista
television, licenses titles to cable, satellite and internet
platforms for showing on a pay-per-view basis (ppv). ppv
services, such as in demand and directv, deliver one-time
rentals electronically to consumers televisions at a price
comparable to that of physical media rentals. video on demand
(vod)is an augmentation of ppv, and currently shares the
ppv window. the ppv/ vod window lasts generally about three
months.
pay television (pay 1):
effective with theatrical releases
beginning january1, 2003, there are two pay television
windows. the first window is generally fifteen months in
duration and follows the ppv/ vod window. the company has
licensed to the encore pay television services, over a
multi-year period, exclusive domestic pay television rights to
certain films released under the walt disney pictures,
touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures, miramax and dimension
banners.
free television (free 1):
following the pay 1 window is a free
television window wherein telecasts are accessible to consumers
without charge. this free window may last up to 84months.
motion pictures are usually sold in the first free window on an
ad hoc basis to major networks and basic cable services. for
films released theatrically prior to october 1st, 2004, the
company maintains only one output deal, with the abc television
network and its affiliates, covering branded live action and
animated product broadcast in the wonderful world of disney
slot. films released after that date will be sold on an ad hoc
basis to other networks besides abc.
pay television 2 (pay 2) and free television 2
(free 2): in the u.s., free 1 is
generally followed by a twelve month pay 2 window, included
under our license arrangement with encore, and finally by a
second free window (free 2). the free 2 window is a syndication
window where films are licensed both to basic cable networks and
to station groups, such as tribune co. major packages of the
companys feature films and animated television programming
have been licensed for broadcast under multi-year agreements.
international television:
the company also licenses its
theatrical and television properties outside of the us. the
typical windowing sequence is broadly consistent with the
domestic cycle such that titles premiere on television in ppv/
vod then air in pay tv before airing in free tv. certain
properties may then be re-licensed to one or more of the above
windows. windowing strategies are developed in response to local
market practices and conditions, and the exact sequence and
length of each window can vary country by country.
audio products and music publishing
walt disney records produces and distributes
compact discs, audiocassettes and records, consisting primarily
of soundtracks from animated films and read-along products,
directed at the childrens market in the united states. we
also license the creation of similar products throughout the
rest of the world. our hollywood records subsidiary, under the
hollywood records and buena vista records labels, develops,
produces and markets recordings from new talent across the
spectrum of popular music, as well as soundtracks from certain
live-action motion pictures. we also own the nashville-based
music label lyric street records.
in addition, each of our labels and our music
publishing companies commission new music for the companys
motion pictures and television programs, and records the songs
and licenses the song
-17-
table of contents
copyrights to others for printed music, records,
audiovisual devices and public performances and digital
distribution.
buena vista theatrical group
the buena vista theatrical group includes both
disney theatrical productions and disney live family
entertainment.
disney theatrical productions develops, produces
and licenses stage musicals worldwide. to date, the
companys shows have included beauty and the beast, the
lion king and elton john and tim rices aida.
the company generally elects to produce its own shows in the
united states, the united kingdom and australia and licenses its
shows to local producers in other territories. as of
september30, 2004, disney theatrical production had
fourteen productions running worldwide. three new productions
opening in fiscal 2005 include: mary poppins in london (a
co-production with cameron mackintosh) in december 2004; on
the record us tour which premiered in cleveland in november
2004; and aida in seoul, korea in august 2005.
disney live family entertainment has eight
different disney on ice shows touring in more than 40 countries
worldwide. the newest disney on ice show, disney/ pixars
finding nemo opened in september 2004 and will tour
throughout the united states and in mexico over the next two
years. disney live! winnie the poohs perfect day
launched in july 2004. disney live! is a new brand of live
family entertainment which will perform in theaters and arenas.
both disney on ice and disney live! are licensed to feld
entertainment.
relationship with pixar
the company entered into a feature film agreement
with pixar in 1991, which resulted in the release of its first
film with pixar, toy story, in november 1995. in 1997,
the company extended its relationship with pixar by entering
into a co-production agreement, under which pixar agreed to
produce, on an exclusive basis, five original computer-animated
feature films for distribution by the company. both parties
agreed to co-finance and co-brand the films and share equally in
the profits of each picture and any related merchandise or
ancillary products, after the company recovers all marketing
costs and receives a distribution fee. the first four films
under the extension were a bugs life, monsters,
inc., finding nemo and the incredibles. pixar
is currently in production on the final film under the agreement
which is cars. the company retains the right to produce
sequels to the films that it co-produced with pixar.
competition and intellectual property
protection
the success of studio entertainment operations is
heavily dependent upon public taste and preferences. in
addition, studio entertainment operating results fluctuate due
to the timing and performance of releases in the theatrical,
home entertainment and television markets. release dates are
determined by several factors, including competition and the
timing of vacation and holiday periods.
the studio entertainment businesses compete with
all forms of entertainment. a significant number of companies
produce and/or distribute theatrical and television films,
exploit products in the home entertainment market, provide pay
television programming services and sponsor live theater. we
also compete to obtain creative and performing talents, story
properties, advertiser support, broadcast rights and market
share, which are essential to the success of our studio
entertainment businesses.
the companys ability to exploit and protect
rights in its content, including its motion pictures, television
programs and sound recordings is affected by the strength and
effectiveness of intellectual property laws in the united states
and abroad. inadequate laws or enforcement mechanisms to protect
intellectual property in a country can adversely affect the
results of the companys operations, despite the
companys strong efforts to protect its intellectual
property rights throughout the world.
-18-
table of contents
in addition, some technological advances, such as
peer-to-peer technology and some features of digital video
recorders, and other factors have made infringement easier and
faster and enforcement more challenging. therefore, the company
devotes significant resources to protecting its intellectual
property against piracy in the united states and foreign markets.
the companys businesses are also subject to
the risk of challenges by third parties claiming infringement of
their proprietary rights. regardless of their validity, such
claims may result in substantial costs and diversion of
resources which could have an adverse effect on the company.
see further discussion under consumer
products competition, seasonality and intellectual
property protection below.
consumer products
the consumer products segment partners with
licensees, manufacturers, publishers and retailers throughout
the world to design, promote and sell a wide variety of products
based on existing and new disney characters and other
intellectual property. in addition to promoting the
companys film and television programs, consumer products
develops new intellectual property within its publishing and
interactive gaming divisions with the potential of being
leveraged across the company. the company also engages in
retail, direct mail and online distribution of products based on
the companys characters and films through the disney
stores, the disney catalog and disneydirect.com, respectively.
as discussed in note 14 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company sold the disney store in north america
in november 2004.
character merchandise and publications
licensing
the companys worldwide merchandise
licensing operations are divided among three lines of business:
disney hardlines which includes product categories such as
consumer electronics, home and infant, stationery, food and
personal care products; disney softlines which includes apparel,
accessories and footwear, and disney toys. through these lines
of business, the company earns royalties, which are usually
based on a fixed percentage of the wholesale or retail-selling
price of the licensees products. the company licenses
characters from its film, television and other properties. some
of the major properties licensed by the company include
mickey mouse, winnie the pooh and disney
princess. the company partners, both globally and
regionally, with key strategic licensees. the company has also
expanded its ability to design individual products across all
categories and create exclusive themed and seasonal promotional
campaigns for retailers based on characters, movies and tv
shows. direct-to-retail relationships have enabled
the company to offer disney products at competitive prices with
the worlds major retailers.
books and magazines
the company publishes childrens books,
magazines and continuity programs in 55 languages in 74
countries, reaching more than 100million readers each
month. during 2004, the companys u.s. childrens book
group published several titles including peter and the
starcatchers, a prequel to peter pan by dave barry and
ridley pearson, the golems eye, by jonathan stroud
and a second book in the bartimaeus trilogy (co-published with
miramax), as well as dont let the pigeon drive the
bus, by mo willems. the companys consumer magazine
business includes such titles as disney magazine,
disney adventures, discover and familyfun.
the comic magazine business includes titles such as
w.i.t.c.h., which has 32 international editions and is
published in almost 70 countries worldwide. through its
continuity programs, disney offers language-learning products
such as disneys magic english.
buena vista games
buena vista games (bvg)creates, markets and
distributes a broad portfolio of pc and multi-platform video
games worldwide. bvg also licenses properties and works directly
with third-party interactive game publishers to bring products
to market. bvg primarily focuses on multi-platform
-19-
table of contents
games derived from the companys creative
content, such as tron 2.0, kingdom hearts and
thats so raven, and on childrens
entertainment and learning software video games.
direct marketing
the direct marketing business operates the disney
catalog and disneydirect.com, offering disney-themed merchandise
through the direct mail and online channels, respectively.
disneydirect.com offers internally developed disney merchandise
as well as exclusive merchandise from other disney units and
disney licensees. the disney catalog also operates its own
retail outlet stores for the purpose of selling overstock and
other merchandise.
disney stores
the company has marketed disney-themed products
directly through retail facilities operated under the disney
store name. these facilities are generally located in leading
shopping malls and other retail complexes. the stores carry a
wide variety of disney merchandise and promote other businesses
of the company. the total number of owned and operated stores
was 423 as of september 30, 2004, after 58 stores were closed
during fiscal 2004. subsequently, in november 2004, 313 stores
in north america were sold to a wholly owned subsidiary of the
childrens place. the company continues to own 107 stores
primarily in europe (see note 14 to the consolidated financial
statements for discussion on the sale of the disney store chain
in north america). the company is currently considering options
with respect to the stores in europe, including a potential sale.
competition, seasonality, and intellectual
property protection
the company competes in its character
merchandising and other licensing, publishing, interactive and
retail activities with other licensors, publishers and retailers
of character, brand and celebrity names. although public
information is limited, we believe the company is the largest
worldwide licensor of character-based merchandise and
producer/distributor of childrens film-related products
based on retail sales. operating results for the licensing and
retail distribution business are influenced by seasonal consumer
purchasing behavior and by the timing and performance of
animated theatrical releases.
the companys licensing businesses, as well
as its studio entertainment and theme park and resort
operations, are affected by the companys ability to
exploit and protect its intellectual property, including
trademarks, trade names, copyrights, patents and trade secrets,
throughout the world. as a result, domestic and foreign laws
protecting intellectual property rights are important to the
company. the right and ability to enforce intellectual property
rights against infringement are essential to the companys
businesses. these businesses are also subject to the risk of
challenges by third parties claiming infringement of their
proprietary rights. regardless of their validity, such claims
may result in substantial costs and diversion of resources which
could have an adverse effect on the companys licensing
operations.
available information
our annual report on form10-k, quarterly
reports on form10-q, current reports on form8-k and
amendments to those reports are available without charge on our
website, www.disney.com/investors, as soon as reasonably
practicable after they are filed electronically with the sec. we
are providing the address to our internet site solely for the
information of investors. we do not intend the address to be an
active link or to otherwise incorporate the contents of the
website into this report.
item 2. properties
the walt disney world resort, disneyland park and
other properties of the company and its subsidiaries are
described in item1 under the caption parks and
resorts. film library properties are
-20-
table of contents
described in item1 under the caption
studio entertainment. radio and television stations owned
by the company are described under the caption media
networks.
the company and its subsidiaries own and lease
properties throughout the world. the table below provides a
brief description of the significant properties and the related
business segment.
location
property/ approximate size
use
business segment(1)
burbank, ca
land (51acres) & building
(1,900,000ft2)
office/production/warehouse
corp/studio/media
burbank, ca
building (1,100,000 ft2)
office/warehouse
corp/studio/media/cp
glendale, ca
land (115 acres) & building (2,500,000
ft2)
office/warehouse
corp/studio/media/cp/tp&r
glendale, ca
building (316,000 ft2)
office/warehouse
corp/cp
los angeles, ca
land (22 acres) & building
(567,000ft2)
office/production/technical
media
new york, ny
land (6.5 acres) & building (1,500,000
ft2)
office/production/technical
media
new york, ny
building (750,000 ft2)
office/production/warehouse
corp/studio/media/cp
bristol, ct
land (68 acres) & building
(684,000ft2)
office/production/warehouse
media
usa& canada
buildings (multiple sites and sizes)
office/production/transmitter/
retail/warehouse
studio/cp/media
england
building (330,000 ft2)
office/retail
corp/studio/media/cp
europe, asia, australia
& latin america
buildings (multiple sites and sizes)
office/retail/warehouse
corp/studio/media/cp
(1)
corp corporate, cp
consumer products and tp&r theme parks and
resorts
item 3. legal proceedings
in re the walt disney company derivative
litigation. william and geraldine
brehm and thirteen other individuals filed an amended and
consolidated complaint on may28, 1997 in the delaware
court of chancery seeking, among other things, a declaratory
judgment against each of the companys directors as of
december 1996 that the companys 1995 employment agreement
with its former president michael s. ovitz, was void, or
alternatively that mr.ovitzs termination should be
deemed a termination for cause and any severance
payments to him forfeited. on october8, 1998, the delaware
court of chancery dismissed all counts of the amended complaint.
plaintiffs appealed, and on february9, 2000, the supreme
court of delaware affirmed the dismissal but ruled also that
plaintiffs should be permitted to file an amended complaint in
accordance with the courts opinion. the plaintiffs filed
their amended complaint on january3, 2002. on
february6, 2003, the companys directors motion
to dismiss the amended complaint was converted by the court to a
motion for summary judgment and the plaintiffs were permitted to
take discovery. the company and its directors answered the
amended complaint on april1, 2003. on may28, 2003,
the court (treating as a motion to dismiss the motion for
summary judgment into which it had converted the original motion
on february6, 2003) denied the directors motion to
dismiss the amended complaint. trial commenced on
october20, 2004.
similar or identical claims have also been filed
by the same plaintiffs (other than william and geraldine brehm)
in the superior court of the state of california, los angeles
county, beginning with a claim filed by richard and david kaplan
on january3, 1997. on may18, 1998, an additional
claim was filed in the same california court by dorothy l.
greenfield. on september25, 2001, ms.greenfield
sought leave to amend her claim, but withdrew her request to
amend on january3, 2002. all of the california claims have
been consolidated and stayed pending final resolution of the
delaware proceedings.
stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney
company. in this lawsuit, filed on
february27, 1991 in the los angeles county superior court,
the plaintiff claims that a company subsidiary defrauded it
-21-
table of contents
and breached a 1983 licensing agreement with
respect to certain winnie the pooh properties, by failing to
account for and pay royalties on revenues earned from the sale
of winnie the pooh movies on videocassette and from the
exploitation of winnie the pooh merchandising rights. the
plaintiff seeks damages for the licensees alleged breaches
as well as confirmation of the plaintiffs interpretation
of the licensing agreement with respect to future activities.
the plaintiff also seeks the right to terminate the agreement on
the basis of the alleged breaches. if each of the
plaintiffs claims were to be confirmed in a final
judgment, damages as argued by the plaintiff could total as much
as several hundred million dollars and adversely impact the
value to the company of any future exploitation of the licensed
rights. the company disputes that the plaintiff is entitled to
any damages or other relief of any kind, including termination
of the licensing agreement. on april24, 2003, the matter
was removed to the united states district court for the central
district of california, which, on may19, 2003, dismissed
certain claims and remanded the matter to the los angeles
superior court. the company appealed from the district
courts order to the court of appeals for the ninth
circuit, but served notice that it was withdrawing its appeal in
september 2004. on march 29, 2004, the superior court granted
the companys motion for terminating sanctions against the
plaintiff for a host of discovery abuses, including the
withholding, alteration, and theft of documents and other
information, and, on april5, 2004, dismissed
plaintiffs case with prejudice. on may6, 2004, the
plaintiff moved to disqualify the judge who issued the
march29, 2004 decision, and on may13, 2004, the
plaintiff moved for a new trial on the issue of the
terminating sanctions. on july19, 2004, the
plaintiffs motion to disqualify the judge who issued the
march29, 2004 decision was denied, and on august2,
2004, the plaintiff filed with the state court of appeal a
petition for a writ of mandate to challenge the denial, which
was also denied. in september 2004, plaintiffs moved a second
time to disqualify the trial judge. that motion is pending.
milne and disney enterprises, inc. v. stephen
slesinger, inc. on november5,
2002, clare milne, the granddaughter of a. a. milne, author of
the winnie the pooh books, and the companys subsidiary
disney enterprises, inc. filed a complaint against stephen
slesinger, inc. (ssi) in the united states district
court for the central district of california. on
november4, 2002, ms. milne served notices to ssi and the
companys subsidiary terminating a. a. milnes prior
grant of rights to winnie the pooh, effective november5,
2004, and granted all of those rights to the companys
subsidiary. in their lawsuit, ms.milne and the
companys subsidiary seek a declaratory judgment, under
united states copyright law, that ms.milnes
termination notices were valid; that ssis rights to winnie
the pooh in the united states terminated effective
november5, 2004; that upon termination of ssis
rights in the united states, the 1983 licensing agreement that
is the subject of the stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt
disney company lawsuit terminated by operation of law; and
that, as of november5, 2004, ssi was entitled to no
further royalties for uses of winnie the pooh. in january 2003,
ssi filed (a)an answer denying the material allegations of
the complaint and (b)counterclaims seeking a declaration
that (i)ms.milnes grant of rights to disney
enterprises, inc. is void and unenforceable and (ii)disney
enterprises, inc. remains obligated to pay ssi royalties under
the 1983 licensing agreement. ssi also filed a motion to dismiss
the complaint or, in the alternative, for summary judgment. on
may8, 2003, the court ruled that milnes termination
notices are invalid and dismissed ssis counterclaims as
moot. following further motions, on august1, 2003, ssi
filed an amended answer and counterclaims and a third-party
complaint against harriet hunt (heir to e. h. shepard,
illustrator of the original winnie the pooh stories), who had
served a notice of termination and a grant of rights similar to
ms.milnes. by order dated october27, 2003, the
court certified an interlocutory appeal from its may 8 order to
the court of appeals for the ninth circuit, but on
january15, 2004, the court of appeals denied the
companys and milnes petition for an interlocutory
appeal. by order dated august3, 2004, the court granted
ssi leave to amend its answer to assert counterclaims against
the company allegedly arising from the milne and hunt
terminations and the grant of rights to the companys
subsidiary for (a) unlawful and unfair business practices; and
(b)breach of the 1983 licensing agreement. in october
2004, milne, joined by the company, moved to amend its complaint
to dismiss its claim against ssi for the purpose of obtaining a
final order of
-22-
table of contents
dismissal against it, so as to permit its appeal
to the court of appeals to proceed, and the district court
granted that motion by order dated november12, 2004.
management believes that it is not currently
possible to estimate the impact if any, that the ultimate
resolution of these matters will have on the companys
results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
the company, together with, in some instances,
certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant or
co-defendant in various other legal actions involving copyright,
breach of contract and various other claims incident to the
conduct of its businesses. management does not expect the
company to suffer any material liability by reason of such
actions.
sec proceeding. the
u.s. securities and exchange commission (the sec) is
conducting an investigation into an amendment of the
companys annual report on form10-k for fiscal year
2001, certain related matters and other related party
transactions that have been previously disclosed by the company.
the investigation does not relate to the companys
financial statements but rather to the issue of disclosure of
those relationships. the company is in discussions with the
staff of the sec about a possible administrative resolution of
these non-financial matters, which would allege disclosure
deficiencies generally about these matters and cite violation
under sections13(a) and 14(a) of the exchange act
regarding the following relationships between the company and
certain directors: the employment of adult children of three
directors by the company and the wife of another director by a
50% owned joint venture (whose employment preceded the
directors tenure); the provision of an office, secretary
and driver to one director following his retirement as chief
executive officer of capital/ cities abc, inc.; and the payments
to air shamrock, inc., a company controlled by a former
director, in reimbursement for his business use of his private
corporate jet. the settlement under discussion would involve the
issuance of an administrative cease and desist order.
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
no matters were submitted to a vote of
shareholders during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year
covered by this report.
executive officers of the company
the executive officers of the company are elected
each year at the organizational meeting of the board of
directors, which follows the annual meeting of the shareholders,
and at other board of directors meetings as appropriate. each of
the executive officers has been employed by the company in the
position or positions indicated in the list and pertinent notes
below. messrs.eisner, staggs and murphy have been employed
by the company as executive officers for more than five years.
at september30, 2004, the executive
officers of the company were as follows:
executive
name
age
title
officer since
michael d. eisner
chief executive officer(1)
robert a. iger
president and chief operating
officer(2)
thomas o. staggs
senior executive vice president and chief
financial officer
peter e. murphy
senior executive vice president and chief
strategic officer
alan n. braverman
senior executive vice president and general
counsel(3)
-23-
table of contents
(1)
mr.eisner also served as chairman of the
board from 1984 through march 2004.
(2)
mr.iger was appointed to his present
position in january 2000, having served (from february 1999
until january 2000) as president of walt disney international
and chairman of the abc group. mr.iger previously held a
number of increasingly responsible positions at abc, inc. and
its predecessor capital cities/ abc, inc., culminating in
service as president and chief operating officer of abc, inc.
from 1994 to 1999.
(3)
mr.braverman was named executive vice
president and general counsel of the company in january 2003 and
promoted to senior executive vice president and general counsel
of the company in october 2003. prior to his appointment as
general counsel of the company, mr.braverman had been
executive or senior vice president and general counsel of abc,
inc. since august 1996 and also deputy general counsel of the
company since august 2001.
-24-
table of contents
part ii
item 5.
market for the companys common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
the companys common stock is listed on the
new york and pacific stock exchanges under the ticker symbol
dis. the following table shows, for the periods
indicated, the high and low sales prices per share of common
stock as reported in the bloomberg financial markets services.
sales price
high
low
4th quarter
$
25.50
$
20.88
3rd quarter
26.65
21.39
2nd quarter
28.41
22.90
1st quarter
23.76
20.36
4th quarter
$
23.80
$
19.40
3rd quarter
21.55
16.92
2nd quarter
18.74
14.84
1st quarter
20.24
13.90
the company declared a dividend of $0.24 per
share on december1, 2004 with respect to fiscal 2004, and
a dividend of $0.21 per share on december2, 2003, with
respect to fiscal 2003.
as of september30, 2004, the approximate
number of common shareholders of record was 1,001,000.
the following table provides information about
company purchases of equity securities that are registered by
the company pursuant to section12 of the exchange act
during the quarter ended september30, 2004:
total number of
shares purchased
as part of
maximum number of
total number
average price
publicly
shares that may yet be
of shares
paid
announced plans
purchased under the
period
purchased(1)
per share
or programs(2)
plans or programs(3)
07/01/04 07/31/04
171,227
$
23.83
330 million
08/01/04 08/31/04
5,813,774
$
21.82
5,655,000
324 million
09/01/04 09/30/04
9,427,164
$
22.86
9,280,100
315 million
total
15,412,165
$
22.48
14,935,100
315 million
(1)
477,065 shares were purchased on the open market
to provide shares to participants in the walt disney investment
plan (wdip)and employee stock purchase plan (espp). these
purchases were not made pursuant to a publicly announced
repurchase plan or program.
(2)
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004, the
company repurchased 14,935,100 shares, including 1,350,0000
shares which were settled after september30, 2004.
(3)
under a share repurchase program most recently
reaffirmed by the companys board of directors on
april21, 1998, and implemented effective june10,
1998, the company was authorized to repurchase up to
400million shares of its common stock. the repurchase
program does not have an expiration date.
-25-
table of contents
item 6.selected financial data
(in millions, except per share data)
2004(1)
2003(2)
2002(3)
2001(4)
2000(5)
statements of income
revenues
$
30,752
$
27,061
$
25,329
$
25,172
$
25,325
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
change
2,345
1,338
1,236
per common share
earnings before the cumulative effect of
accounting change
diluted
$
1.12
$
0.65
$
0.60
$
0.11
$
0.57
basic
1.14
0.65
0.61
0.11
0.58
dividends
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
balance sheets
total assets
$
53,902
$
49,988
$
50,045
$
43,810
$
45,027
borrowings
13,488
13,100
14,130
9,769
9,461
shareholders equity
26,081
23,791
23,445
22,672
24,100
statements of cash flows
cash provided (used)by:
operating activities
$
4,370
$
2,901
$
2,286
$
3,048
$
3,755
investing activities
(1,484
)
(1,034
)
(3,176
)
(2,015
)
(1,091
)
financing activities
(2,701
)
(1,523
)
1,511
(1,257
)
(2,236
)
(1)
during fiscal 2004, the company adopted fasb
interpretation no.46r, consolidation of variable
interest entities (fin 46r) and as a result, consolidated
the balance sheets of euro disney and hong kong disneyland as of
march31, 2004 and the income and cash flow statements
beginning april 1, 2004, the beginning of the companys
fiscal third quarter. under fin 46r transition rules, euro
disney and hong kong disneylands operating results
continued to be accounted for on the equity method for the six
month period ended march31, 2004. in addition, the 2004
results include a benefit from the settlement of certain tax
issues of $120million or $0.06 per diluted share, and
restructuring and impairment charges totaling $64million
pre-tax or ($0.02) per diluted share.
(2)
the 2003 results include the write-off of an
aircraft leveraged lease investment with united airlines of
$114million pre-tax and a benefit from the favorable
settlement of certain state tax issues of $56million. see
notes 4 and 7 to the consolidated financial statements. these
items had a ($0.04) and $0.03 impact on diluted earnings per
share, respectively. the amounts do not reflect the cumulative
effect of adopting eitf 00-21 which was a charge of
$71million or ($0.03) per diluted share. see note 2 to the
consolidated financial statements.
(3)
the 2002 results include a $216million
pre-tax gain on the sale of investments and a $34million
pre-tax gain on the sale of the disney stores in japan. these
items had a $0.06 and $0.01 impact on diluted earnings per
share, respectively. see notes 3 and 4 to the consolidated
financial statements. during fiscal 2002, the company acquired
fox family worldwide, inc. for $5.2billion. see note 3 to
the consolidated financial statements. effective at the
beginning of fiscal 2002, the company adopted statement of
financial accounting standards no.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets and, accordingly, ceased amortization of
goodwill and substantially all other intangible assets.
(4)
the 2001 results include restructuring and
impairment charges totaling $1.5billion pre-tax. the
charges were primarily related to the closure of go.com,
investment write downs and a work force reduction. the diluted
earnings per share impact of these charges was ($0.52). the
amounts do not reflect the cumulative effect of required
accounting changes related to film and derivative
-26-
table of contents
accounting which were charges of
$228million and $50 million, respectively or ($0.11) and
($0.02) per diluted share, respectively.
(5)
the 2000 results include pre-tax gains of
$243million, $93million and $153million from
the sale of fairchild publications, eurosport and ultraseek,
respectively. the impact of income taxes substantially offset
certain of the gains. the diluted earnings per share impacts of
these items were $0.00, $0.02 and $0.01, respectively. the
results also include a $92million pre-tax restructuring
and impairment charge. the diluted earnings per share impact of
the charge was ($0.01).
-27-
table of contents
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
consolidated results
(in millions, except per share data)
% change
vs.
vs.
results of operations
revenues
$
30,752
$
27,061
$
25,329
%
%
costs and expenses
(26,704
)
(24,348
)
(22,945
)
%
%
gain on sale of business
nm
(53
)%
net interest expense
(617
)
(793
)
(453
)
(22
)%
%
equity in the income of investees
%
%
restructuring and impairment charges
(64
)
(16
)
nm
nm
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting change
3,739
2,254
2,190
%
%
income taxes
(1,197
)
(789
)
(853
)
%
(8
)%
minority interests
(197
)
(127
)
(101
)
%
%
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
change
2,345
1,338
1,236
%
%
cumulative effect of accounting change
(71
)
nm
nm
net income
$
2,345
$
1,267
$
1,236
%
%
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting change
diluted(1)
$
1.12
$
0.65
$
0.60
%
%
basic
$
1.14
$
0.65
$
0.61
%
%
cumulative effect of accounting change per share
$
$
(0.03
)
$
nm
nm
earnings per share:
diluted(1)
$
1.12
$
0.62
$
0.60
%
%
basic
$
1.14
$
0.62
$
0.61
%
%
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding:
diluted
2,106
2,067
2,044
basic
2,049
2,043
2,040
(1)
the calculation of diluted earnings per share
assumes the conversion of the companys convertible senior
notes issued in april 2003 into 45million shares of common
stock, and adds back related after-tax interest expense of
$21million and $10million for fiscal years 2004 and
2003, respectively.
-28-
table of contents
organization of information
managements discussion and analysis
provides a narrative on the companys financial performance
and condition that should be read in conjunction with the
accompanying financial statements. it includes the following
sections:
consolidated results
business segment results 2004 vs. 2003
corporate items 2004 vs. 2003
business segment results 2003 vs. 2002
corporate items 2003 vs. 2002
stock option accounting
liquidity and capital resources
contractual obligations, commitments and off
balance sheet arrangements
accounting policies and estimates
accounting changes
forward-looking statements
consolidated results
2004 vs. 2003
net income for the year was $2.3billion,
which was $1.1billion higher than the prior year. the
increase in net income for the year was primarily the result of
improvements in segment operating income in all of the operating
segments (see business segment results below for further
discussion). diluted earnings per share for the year were $1.12,
an increase of $0.47 compared to the prior-year earnings per
share of $0.65 before the cumulative effect of an accounting
change. results for the year included a benefit in the fourth
quarter from the settlement of certain income tax issues of
$120million ($0.06 per share) and restructuring and
impairment charges totaling $64million ($0.02 per share)
in connection with the sale of the disney stores in north
america, the majority of which were recorded in the third
quarter.
results for the prior year included a
$114million ($0.04 per share) write-off of an aircraft
leveraged lease investment during the first quarter and the
favorable settlement of certain income tax issues of
$56million ($0.03 per share) in the fourth quarter.
additionally, we made an accounting change effective as of the
beginning of fiscal 2003 to adopt a new accounting rule for
multiple element revenue accounting (eitf00-21, see
note2 to the consolidated financial statements) which
resulted in an after-tax charge of $71million for the
cumulative effect of the change. diluted earnings per share
including this cumulative effect were $0.62 for the prior year.
cash flow from operations has allowed us to
continue to make necessary capital investments in our properties
and to reduce our borrowings, which in turn is reducing our
interest expense. during the year, we generated cash flow from
operations of $4.4billion and had net repayment of
borrowings of $2.2billion. as a result of our adoption of
fin46r, we consolidated the balance sheets of euro disney
and hong kong disneyland as of march31, 2004 and added
their borrowings ($2.2billion for euro disney and
$545million for hong kong disneyland as of
september30, 2004) to our balance sheet, as well as their
assets and other liabilities. accordingly, our total borrowings
at september30, 2004 increased to $13.5billion. we
also used cash flow from operations to repurchase
$335million of our common stock in the fourth quarter.
2003 vs. 2002
income before the cumulative effect of an
accounting change was $1.3billion in fiscal 2003, which
was $102million, or 8%, higher than in fiscal 2002. this
represented diluted earnings per share before the cumulative
effect of accounting change of $0.65, which was $0.05 higher
than in fiscal 2002. we made an accounting change effective as
of the beginning of fiscal 2003 to adopt a new accounting rule
-29-
table of contents
for multiple element revenue accounting
(eitf00-21, see note2 to the consolidated financial
statements), which impacted the timing of revenue recognition
related to nfl football programming at espn. this change
resulted in a cumulative effect charge totaling
$71million. diluted earnings per share including the
effect of this accounting change were $0.62 for fiscal 2003.
results for 2003 also included a write-off of an
aircraft leveraged lease investment with united airlines
($114million pre-tax or $0.04 per share), a pre-tax gain
of $16million on the sale of the anaheim angels and
restructuring and impairment charges of $16million at the
disney store. additionally, fiscal 2003 included a benefit from
the favorable settlement of certain state tax issues
($56million or $0.03 per share). results for fiscal 2002
included a pre-tax gain on the sale of shares of knight-ridder,
inc. ($216million or $0.06 per share) and a pre-tax gain
on the sale of the disney store business in japan
($34million or $0.01 per share).
business segment results
% change
vs.
vs.
(in millions)
revenues:
media networks
$
11,778
$
10,941
$
9,733
%
%
parks and resorts
7,750
6,412
6,465
%
(1
)%
studio entertainment
8,713
7,364
6,691
%
%
consumer products
2,511
2,344
2,440
%
(4
)%
$
30,752
$
27,061
$
25,329
%
%
segment operating income:
media networks
$
2,169
$
1,213
$
%
%
parks and resorts
1,123
1,169
%
(18
)%
studio entertainment
%
nm
consumer products
%
(3
)%
$
4,488
$
3,174
$
2,822
%
%
the company evaluates the performance of its
operating segments based on segment operating income and
management uses aggregate segment operating income as a measure
of the overall performance of the operating businesses. the
company believes that aggregate segment operating income assists
investors by allowing them to evaluate changes in the operating
results of the companys portfolio of businesses separate
from factors other than business operations that affect net
-30-
table of contents
income. the following table reconciles segment
operating income to income before income taxes, minority
interests and the cumulative effect of accounting changes.
% change
vs.
vs.
(in millions)
segment operating income
$
4,488
$
3,174
$
2,822
%
%
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
(428
)
(443
)
(417
)
(3
)%
%
amortization of intangible assets
(12
)
(18
)
(21
)
(33
)%
(14
)%
gain on sale of business
nm
(53
)%
net interest expense
(617
)
(793
)
(453
)
(22
)%
%
equity in the income of investees
%
%
restructuring and impairment charges
(64
)
(16
)
nm
nm
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting change
$
3,739
$
2,254
$
2,190
%
%
depreciation expense is as follows:
(in millions)
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
domestic
international(1)
studio entertainment
consumer products
segment depreciation expense
1,043
corporate
total depreciation expense
$
1,198
$
1,059
$
1,021
(1)
represents 100% of euro disney and hong kong
disneylands depreciation expense beginning april1,
2004.
segment depreciation expense is included in
segment operating income and corporate depreciation expense is
included in corporate and unallocated shared expenses.
-31-
table of contents
media networks
the following table provides supplemental revenue
and segment operating income detail for the media networks
segment:
% change
vs.
vs.
(in millions)
revenues
cable networks
$
6,410
$
5,523
$
4,675
%
%
broadcasting
5,368
5,418
5,058
(1
)%
%
11,778
10,941
9,733
%
%
segment operating income (loss):
cable networks
1,924
1,176
1,023
%
%
broadcasting
(37
)
nm
nm
$
2,169
$
1,213
$
%
%
media networks 2004 vs.
revenues
media networks revenues increased 8%, or
$837million, to $11.8billion reflecting a 16%
increase, or $887million at the cable networks, and a
decrease of 1%, or $50million, at broadcasting.
increased cable networks revenues were driven by
increases of $696million in revenues from cable and
satellite operators and $236million in advertising
revenues. increased advertising revenue was primarily a result
of the increases at espn due to higher advertising rates and at
abc family due to higher ratings. revenues from cable and
satellite operators are largely derived from fees charged on a
per subscriber basis, and the increases in the current year
reflected both contractual rate adjustments and to a lesser
extent subscriber growth. the companys contractual
arrangements with cable and satellite operators are renewed or
renegotiated from time to time in the ordinary course of
business. a significant number of these arrangements will be up
for renewal in the next 12months. consolidation in the
cable and satellite distribution industry and other factors may
adversely affect the companys ability to obtain and
maintain contractual terms for the distribution of its various
cable and satellite programming services that are as favorable
as those currently in place. if this were to occur, revenues
from cable networks could increase at slower rates than in the
past or could be stable or decline.
decreased broadcasting revenues were driven
primarily by a decrease of $147million at the abc
television production and distribution businesses partially
offset by an increase of $63million at the abc television
network. the decrease in television production and distribution
revenues was primarily due to lower syndication revenue and
license fees. the increase at the network was driven by higher
advertising revenues reflecting higher rates due to an improved
advertising marketplace, partially offset by lower ratings and a
decrease due to airing the super bowl in fiscal 2003.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses consist primarily of
programming rights amortization, production costs, distribution
and selling expenses and labor costs. costs and expenses
decreased 1%, or $119million, to $9.6billion. the
decrease reflected lower costs at broadcasting, partially offset
by higher costs at cable. the decrease at broadcasting was due
to lower programming costs partially offset by higher pension
and other administrative costs as well as higher moviebeam
costs. higher costs at cable reflected increased programming,
pension and administrative costs, partially offset by lower bad
debt expense.
-32-
table of contents
lower programming costs at broadcasting were
driven by lower sports programming costs due primarily to the
airing of the super bowl in the prior-year, lower license fees
for primetime series and fewer primetime movies. additionally,
the prior year included higher news production costs due to the
coverage of the military conflict in iraq.
higher programming costs at the cable networks
were primarily due to higher rights and production costs at
espn, partially offset by lower nfl amortization due to
commencing the three year option period as described under
sports programming costs below. the decrease in bad
debt expense at the cable networks reflected the favorable
impact of a bankruptcy settlement with a cable operator in latin
america in the second quarter of the current year.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 79%, or
$956million, to $2.2billion reflecting increases of
$748million at the cable networks and $208million at
broadcasting. growth at the cable networks reflected higher
affiliate revenues, higher advertising revenue and lower nfl
programming costs, partially offset by higher rights and
production cost and higher administrative expenses. increased
segment operating income at broadcasting reflected higher
advertising revenues at the abc television network and lower
programming and production costs, partially offset by higher
administrative expenses.
sports programming costs
the initial five-year period of the
companys contract to televise nfl games was non-cancelable
and ended with the telecast of the 2003 pro bowl. in february
2003, the nfl did not exercise its renegotiation option and as a
result, the companys nfl contract was extended for an
additional three years ending with the telecast of the 2006 pro
bowl. the aggregate fee for the three-year period is
$3.7billion. espn recognized its portion of the costs of
the initial five-year term of the contract at levels that
increased each year commensurate with expected increases in nfl
revenues. as a result, espn experienced its highest level of nfl
programming costs during fiscal 2003. the implementation of the
contract extension resulted in a $180million reduction in
nfl programming costs at espn in fiscal 2004 as compared to
fiscal 2003. the majority of this decrease was in the first
quarter. these costs will be relatively level over the remaining
two years of the contract extension.
cost recognition for nfl programming at the abc
television network in fiscal 2004 decreased by $300million
as compared to fiscal 2003. the decrease at the abc television
network is primarily due to the absence of the super bowl, which
was aired by the abc television network in fiscal 2003, as well
as fewer games in fiscal 2004. the absence of the super bowl and
the lower number of games at the abc television network also
resulted in lower revenue from nfl broadcasts in fiscal 2004.
due to the payment terms in the nfl contract,
cash payments under the contract in fiscal 2004 totaled
$1.2billion as compared to $1.3billion in fiscal
2003.
the company has various contractual commitments
for the purchase of television rights for sports and other
programming, including the nfl, nba, mlb, nhl and various
college football conference and bowl games. the costs of these
contracts have increased significantly in recent years. we enter
into these contractual commitments with the expectation that,
over the life of the contracts, revenue from advertising during
the programming and affiliate fees will exceed the costs of the
programming. while contract costs may initially exceed
incremental revenues and negatively impact operating income, it
is our expectation that the combined value to our sports
networks from all of these contracts will result in long-term
benefits. the actual impact of these contracts on the
companys results over the term of the contracts is
dependent upon a number of factors, including the strength of
advertising markets, effectiveness of marketing efforts and the
size of viewer audiences.
-33-
table of contents
moviebeam
the company launched moviebeam, an on-demand
electronic movie rental service in three domestic cities in
october 2003. as of september30, 2004, the companys
recorded investment in moviebeam and dotcast, inc., the third
party licensor of the principal underlying technology, totaled
$60million. the company has executed licensing
arrangements under which it would pay an additional
$55million over the next three and one half years
($10million of which was paid in october 2004) if the
company continues to pursue this business over that time frame.
the company is currently evaluating the go forward business
model and is in discussion with potential strategic investors.
the success of the venture in the initial markets as well as
decisions with respect to strategic investors will determine the
strategic direction of the business, its future rollout plans,
and the ultimate recoverability of the investment.
parks and resorts 2004 vs.
revenues
revenues at parks and resorts increased 21%, or
$1.3billion, to $7.8 billion. the increase was driven by
increases of $715million due to the consolidation,
effective april1, 2004, of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland (primarily euro disney), $609million from the
walt disney world resort, and $95million from the
disneyland resort. these increases were partially offset by a
decrease of $61million resulting from the sale of the
anaheim angels baseball team during the third quarter of fiscal
2003.
at the walt disney world resort, increased
revenues were primarily driven by higher theme park attendance,
occupied room nights, and per capita spending at the theme
parks, partially offset by lower per room guest spending at the
hotels. higher theme park attendance was driven by increased
resident, domestic, and international guest visitation,
reflecting the continued success of mission: space,
mickeys philharmagic and disneys pop century resort,
and improvements in travel and tourism. guest spending decreases
at the hotels reflected a higher mix of hotel guest visitation
at the lower priced value resorts.
at the disneyland resort, increased revenues were
primarily due to higher guest spending at the theme parks and
hotel properties.
across our domestic theme parks, attendance
increased 7% and per capita guest spending increased 6% compared
to the prior year. attendance and per capita guest spending at
the walt disney world resort increased 10% and 4%, respectively.
attendance at the disneyland resort remained flat while per
capita guest spending increased 7%. operating statistics for our
hotel properties are as follows (unaudited):
west coast
resorts
east coast
total domestic
resorts
resorts
twelve
months
twelve
ended
twelve
months ended
september
months ended
september 30,
30,
september 30,
occupancy
%
%
%
%
%
%
available roomnights (in thousands)
8,540
7,550
9,356
8,366
per roomguest spending
$
$
$
$
$
$
the increase in available room nights reflected
the opening of the value priced disneys pop century resort
in the first quarter of fiscal 2004. per room guest spending
consists of the average daily hotel room rate as well as guest
spending on food, beverages, and merchandise at the hotels. the
-34-
table of contents
decline in per room guest spending reflects a
higher mix of hotel guest visitation at the lower priced value
resorts.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses, which consist principally of
labor, costs of merchandise, food and beverages sold,
depreciation, repairs and maintenance, entertainment, marketing
and sales expense, increased 21%, or $1.2billion compared
to fiscal 2003. the increase in costs and expenses was primarily
due to the consolidation of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland, which increased costs and expenses by
$651million, as well as higher operating costs at both
domestic resorts. higher operating costs were driven by volume
increases as well as higher employee benefits, marketing and
sales costs, depreciation expense, and information technology
costs. higher employee benefits costs reflected increased
pension and post-retirement medical costs, which grew $137
million at the domestic resorts. higher marketing costs were
driven by the opening of mission: space at epcot and
disneys pop century resort at walt disney world, and by
the twilight zonetm tower of terror and the 50th
anniversary celebration at disneyland. higher depreciation
reflects new resort properties and theme park attractions as
well as new information technology systems. these increases were
partially offset by cost decreases due to the sale of the
anaheim angels during the third quarter of fiscal 2003.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 17%, or
$166million, to $1.1billion, primarily due to growth
at the walt disney world resort and the consolidation of euro
disney which contributed $75million of the increase in
operating income.
studio entertainment 2004 vs.
revenues
revenues increased 18%, or $1.3billion, to
$8.7billion, driven by increases of $1.4billion in
worldwide home entertainment and $151million in television
distribution, partially offset by a decrease of
$215million in worldwide theatrical motion picture
distribution.
higher worldwide home entertainment revenues
reflected higher dvd unit sales in the current year, which
included disney/ pixars finding nemo, pirates of the
caribbean, the lion king and brother bear compared to
the prior year, which included lilo & stitch and
beauty and the beast. increased revenues in television
distribution reflected higher pay television sales due to better
performances of live-action titles. worldwide theatrical motion
picture distribution revenue decreases reflected the performance
of current year titles, which included home on the range, the
alamo and king arthur, which faced difficult
comparisons to the strong performances of prior year titles,
which included finding nemo (domestically)and
pirates of the caribbean. partially offsetting the
decrease was the successful performance of finding nemo
internationally in fiscal 2004.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses, which consist primarily of
production cost amortization, distribution and selling expenses,
product costs and participations costs, increased 19%, or
$1.3billion. higher costs and expenses reflected increases
in worldwide home entertainment and worldwide theatrical motion
picture distribution. higher costs in worldwide home
entertainment reflected higher distribution costs and production
cost amortization for current year titles, primarily due to the
increased unit sales volume for finding nemo and
pirates of the caribbean. in addition, participation
expense was higher in the current year because of participation
arrangements with finding nemo and pirates of the
caribbean. pixar receives an equal share of profits (after
distribution fees) as co-producer of finding nemo. higher costs
in worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution reflected
increased distribution costs for current year titles, which
included king arthur, brother bear and the
village, and increased production cost amortization,
including higher film write-offs, for current year titles which
included home on the range and the alamo. these
increases were partially offset by lower production and
-35-
table of contents
development write-offs and lower participation
expense as the prior year included participation payments for
the domestic theatrical release of finding nemo and the
worldwide theatrical release of pirates of the caribbean.
cost and expenses for television distribution were comparable
year over year.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 7%, or
$42million, to $662million, due to improvements in
worldwide home entertainment and television distribution,
partially offset by declines in worldwide theatrical motion
picture distribution.
miramax
the company does not expect business at its
subsidiary miramax to continue at the same level beyond the
september30, 2005 date on which the current contractual
relationship with the co-chairmen (bob and harvey weinstein)
will end. the company is currently in negotiations with the
weinsteins regarding the future of our business relationship
with them. at this time the company is unable to determine
whether projects currently in progress may be abandoned or
otherwise impaired and whether there will be any material
charges.
consumer products 2004 vs.
revenues
revenues increased 7%, or $167million, to
$2.5billion, reflecting increases of $73million in
merchandise licensing, $72million in publishing and
$28million at the disney stores.
higher merchandise licensing revenues were due to
higher sales of hardlines, softlines and toys which were driven
by the strong performance of disney princess and certain
film properties. the increase at publishing primarily reflected
the strong performance of finding nemo and other
childrens books and w.i.t.c.h magazine and book titles
across all regions.
costs and expenses
overall costs and expenses were essentially flat
at $2.0billion. costs and expenses reflected decreases at
the disney store due primarily to overhead savings and the
closure of underperforming stores, offset by volume related
increases in publishing and higher operating expenses related to
merchandise licensing.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 39%, or
$150million, to $534million, primarily driven by an
increase of $117million at the disney store due primarily
to overhead savings and the closure of underperforming stores as
well as margin improvements. improvements in merchandise
licensing and publishing also contributed to operating income
growth.
disney stores
on november21, 2004, the company sold
substantially all of the disney store chain in north america
under a long-term licensing arrangement to a wholly-owned
subsidiary of the childrens place (tcp).
pursuant to the terms of the sale, the disney store north
america will retain its lease obligations and will become a
wholly-owned subsidiary of tcp. tcp will pay the company a
royalty on the physical retail store sales beginning on the
second anniversary of the closing date of the sale.
during the year, the company recorded
$64million of restructuring and impairment charges related
to the disney store. the bulk of the charge ($50 million) was an
impairment of the carrying value of the fixed assets related to
the stores to be sold which was recorded in the third quarter
based on the terms of sale. additional charges recorded during
the year related to the closure of stores that would not be sold
and to transaction costs related to the sale.
-36-
table of contents
the company will record additional charges for
working capital and other adjustments related to the close of
this transaction during the first quarter of fiscal 2005.
additional restructuring costs will also be recognized later in
fiscal 2005. we expect that the total costs that will be
recorded in fiscal 2005 will range from $40million to
$50million.
the company is currently considering options with
respect to the stores in europe, including a potential sale. the
carrying value of the fixed and other long-term assets of the
chain in europe totaled $36million at september30,
2004. depending on the terms of a sale, an impairment of these
assets is possible. the base rent lease obligations for the
chain in europe totaled $206 million at september30, 2004.
the following table provides supplemental
revenues and operating income detail for the disney stores:
% change
vs.
vs.
(in millions)
revenues
north america
$
$
$
(2
)%
(11
)%
europe
%
%
other
(15
)%
(78
)%
$
$
$
1,105
%
(14
)%
operating income:
north america
$
$
(101
)
$
(37
)
nm
nm
europe
%
(36
)%
other
nm
(82
)%
$
$
(83
)
$
nm
nm
corporate items 2004 vs.
corporate and unallocated shared
expenses
2004 vs 2003
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
decreased 3% for the year to $428million. the current year
reflected the favorable resolution of certain legal matters,
partially offset by higher legal and other administrative costs.
net interest expense
net interest expense is detailed below:
% change
vs.
vs.
(in millions)
interest expense
$
(629
)
$
(666
)
$
(708
)
(6
)%
(6
)%
aircraft leveraged lease investment write-off
(16
)
(114
)
(86
)%
nm
interest and investment income (loss)
(13
)
nm
nm
net interest expense
$
(617
)
$
(793
)
$
(453
)
(22
)%
%
-37-
table of contents
2004 vs 2003
excluding an increase of $51million due to
the consolidation of euro disney and hong kong disneyland for
the year, interest expense decreased $88 million (or 13%) for
the year. lower interest expense for the year was primarily due
to lower average debt balances.
interest and investment income (loss)was
income of $28million compared to a loss of
$13million in the prior year. the current year reflected
higher interest income while the prior year period included a
loss on the early repayment of certain borrowings.
equity in the income of
investees
2004 vs 2003
the increase in equity in the income of our
investees reflected increases at lifetime television, due to
lower programming and marketing expenses, as well as increases
at a&e and e! entertainment due to higher advertising
revenues.
effective income tax rate
2004 vs 2003
the effective income tax rate decreased from
35.0% in fiscal 2003 to 32.0% in fiscal 2004. the decrease in
the fiscal 2004 effective income tax rate is primarily due to
tax reserve adjustments including a $120million reserve
release as a result of the favorable resolution of certain
federal income tax issues. as more fully disclosed in note 7 to
the consolidated financial statements, the fiscal 2004 effective
income tax rate reflects a $97million benefit for certain
income exclusions provided for under u.s.income tax laws.
as discussed in note7 to the consolidated financial
statements, this exclusion has been repealed and will be phased
out commencing fiscal 2005.
pension and benefit costs
increasing pension and post-retirement medical
benefit plan costs have affected results in all of our segments,
with the majority of these costs being borne by the parks and
resorts segment. the costs increased from $131million in
fiscal 2003 to $374million in fiscal 2004. the increase in
fiscal 2004 was due primarily to decreases in the discount rate
to measure the present value of plan obligations, the expected
return on plan assets and the actual performance of plan assets.
the discount rate assumption decreased from 7.20% to 5.85%
reflecting the decline in overall market interest rates and the
expected return on plan assets was reduced from 8.5% to 7.5%
reflecting trends in the overall financial markets.
we expect pension and post-retirement medical
costs to decrease in fiscal 2005 to $315million. the
decrease is due primarily to an increase in the discount rate
assumption from 5.85% to 6.30%, reflecting increases in
prevailing market interest rates.
cash contributions to the plans are expected to
decrease in fiscal 2005 to approximately $165million from
$173million in fiscal 2004.
due to plan asset performance and an increase in
the present value of pension obligations, pension obligations
exceed plan assets for certain of our pension plans. in this
situation, the
-38-
table of contents
accounting rules require that we record an
additional minimum pension liability. the additional minimum
pension liability adjustment at september30, 2004 and 2003
is as follows
minimum liability
at september 30,
decreased liability
in 2004
pretax
$
$
$
(554
)
aftertax
$
$
$
(347
)
the decrease in the additional minimum pension
liability in fiscal 2004 was due to the increase in the discount
rate from 5.85% to 6.30% and improved plan asset performance.
the accounting rules do not require that changes in the
additional minimum pension liability adjustment be recorded in
current period earnings but rather are to be recorded directly
to equity through accumulated other comprehensive income.
expense recognition under the pension accounting rules is based
upon long-term trends over the expected life of the
companys workforce. see note 8 to the consolidated
financial statements for further discussion.
business segment results 2003 vs.
media networks 2003 vs.
revenues
media networks revenues increased 12%, or
$1.2billion, to $10.9billion reflecting increases of
18%, or $848million at the cable networks and 7%, or
$360million, at broadcasting.
increased cable networks revenues were driven by
increases of $455million in revenues from cable and
satellite operators and $385million in advertising
revenues. increased advertising revenue was primarily a result
of the addition of nba games. revenues from cable and satellite
operators increased due to contractual rate adjustments and
subscriber growth.
increased broadcasting revenues were driven
primarily by an increase of $196million at the abc
television network, $60million at the companys owned
and operated television stations and $33million at the
radio networks and stations. the increases at the television
network and stations were primarily driven by higher advertising
revenues reflecting higher rates due to an improved advertising
marketplace. the airing of the super bowl in the second quarter
of fiscal 2003 also contributed to increased advertising
revenues. revenues at the radio networks and stations also
increased due to the stronger advertising market.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses increased 11%, or
$981million over fiscal 2002 due to higher programming and
production costs, partially offset by lower bad debt expense at
the cable networks. additionally, fiscal 2002 benefited from the
receipt of insurance proceeds related to the loss of a broadcast
tower.
higher programming and production costs at the
abc television network were primarily due to the airing of the
super bowl and the costs of coverage of the war in iraq. higher
programming costs at the cable networks were primarily due to
nba and mlb telecasts and higher programming costs at abc
family. programming cost increases were partially offset by
lower cost amortization for the nfl contract due to commencing
the three year option period as described under sports
programming costs above. the decrease in bad debt expense
at cable networks reflected negative impacts in fiscal 2002
related to financial difficulties of adelphia communications
company in the united states and kirchmedia & company in
germany.
-39-
table of contents
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 23%, or
$227million, to $1.2billion. the increase reflected
increases of $74million at broadcasting and $153 million
at the cable networks. increased segment operating income at
broadcasting reflected higher advertising revenues, partially
offset by increased programming and production costs. growth at
the cable networks reflected higher revenues from cable and
satellite operators and higher advertising revenue, partially
offset by increased sports programming costs.
parks and resorts 2003 vs.
revenues
revenues at parks and resorts decreased 1%, or
$53million, to $6.4 billion, driven by decreases of
$57million due to the sale of the anaheim angels baseball
team during the third quarter of fiscal 2003, $51million
from decreased revenues from euro disney, and $14million
from the walt disney world resort. these decreases were
partially offset by an increase of $83million at the
disneyland resort. the decrease in revenues from euro disney
reflected the cessation of billing and recognition of revenues
from royalties and management fees commencing with the second
quarter of fiscal 2003 due to euro disneys financial
difficulties.
revenues at the walt disney world resort were
down marginally, reflecting lower theme park attendance and
hotel occupancy, partially offset by increased per capita guest
spending at the theme parks and hotel properties. decreased
theme park attendance and hotel occupancy at the walt disney
world resort reflected continued softness in travel and tourism.
guest spending increases reflected ticket price increases during
fiscal 2003.
at the disneyland resort, increased revenues were
driven by higher theme park attendance and hotel occupancy.
these increases were due primarily to the success of certain
promotional programs offered during fiscal 2003, as well as the
opening of new attractions and entertainment venues at
disneyland park and disneys california adventure during
fiscal 2003.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses increased 3%, or
$159million compared to fiscal 2002. the increase in costs
and expenses was primarily due to higher costs at the walt
disney world and disneyland resorts, partially offset by cost
decreases due to the sale of the anaheim angels during the third
quarter of fiscal 2003. higher costs at walt disney world and
disneyland were primarily driven by increases in employee
benefits, repairs and maintenance, marketing, information
systems, insurance, and depreciation expenses.
segment operating income
segment operating income decreased 18%, or
$212million, to $957million, primarily due to higher
costs and expenses at the walt disney world resort and the
decreased revenues from euro disney. revenue increases at the
disneyland resort were offset by higher costs and expenses.
studio entertainment 2003 vs.
revenues
revenues increased 10%, or $673million, to
$7.4billion. the increase primarily reflects an increase
of $553million in worldwide theatrical motion picture
distribution and $185million in worldwide home
entertainment distribution.
the worldwide theatrical motion picture
distribution revenue increase reflected the strong performance
of pirates of the caribbean, finding nemo, chicago, santa
clause 2, bringing down the house and bruce
almighty, which the company distributed internationally,
compared to fiscal 2002, which included disney/ pixars
monsters, inc., signs and lilo &
stitch. worldwide home video
-40-
table of contents
increases reflected stronger dvd and vhs sales of
lilo & stitch, beauty & the beast, signs, sweet home
alabama and other dvd titles compared to fiscal 2002, which
included monsters, inc., pearl harbor and snow
white and the seven dwarfs.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses increased 5%, or
$326million, reflecting increases in worldwide theatrical
and international home entertainment and higher development and
production write-offs, partially offset by decreases in
television distribution and domestic home entertainment costs.
higher costs in worldwide theatrical reflected higher
distribution costs for fiscal 2003 titles due to the promotion
of high-profile releases, including finding nemo, pirates of
the caribbean, chicago and gangs of new york,
partially offset by lower production cost amortization due
to the write-down of treasure planet in fiscal 2002. cost
increases in international home entertainment reflected higher
distribution costs and production cost amortization for fiscal
2003 titles, which included beauty& the beast, lilo
& stitch and treasure planet, partially offset by
lower participation costs. lower costs in television
distribution reflected lower production cost amortization and
participation costs related to the sale of film products to
television networks, the pay television market and in domestic
syndication. lower costs in domestic home entertainment
reflected higher participation costs for fiscal 2002 titles,
which included monsters, inc. and pearl harbor.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased from
$273million to $620million, due to growth in
worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution, higher
revenues in domestic home entertainment, lower television
distribution costs, partially offset by higher development and
production write-offs.
consumer products 2003 vs.
revenues
revenues decreased 4%, or $96million, to
$2.3billion, reflecting declines of $161million at
the disney store, partially offset by increases of
$60million in merchandise licensing and $30million
in publishing operations.
the decline at the disney store is due primarily
to the sale of the disney store business in japan in fiscal
2002, as well as lower comparative store sales and fewer stores
in north america. the increase in merchandise licensing
primarily reflected higher revenues from toy licensees, due in
part to higher contractually guaranteed minimum royalties in
north america, strong performance across europe and increased
royalties from direct-to-retail licenses. higher publishing
revenues were driven by increases in europe, reflecting the
strong performance of the topolino, w.i.t.c.h. and art
attack titles.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses, which consist primarily of
labor, product costs (including product development costs,
distribution and selling expenses) and leasehold and occupancy
expenses, decreased 4% or $86million. the decrease was
primarily driven by lower costs at the disney store due to the
sale of the japan business and closures of disney store
locations domestically. these decreases were partially offset by
volume increases at publishing and higher divisional
administrative costs.
segment operating income
segment operating income decreased 3%, or
$10million, to $384million, primarily driven by a
decline at the disney store and increased administrative costs,
partially offset by an increase in merchandise licensing.
-41-
table of contents
corporate items 2003 vs.
corporate and unallocated shared
expenses
2003 vs 2002
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
increased in fiscal 2003 reflecting additional costs associated
with new finance and human resource information technology
systems, partially offset by lower brand promotion and
litigation costs. fiscal 2002 also included gains on the sale of
properties in the u.k.
net interest expense
2003 vs 2002
lower interest expense in fiscal year 2003 was
primarily due to lower interest rates and average debt balances.
interest and investment income (loss)in
fiscal year 2003 included the $114million write-off of our
leveraged lease investment with united airlines referred to
above. fiscal 2002 included a $216million gain on the sale
of shares of knight-ridder, inc.
equity in the income of
investees
2003 vs 2002
higher equity in the income of our investees
reflected increases at lifetime television, due to lower
advertising expenses, as well as increases at a&e and e!
entertainment due to higher advertising revenues. in addition,
in fiscal year 2002 a write-down of an investment in a latin
american cable operator negatively affected equity income.
effective income tax rate
2003 vs 2002
the effective income tax rate decreased from
38.9% in fiscal 2002 to 35.0% in fiscal 2003. the decrease in
the fiscal 2003 effective income tax rate is primarily due to a
$56million reserve release as a result of the favorable
resolution of certain state income tax exposures.
stock option accounting
the company uses the intrinsic-value method of
accounting for stock-based awards granted to employees and,
accordingly, does not recognize compensation expense for the
fair value of its stock-based awards to employees in its
consolidated statements of income.
the following table reflects pro forma net income
and earnings per share had the company elected to record an
expense for the fair value of employee stock options.
year ended
september30,
(in millions, except for per share data)
net income:
as reported
$
2,345
$
1,267
$
1,236
pro forma after stock option expense
2,090
diluted earnings per share:
as reported
1.12
0.62
0.60
pro forma after stock option expense
1.00
0.48
0.45
-42-
table of contents
these pro forma amounts may not be representative
of future disclosures since the estimated fair value of stock
options is amortized to expense over the vesting period, and
additional options may be granted in future years.
fully diluted shares outstanding and diluted
earnings per share include the effect of in-the-money stock
options calculated based on the average share price for the
period and assumes
-43-
table of contents
conversion of the convertible senior notes (see
note 6 to the consolidated financial statements). the dilution
from employee options increases as the companys share
price increases, as shown below:
average
total
percentage of
hypothetical
disney
in-the-money
incremental
average shares
fy 2004 eps
share price
options
diluted shares(1)
outstanding
impact(3)
$
23.72
106million
(2)
$
0.00
25.00
134million
3 million
0.14
%
(0.00
)
30.00
160million
17 million
0.81
%
(0.01
)
40.00
221million
43 million
2.04
%
(0.02
)
50.00
230million
59 million
2.80
%
(0.03
)
(1)
represents the incremental impact on fully
diluted shares outstanding assuming the average share prices
indicated, using the treasury stock method. under the treasury
stock method, the tax effected proceeds that would be received
from the exercise of all in-the-money options are assumed to be
used to repurchase shares.
(2)
fully diluted shares outstanding for the year
ended september30, 2004 total 2,106million and
include the dilutive impact of in-the-money options at the
average share price for the period of $23.72 and the assumed
conversion of the convertible senior notes. at the average share
price of $23.72, the dilutive impact of in-the-money options was
12 million shares for the year.
(3)
based upon fiscal 2004 earnings of
$2,345million or $1.12 per share.
liquidity and capital resources
cash and cash equivalents increased by
$459million during the year ended september30, 2004.
the change in cash and cash equivalents is as follows:
year ended september 30,
(in millions)
cash provided by operating activities
$
4,370
$
2,901
$
2,286
cash used by investing activities
(1,484
)
(1,034
)
(3,176
)
cash (used)provided by financing activities
(2,701
)
(1,523
)
1,511
consolidation of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland cash and cash equivalents(1)
increase in cash and cash equivalents
$
$
$
(1)
amount represents the cash balances of euro
disney and hong kong disneyland on march31, 2004 when they
were initially consolidated pursuant to fin 46r. as previously
discussed the company adopted fin 46r, and as a result, began
consolidating the balance sheets of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland as of march31, 2004, and the income and cash
flow statements beginning april1, 2004.
operating activities
cash provided by operations increased 51%, or
$1.5billion, to $4.4 billion, reflecting higher pre-tax
income adjusted for non-cash items and lower net investment in
film and television costs, partially offset by higher income tax
payments. we anticipate that we will have a significant increase
in our net investment in film and television costs in fiscal
2005.
investing activities
investing activities consist principally of
investments in parks, resorts and other property and mergers,
acquisition and divestiture activity. the companys
investing activities generally consist of
-43-
table of contents
investments in parks, resorts and other property.
during fiscal 2002, investing activities included approximately
$2.8billion for the acquisition of abc family worldwide.
investments in parks, resorts and other
properties
investments in parks, resorts and other
properties by segment are as follows:
year ended september30,
(in millions)
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts:
domestic
international(1)
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate and unallocated shared expenditures
$
1,427
$
1,049
$
1,086
(1)
represents 100% of euro disney and hong kong
disneylands capital expenditures beginning april1,
2004.
capital expenditures for the parks and resorts
segment are principally for theme park and resort expansion, new
rides and attractions and recurring capital and capital
improvements. the increase in domestic park spending in fiscal
2004 as compared to fiscal 2003 was primarily due to spending in
anticipation of the 50th anniversary celebration which includes
new attractions at walt disney world and disneyland. the
decrease in fiscal 2003 as compared to fiscal 2002 was primarily
due to the completion in fiscal 2002 of a new resort facility at
walt disney world. the international park spending in fiscal
2004, representing six months of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland capital expenditures following the implementation of
fin 46r, primarily relates to hong kong disneyland construction.
our minority partner contributed $66 million which is included
in financing activities.
capital spending will increase in fiscal 2005 due
to including a full year of spending for euro disney and hong
kong disneyland as a result of fin 46, and to a lesser extent,
due to higher domestic theme park spending.
capital expenditures at media networks primarily
reflect investments in facilities and equipment for expanding
and upgrading broadcast centers, production facilities and
television station facilities.
corporate and unallocated capital expenditures
were primarily for information technology software and hardware.
other investing activities
during fiscal 2004, the company purchased certain
financial investments totaling $67million, made equity
contributions to hong kong disneyland totaling $46million
in the first six months of the year, and acquired the film
library and intellectual property rights for the muppets and
bear in the big blue house for $68million
($45million in cash).
during fiscal 2003, the company invested
$130million primarily for the acquisition of a radio
station. the company also made equity contributions to hong kong
disneyland totaling $47million and received proceeds of
$166million from the sale of the angels and certain
utility infrastructure at walt disney world.
during fiscal 2002, the company acquired abc
family for $5.2billion, which was funded with
$2.9billion of new long-term borrowings, plus the
assumption of $2.3billion of borrowings.
-44-
table of contents
during fiscal 2002, the company received proceeds
totaling $601million from the sale of investments,
primarily the remaining shares of knight-ridder, inc., which the
company had received in connection with the disposition of
certain publishing assets in fiscal 1997. additionally, the
company received aggregate proceeds of $200million from
the sale of the disney store business in japan and the sale of
certain real estate properties in the u.k. and florida.
financing activities
cash used in financing activities during fiscal
2004 of $2.7billion reflected net repayments of
borrowings, the payment of dividends to shareholders, and share
repurchases partially offset by proceeds from stock option
exercises.
during the year, the companys borrowing
activity, including activity for euro disney and hong kong
disneyland commencing on april1, 2004, was as follows:
(in millions)
additions
payments
total
commercial paper borrowings (net change)
$
$
$
us medium term notes and other us dollar
denominated debt
(1,886
)
(1,886
)
european medium term notes
(420
)
(420
)
privately placed debt
(89
)
(89
)
other
(50
)
(37
)
$
$
(2,445
)
$
(2,332
)
euro disney borrowings
(34
)
(32
)
hong kong disneyland borrowings
$
$
(2,479
)
$
(2,203
)
see note 6 to the consolidated financial
statements for more detailed information regarding the
companys borrowings.
at september30, 2004, total committed
borrowing capacity, capacity used and unused borrowing capacity
were as follows:
committed
capacity
unused
(in millions)
capacity
used
capacity
bank facilities expiring 2005(1)
$
2,250
$
$
2,250
bank facilities expiring 2009(1)(2)
2,250
2,045
total
$
4,500
$
$
4,295
(1)
these bank facilities allow for borrowings at
libor-based rates plus a spread, which depends on the
companys public debt rating and can range from 0.175% to
0.575%. as of september30, 2004, the company had not
borrowed under these bank facilities. our bank facilities were
renewed on february25, 2004 on substantially the same
terms as our previous facilities.
(2)
the company also has the ability to issue up to
$500million of letters of credit under this facility,
which if utilized, reduces available borrowing. as of
september30, 2004, $205million of letters of credit
had been issued under this facility.
the company expects to use commercial paper
borrowings up to the amount of its above unused bank facilities,
in conjunction with term debt issuance and operating cash flow,
to retire or refinance other borrowings before or as they come
due.
the company has filed a u.s. shelf registration
statement which allows the company to borrow up to
$7.5billion of which $1.8billion was available at
september30, 2004. the company also has a
-45-
table of contents
european medium-term note program, which permits
issuance of approximately $4billion of debt instruments,
which has $2.9billion of capacity at september30,
2004.
the company declared an annual dividend of $0.24
per share on december1, 2004 related to fiscal 2004. the
dividend is payable on january6, 2005 to shareholders of
record on december10, 2004. the company paid a
$430million dividend ($0.21 per share) related to fiscal
2003 on january6, 2004 to shareholders of record on
december12, 2003. the company paid a $429million
dividend ($0.21 per share) during the first quarter of fiscal
2003 applicable to fiscal 2002 and paid a $428million
dividend ($0.21 per share) during the first quarter of fiscal
2002 applicable to fiscal 2001.
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004, the
company repurchased 14.9 million shares of disney common stock
for approximately $335million. no shares of disney common
stock were repurchased during fiscal 2003 and fiscal 2002. as of
september30, 2004, the company was authorized to
repurchase up to approximately 315million shares of
company common stock.
euro disney is currently in the process of a
financial restructuring, that if completed, will result in a
refinancing of its debt. see note 4 to the consolidated
financial statements for further details on the terms of the
restructuring.
we believe that the companys financial
condition is strong and that its cash balances, other liquid
assets, operating cash flows, access to debt and equity capital
markets and borrowing capacity, taken together, provide adequate
resources to fund ongoing operating requirements and future
capital expenditures related to the expansion of existing
businesses and development of new projects. however, the
companys operating cash flow and access to the capital
markets can be impacted by macroeconomic factors outside of its
control. in addition to macroeconomic factors, the
companys borrowing costs can be impacted by short and
long-term debt ratings assigned by independent rating agencies,
which are based, in significant part, on the companys
performance as measured by certain credit measures such as
interest coverage and leverage ratios. as of september30,
2004, moodys investors services long and short-term
debt ratings for the company were baal and p-2, respectively,
with stable outlook; and standard & poors long and
short-term debt ratings for the company were bbb+ and a-2,
respectively, with stable outlook. the companys bank
facilities contain only one financial covenant, relating to
interest coverage, which the company met on september30,
2004, by a significant margin. the companys bank
facilities also specifically exclude certain entities, including
euro disney and hong kong disneyland, from any representations,
covenants or events of default.
contractual obligations, commitments and off
balance sheet arrangements
the company has various contractual obligations
which are recorded as liabilities in our consolidated financial
statements. other items, such as certain purchase commitments
and other executory contracts are not recognized as liabilities
in our consolidated financial statements but are required to be
disclosed. for example, the company is contractually committed
to acquire broadcast programming and make certain minimum lease
payments for the use of property under operating lease
agreements.
-46-
table of contents
the following table summarizes our significant
contractual obligations and commercial commitments at
september30, 2004 and the future periods in which such
obligations are expected to be settled in cash. in addition, the
table reflects the timing of principal payments on outstanding
borrowings. additional details regarding these obligations are
provided in footnotes to the financial statements, as referenced
in the table:
payments due by period
less than
1-3
4-5
more than
(in millions)
total
1 year
years
years
5 years
borrowings (note6)(1)
$
19,729
$
2,411
$
4,386
$
1,477
$
11,455
operating lease commitments (note13)
2,172
capital lease obligations (note13)
sports programming commitments (note13)
6,513
2,612
2,918
broadcast programming commitments (note13)
3,087
1,510
total sports and other broadcast programming
commitments
9,600
4,122
3,688
1,384
other(2)
2,100
1,069
total contractual obligations(3)
$
34,486
$
7,948
$
9,453
$
3,574
$
13,511
(1)
amounts exclude market value adjustments totaling
$369million. maturities of euro disneys borrowings
are included based on the contractual terms. amounts include
interest payments based on contractual terms.
(2)
other commitments primarily comprise creative
talent and employment agreements including obligations to
actors, producers, sports personnel, executives and television
and radio personalities. amounts also include capital
expenditure commitments at hong kong disneyland and other
commitments, such as computer hardware maintenance commitments,
vendor commitments and minimum print and advertising commitments.
(3)
comprised of the following:
liabilities recorded on the balance sheet
$
14,329
commitments not recorded on the balance sheet
20,157
$
34,486
the company also has obligations with respect to
its pension and post-retirement medical benefit plans. see note
8 to the consolidated financial statements.
contingent commitments and
contingencies
the company also has certain contractual
arrangements that would require the company to make payments or
provide funding if certain circumstances occur (contingent
commitments). the company does not currently expect that
the remaining contingent commitments will result in any amounts
being paid by the company.
contractual guarantees
see note 13 to the consolidated financial
statements for information regarding the companys
contractual guarantees.
-47-
table of contents
euro disney
as described in note 4 to the consolidated
financial statements, the company has signed a memorandum of
agreement (moa)with respect to the financial restructuring
of euro disney that remains subject to certain approvals by euro
disneys shareholders (which the company has agreed to vote
in favor of), completion of final documentation, and successful
implementation of an equity rights offering by no later than
march31, 2005. if approved, the moa would commit the
company to make certain investments in and advances to euro
disney. in addition, the timing of euro disneys future
payments to its lenders will change as discussed in note 4.
aircraft leveraged lease investment
as disclosed in more detail in note 4 to the
consolidated financial statements, as of september30,
2004, the companys remaining net aircraft leveraged lease
investment totaled approximately $156million, consisting
of $101million and $55million with delta air lines,
inc. (delta) and fedex, respectively. given the current status
of the airline industry, we continue to monitor the
recoverability of these investments, particularly the delta
leases. delta has disclosed that if it is unsuccessful in
reducing its operating expenses and continues to experience
significant losses, it will need to seek to restructure its
costs under chapter11 of the u.s. bankruptcy code.
although delta remains current on their lease payments to us,
the inability of delta to make their lease payments, or the
termination of our lease in a bankruptcy proceeding, could
result in a material charge for the write-down of our investment
and could accelerate certain income tax payments.
legal and tax matters
as disclosed in notes 7 and 13 to the
consolidated financial statements, the company has exposure for
certain legal and tax matters.
accounting policies and estimates
we believe that the application of the following
accounting policies, which are important to our financial
position and results of operations, requires significant
judgments and estimates on the part of management. for a summary
of all of our accounting policies, including the accounting
policies discussed below, see note 2 to the consolidated
financial statements.
film and television revenues and
costs
we expense the cost of film and television
production and participations as well as certain multi-year
sports rights over the applicable product life cycle based upon
the ratio of the current periods gross revenues to the
estimated remaining total gross revenues or on a straight-line
basis, as appropriate. these estimates are calculated on an
individual production basis for film and television and on an
individual contract basis for sports rights. estimates of total
gross revenues can change significantly due to a variety of
factors, including advertising rates and the level of market
acceptance of the production.
for film productions, estimated remaining gross
revenue from all sources includes revenue that will be earned
within ten years of the date of the initial theatrical release.
for television series, we include revenues that will be earned
within 10years of the delivery of the first episode, or if
still in production, five years from the date of delivery of the
most recent episode. for acquired film libraries, remaining
revenues include amounts to be earned for up to 20years
from the date of acquisition.
television network and station rights for
theatrical movies, series and other programs are charged to
expense based on the number of times the program is expected to
be shown. estimates of usage of television network and station
programming can change based on competition and audience
acceptance. accordingly, revenue estimates and planned usage are
reviewed periodically and are revised if necessary. a change in
revenue projections or planned usage could have an impact on our
results of operations.
-48-
table of contents
costs of film and television productions and
programming costs for our television and cable networks are
subject to valuation adjustments pursuant to applicable
accounting rules. the net realizable value of the television
broadcast program licenses and rights are reviewed using a
daypart methodology. the companys dayparts are: early
morning, daytime, late night, primetime, news, children and
sports (includes network and cable). a daypart is defined as an
aggregation of programs broadcast during a particular time of
day or programs of a similar type. the net realizable values of
other cable programming are reviewed on an aggregated basis for
each cable channel. estimated values are based upon assumptions
about future demand and market conditions. if actual demand or
market conditions are less favorable than our projections, film
and television programming asset write-downs may be required.
revenue recognition
the company has revenue recognition policies for
its various operating segments, which are appropriate to the
circumstances of each business. see note 2 to the consolidated
financial statements for a summary of these revenue recognition
policies.
we record reductions to revenues for estimated
future returns of merchandise, primarily home video, dvd and
software products, and for customer programs and sales
incentives. these estimates are based upon historical return
experience, current economic trends and projections of customer
demand for and acceptance of our products. if we underestimate
the level of returns in a particular period, we may record less
revenue in later periods when returns exceed the predicted
amount. conversely, if we overestimate the level of returns for
a period, we may have additional revenue in later periods when
returns are less than predicted.
pension and postretirement benefit plan
actuarial assumptions
the companys pension benefit and
postretirement medical benefit obligations and related costs are
calculated using actuarial concepts, within the framework of
statement of financial accounting standards no.87
employers accounting for pensions (sfas 87) and
statement of financial accounting standards no.106,
employers accounting for postretirement benefits other
than pensions (sfas 106), respectively. two critical
assumptions, the discount rate and the expected return on plan
assets, are important elements of expense and/or liability
measurement. we evaluate these critical assumptions annually.
other assumptions involve employee demographic factors such as
retirement patterns, mortality, turnover and the rate of
compensation increase.
the discount rate enables us to state expected
future benefit payments as a present value on the measurement
date. the guideline for setting this rate is a high-quality
long-term corporate bond rate. a lower discount rate increases
the present value of benefit obligations and increases pension
expense. we increased our discount rate to 6.30% in 2004 from
5.85% in 2003 to reflect market interest rate conditions. a one
percentage point decrease in the assumed discount rate would
increase annual expense and the projected benefit obligation by
$31million and $620million, respectively. a one
percentage point increase in the assumed discount rate would
decrease annual expense and projected benefit obligations by
$29million and $515million, respectively.
to determine the expected long-term rate of
return on the plan assets, we consider the current and expected
asset allocation, as well as historical and expected returns on
each plan asset class. a lower expected rate of return on
pension plan assets will increase pension expense. our long-term
expected return on plan assets was 7.50% in both 2004 and 2003,
respectively. a one percentage point change in the long-term
return on pension plan asset assumption would impact annual
pension expense by approximately $29million. see note 8 to
the consolidated financial statements.
goodwill, intangible assets, long-lived assets
and investments
effective october1, 2001, we adopted
statement of financial accounting standards no.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets (sfas 142). goodwill
and other intangible assets must be tested
-49-
table of contents
for impairment on an annual basis. we completed
our impairment testing as of september30, 2004 and
determined that there were no impairment losses related to
goodwill and other intangible assets. in assessing the
recoverability of goodwill and other intangible assets, market
values and projections regarding estimated future cash flows and
other factors are used to determine the fair value of the
respective assets. if these estimates or related projections
change in the future, we may be required to record impairment
charges for these assets.
for purposes of performing the impairment test
for goodwill as required by sfas 142 we established the
following reporting units: cable networks, television
broadcasting, radio, studio entertainment, consumer products and
parks and resorts.
sfas 142 requires the company to compare the fair
value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount on an annual
basis to determine if there is potential goodwill impairment. if
the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying
value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent that the
fair value of the goodwill within the reporting unit is less
than its carrying value.
sfas 142 requires the company to compare the fair
value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset to its carrying
amount. if the carrying amount of an indefinite-lived intangible
asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized.
fair values for goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible
assets are determined based on discounted cash flows, market
multiples or appraised values as appropriate.
to determine the fair value of our reporting
units, we generally use a present value technique (discounted
cash flow) corroborated by market multiples when available and
as appropriate, for all of the reporting units except for the
television network which is included in the television
broadcasting group. the television broadcasting reporting unit
includes the television network and the owned and operated
television stations. these businesses have been grouped together
because their respective cash flows are dependent on one
another. for purposes of our impairment test, we used a revenue
multiple to value the television network. we did not use a
present value technique or a market multiple approach to value
the television network as a present value technique would not
capture the full fair value of the television network and there
is little comparable market data available due to the scarcity
of television networks. we applied what we believe to be the
most appropriate valuation methodology for each of the reporting
units. if we had established different reporting units or
utilized different valuation methodologies, the impairment test
results could differ.
long-lived assets include certain long-term
investments. the fair value of the long-term investments is
dependent on the performance of the investee companies, as well
as volatility inherent in the external markets for these
investments. in assessing potential impairment for these
investments, we consider these factors as well as forecasted
financial performance of our investees. if these forecasts are
not met, impairment charges may be required.
contingencies and litigation
we are currently involved in certain legal
proceedings and, as required, have accrued estimates of the
probable costs for the resolution of these claims. these
estimates have been developed in consultation with outside
counsel and are based upon an analysis of potential results,
assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies.
it is possible, however, that future results of operations for
any particular quarterly or annual period could be materially
affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of
our strategies related to these proceedings. see note 13 to the
consolidated financial statements for more detailed information
on litigation exposure.
income tax audits
as a matter of course, the company is regularly
audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. from time
to time, these audits result in proposed assessments. during the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2004, the company reached a settlement
with the internal revenue service regarding all
-50-
table of contents
assessments proposed with respect to the
companys federal income tax returns for 1993 through 1995.
this settlement resulted in the company releasing
$120million in tax reserves which are no longer required
with respect to these matters. this release of reserves is
reflected in the current year income tax provision. during the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2003, the company resolved certain
state income tax audit issues and the corresponding release of
$56million of related tax reserves is reflected in the
2003 income tax provision.
accounting changes
fin 46r
in december 2003, the fasb issued fin 46r which
was generally effective as of march31, 2004. variable
interest entities (vies) are primarily entities that lack
sufficient equity to finance their activities without additional
financial support from other parties or whose equity holders
lack adequate decision making ability. all vies with which the
company is involved must be evaluated to determine the primary
beneficiary of the risks and rewards of the vie. the primary
beneficiary is required to consolidate the vie for financial
reporting purposes.
the company has minority equity interests in
certain entities, including euro disney s.c.a. (euro disney) and
hongkong international theme parks limited (hong kong
disneyland). in connection with the adoption of fin 46r, the
company concluded that euro disney and hong kong disneyland are
vies and that we are the primary beneficiary. pursuant to the
transition provisions of fin 46r, the company began
consolidating euro disney and hong kong disneylands
balance sheets on march31, 2004, the end of the
companys second quarter of fiscal year 2004 and the income
and cash flow statements beginning april1, 2004, the
beginning of the third quarter of fiscal year 2004. under fin
46r transition rules, the operating results of euro disney and
hong kong disneyland continued to be accounted for on the equity
method for the six month period ended march31, 2004.
we have concluded that the rest of our equity
investments do not require consolidation as either they are not
vies, or in the event that they are vies, we are not the primary
beneficiary. the company also has variable interests in certain
other vies that will not be consolidated because the company is
not the primary beneficiary. these vies do not involve any
material exposure to the company.
-51-
table of contents
the following table presents the condensed
consolidating balance sheet of the company, reflecting the
impact of consolidating the balance sheets of euro disney and
hong kong disneyland as of september30, 2004.
before euro
disney and hong
euro disney, hong
kong disneyland
kong disneyland
consolidation
and adjustments
total
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,730
$
$
2,042
other current assets
7,103
7,327
total current assets
8,833
9,369
investments
1,991
(699
)
1,292
fixed assets
12,529
3,953
16,482
intangible assets
2,815
2,815
goodwill
16,966
16,966
other assets
6,843
6,978
total assets
$
49,977
$
3,925
$
53,902
current portion of borrowings(1)
$
1,872
$
2,221
$
4,093
other current liabilities
6,349
6,966
total current liabilities
8,221
2,838
11,059
borrowings
8,850
9,395
deferred income taxes
2,950
2,950
other long term liabilities
3,394
3,619
minority interests
shareholders equity
26,075
26,081
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
49,977
$
3,925
$
53,902
(1)
all of euro disneys borrowings of
$2.2billion are classified as current as they are subject
to acceleration if certain requirements of the memorandum of
agreement (moa) are not achieved as part of the
current restructuring process (see note 4 to the consolidated
financial statements).
the following table presents the condensed
consolidating income statement of the company for the year ended
september30, 2004, reflecting the impact of consolidating
the income statements of euro disney and hong kong disneyland
beginning april1, 2004(1).
before euro
disney and hong
euro disney, hong
kong disneyland
kong disneyland and
consolidation
adjustments
total
revenues
$
30,037
$
$
30,752
cost and expenses
(26,053
)
(651
)
(26,704
)
restructuring and impairment charges
(64
)
(64
)
net interest expense
(575
)
(42
)
(617
)
equity in the income of investees
(26
)
income before income taxes and minority interests
3,743
(4
)
3,739
income taxes
(1,199
)
(1,197
)
minority interests
(199
)
(197
)
net income
$
2,345
$
$
2,345
-52-
table of contents
(1)
as discussed above, under fin 46r transition
rules, the operating results of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland continued to be accounted for on the equity method
for the six month period ended march 31, 2004.
the following table presents the condensed
consolidating cash flow statement of the company for the year
ended september30, 2004, reflecting the impact of
consolidating the cash flow statements of euro disney and hong
kong disneyland beginning april1, 2004.
before euro
disney and hong
euro disney, hong
kong disneyland
kong disneyland
consolidation
and adjustments(1)
total
cash provided by operations
$
4,283
$
$
4,370
investments in parks, resorts and other property
(1,138
)
(289
)
(1,427
)
free cash flow
3,145
(202
)
2,943
other investing activities
(107
)
(57
)
cash provided (used)by financing activities
(2,891
)
(2,701
)
increase in cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
1,583
1,857
cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
1,730
$
$
2,042
(1)
includes cash flows of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland for the six months ended september30, 2004.
fsp 106-2
in may 2004, the fasb issued fasb staff position
no.106-2, accounting and disclosure requirements
related to the medicare prescription drug, improvement and
modernization act of 2003 (fsp106-2) in response to a
new law regarding prescription drug benefits under medicare as
well as a federal subsidy to sponsors of retiree healthcare
benefit plans. we expect that the impact of this act will not be
material.
eitf 00-21
the company adopted emerging issues task force
(eitf) no.00-21, revenue arrangements with multiple
deliverables (eitf00-21), effective october1,
2002, in the fiscal fourth quarter of 2003. eitf00-21
addresses revenue recognition for revenues derived from a single
contract that contains multiple products or services. the rule
provides additional requirements to determine when such revenues
may be recorded separately for accounting purposes.
historically, the company had recognized the nfl broadcast
portion of espns affiliate revenue when the nfl games were
aired, as espns affiliate contracts provided a basis for
allocating such revenue between nfl and non-nfl programming.
since the cost of the nfl rights had also been recognized as the
games were aired, the company recognized both the nfl revenues
and nfl costs in the quarters the games were aired.
under eitf00-21s requirements for
separating the revenue elements of a single contract, the
company no longer allocates espns affiliate revenue
between nfl and non-nfl programming for accounting purposes. as
a consequence, the company no longer matches all nfl revenue
with nfl costs as espn affiliate revenue (including the nfl
portion) is generally recognized ratably throughout the year,
while nfl contract costs continue to be recognized in the
quarters the games are aired. this accounting change impacts
only the timing of revenue recognition and has no impact on cash
flow. as a result of this change, the media networks segment
reports significantly reduced revenue
-53-
table of contents
and profitability in the first fiscal quarter
when the majority of the nfl games are aired, with
commensurately increased revenues and profits in the second and
third fiscal quarters.
the company elected to adopt this new accounting
rule using the cumulative effect approach. in the fiscal fourth
quarter of 2003, the company recorded an after-tax charge of
$71million for the cumulative effect of a change in
accounting as of the beginning of fiscal year 2003. this amount
represented the revenue recorded for nfl games in the fourth
quarter of fiscal year 2002, which would have been recorded
ratably over fiscal 2003 under the new accounting method.
forward-looking statements
the private securities litigation reform act of
1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements made
by or on behalf of the company. we may from time to time make
written or oral statements that are forward-looking,
including statements contained in this report and other filings
with the securities and exchange commission and in reports to
our shareholders. such statements may, for example, express
expectations or projections about future actions that we may
take, including restructuring or strategic initiatives or about
developments beyond our control including changes in domestic or
global economic conditions. these statements are made on the
basis of managements views and assumptions as of the time
the statements are made and we undertake no obligation to update
these statements. there can be no assurance, however, that our
expectations will necessarily come to pass.
factors that may affect forward-looking
statements. for an enterprise as large
and complex as the company, a wide range of factors could
materially affect future developments and performance.
significant factors affecting specific business operations are
identified in connection with the description of these
operations and the financial results of these operations
elsewhere in this report. general factors affecting our
operations include:
changes in company-wide or business-unit
strategies, which may result in changes in the types or mix of
businesses in which the company is involved or will invest;
changes in u.s., global or regional economic
conditions, which may affect attendance and spending at the
companys parks and resorts, purchases of company-licensed
consumer products, the advertising market for broadcast and
cable television programming and the performance of the
companys theatrical and home entertainment releases;
changes in u.s. and global financial and equity
markets, including market disruptions and significant interest
rate fluctuations, which may impede the companys access
to, or increase the cost of, external financing for its
operations and investments;
changes in cost of providing pension and other
postretirement medical benefits, including changes in health
care costs, investment returns on plan assets, and discount
rates used to calculate pension and related liabilities;
increased competitive pressures, both
domestically and internationally, which may, among other things,
affect the performance of the companys parks and resorts
operations, divert consumers from our creative or other
products, or to other products or other forms of entertainment,
or lead to increased expenses in such areas as television
programming acquisition and motion picture production and
marketing;
legal and regulatory developments that may affect
particular business units, such as regulatory actions affecting
environmental activities, consumer products, theme park safety,
broadcasting or internet activities or the protection of
intellectual property; the imposition by foreign countries of
trade restrictions or motion picture or television content
requirements or quotas, and changes in domestic or international
tax laws or currency controls;
-54-
table of contents
adverse weather conditions or natural disasters,
such as hurricanes and earthquakes, which may, among other
things, affect performance at the companys parks and
resorts;
technological developments that may affect the
distribution of the companys creative products or create
new risks to the companys ability to protect its
intellectual property;
labor disputes, which may lead to increased costs
or disruption of operations in any of the companys
business units;
changing public and consumer tastes and
preferences, which may, among other things, affect the
companys entertainment, broadcasting and consumer products
businesses generally or the companys parks and resorts
operations specifically, or result in lower broadcasting ratings
or loss of advertising revenue;
changes in or termination of long-term contracts
for the acquisition or distribution of media programming or
products, which may impact the availability of programming or
product, the cost of acquired content, the ability to distribute
content, or the revenue recognized from the distribution of
content; and
international, political, health concerns and
military developments that may affect among other things, travel
and leisure businesses generally or the companys parks and
resorts operations specifically, or result in increases in
broadcasting costs or loss of advertising revenue.
this list of factors that may affect future
performance and the accuracy of forward-looking statements is
illustrative, but by no means exhaustive. accordingly, all
forward-looking statements should be evaluated with the
understanding of their inherent uncertainty.
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
the company is exposed to the impact of interest
rate changes, foreign currency fluctuations and changes in the
market values of its investments.
policies and procedures
in the normal course of business, we employ
established policies and procedures to manage the companys
exposure to changes in interest rates, foreign currencies and
the fair market value of certain investments in debt and equity
securities using a variety of financial instruments.
our objectives in managing exposure to interest
rate changes are to limit the impact of interest rate volatility
on earnings and cash flows and to lower overall borrowing costs.
to achieve these objectives, we primarily use interest rate
swaps to manage net exposure to interest rate changes related to
the companys portfolio of borrowings. by policy, the
company maintains fixed-rate debt as a percentage of its net
debt between a minimum and maximum percentage.
our objective in managing exposure to foreign
currency fluctuations is to reduce earnings and cash flow
volatility in order to allow management to focus on core
business issues and challenges. accordingly, the company enters
into various contracts that change in value as foreign exchange
rates change to protect the value of its existing foreign
currency assets, liabilities, commitments and forecasted foreign
currency revenues. the company utilizes option strategies and
forward contracts that provide for the sale of foreign
currencies to hedge probable, but not firmly committed,
transactions. the company also uses forward contracts to hedge
foreign currency assets and liabilities. the principal foreign
currencies hedged are the euro, british pound, japanese yen and
canadian dollar. cross-currency swaps are used to effectively
convert foreign currency denominated borrowings to u.s. dollar
denominated borrowings. by policy, the company maintains hedge
coverage between minimum and maximum percentages of its
forecasted foreign exchange exposures generally for periods not
to exceed five years. the gains and losses on these contracts
offset changes in the value of the related exposures.
-55-
table of contents
it is the companys policy to enter into
foreign currency and interest rate derivative transactions and
other financial instruments only to the extent considered
necessary to meet its objectives as stated above. the company
does not enter into these transactions for speculative purposes.
value at risk (var)
the company utilizes a var model to estimate the
maximum potential one-day loss in the fair value of its interest
rate, foreign exchange and market sensitive equity financial
instruments. the var model estimates were made assuming normal
market conditions and a 95% confidence level. various modeling
techniques can be used in a var computation. the companys
computations are based on the interrelationships between
movements in various interest rates, currencies and equity
prices (a variance/co-variance technique). these
interrelationships were determined by observing interest rate,
foreign currency and equity market changes over the preceding
quarter for the calculation of var amounts at september30,
2004. the model includes all of the companys debt as well
as all interest rate and foreign exchange derivative contracts
and market sensitive equity investments. the values of foreign
exchange options do not change on a one-to-one basis with the
underlying currencies, as exchange rates vary. therefore, the
hedge coverage assumed to be obtained from each option has been
adjusted to reflect its respective sensitivity to changes in
currency values. forecasted transactions, firm commitments and
receivables and accounts payable denominated in foreign
currencies, which certain of these instruments are intended to
hedge, were excluded from the model.
the var model is a risk analysis tool and does
not purport to represent actual losses in fair value that will
be incurred by the company, nor does it consider the potential
effect of favorable changes in market factors.
var on a combined basis decreased from
$51million at september30, 2003 to $31million
at september30, 2004. the majority of the decrease is due
to increased correlation benefits and lower market value of
interest rate sensitive instruments.
the estimated maximum potential one-day loss in
fair value, calculated using the var model, is as follows
(unaudited, in millions):
interest rate
currency
sensitive
sensitive
equity sensitive
financial
financial
financial
combined
(in millions)
instruments
instruments
instruments
portfolio
var as of september30, 2004
$
$
$
$
average var during the year ended
september30, 2004
$
$
$
$
highest var during the year ended
september30, 2004
$
$
$
$
lowest var during the year ended
september30, 2004
$
$
$
$
var as of september30, 2003
$
$
$
$
the var for euro disney and hong kong disneyland
is immaterial as of september30, 2004. in calculating the
var it was determined that credit risks are the primary driver
for changes in the value of euro disneys debt rather than
interest rate risks. accordingly, we have excluded euro
disneys borrowings from the var calculation.
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary
data
see index to financial statements and
supplemental data on page64.
-56-
table of contents
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants
on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
item 9a.
controls and procedures
evaluation of disclosure controls and
procedures we have
established disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that
material information relating to the company, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to the officers who
certify the companys financial reports and to other
members of senior management and the board of directors.
based on their evaluation as of
september30, 2004, the principal executive officer and
principal financial officer of the company have concluded that
the companys disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the
securities exchange act of 1934) are effective to ensure that
the information required to be disclosed by the company in the
reports that it files or submits under the securities exchange
act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported
within the time periods specified in sec rules and forms.
managements report on internal control
over financial reporting
our management is responsible for
establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting, as such term is defined in exchange act
rules13a-15(f). under the supervision and with the
participation of our management, including our principal
executive officer and principal financial officer, we conducted
an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over
financial reporting based on the framework in internal
control integrated framework issued by the
committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission. based on our evaluation under the framework in
internal control integrated framework, our
management concluded that our internal control over financial
reporting was effective as of september30, 2004. our
managements assessment of the effectiveness of our
internal control over financial reporting as of
september30, 2004 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included
herein.
changes in internal controls
in fiscal 2002, the company initiated
a company-wide implementation of new integrated finance and
human resources applications software, related information
technology systems, and enterprise-wide shared services (the new
systems). as of september30, 2003, a substantial number of
the companys business units were using the new systems and
as of september30, 2004, substantially all of the
companys businesses are using the new systems. the
implementation has involved changes in systems that included
internal controls, and accordingly, these changes have required
changes to our system of internal controls. we have reviewed
each system as it is being implemented and the controls affected
by the implementation of the new systems and made appropriate
changes to affected internal controls as we implemented the new
systems. we believe that the controls as modified are
appropriate and functioning effectively.
item 9b.
other information
none.
-57-
table of contents
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the
company
information regarding section16(a)
compliance, the audit committee, the companys code of
ethics and background of the directors appearing under the
captions stock ownership, governance of the
company and election of directors in the
companys proxy statement for the 2005 annual meeting of
shareholders is hereby incorporated by reference.
information regarding executive officers is
included in part i of this form10-k as permitted by
general instruction g(3).
item 11.
executive compensation
information appearing under the captions
how are directors compensated? and executive
compensation (other than the report of the compensation
committee) in the 2005 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by
reference.
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder matters
information setting forth the security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management appearing under the
caption stock ownership and information appearing
under the caption equity compensation plans in the
2005 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by reference.
item 13.
certain relationships and related
transactions
information regarding certain related
transactions appearing under the captions governance of
the company and executive compensation in the
2005 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by reference.
item 14.
principal accountant fees and
services
information appearing under the captions
fees to independent registered public accountants for
fiscal 2004 and 2003 in the 2005 proxy statement is hereby
incorporated by reference.
-58-
table of contents
partiv
item 15.
exhibits and financial statement
schedules
(a)
exhibits and financial statements and schedules
(1)financial statements and schedules
see index to financial statements and
supplemental data at page64.
(2)exhibits
the documents set forth below are filed herewith
or incorporated herein by reference to the location indicated.
exhibit
location
3(a)
amended and restated certificate of incorporation
of the company
annexc to the joint proxy statement/
prospectus included in the registration statement on
forms-4 (no.333-88105) of the company, filed
sept.30, 1999
3(b)
bylaws of the company
exhibit3(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended june30, 2004
4(a)
five-year credit agreement, dated as of
february25, 2004
exhibit10(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended march31, 2004
4(b)
364-day credit agreement dated as of
february25, 2004
exhibit10(b) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended march31, 2004
4(c)
indenture, dated as of nov.30, 1990,
between dei and bankers trust company, as trustee
exhibit2 to the current report on
form8-k of dei, dated jan.14, 1991
4(d)
indenture, dated as of mar.7, 1996, between
the company and citibank, n.a., as trustee
exhibit4.1(a) to the current report on
form8-k of the company, dated march7, 1996
4(e)
senior debt securities indenture, dated as of
september24, 2001, between the company and wells fargo
bank, n.a., as trustee
exhibit4.1 to the current report on
form8-k of the company, dated september24, 2001
4(f)
other long-term borrowing instruments are omitted
pursuant to item601(b) (4) (iii) of regulations-k.
the company undertakes to furnish copies of such instruments to
the commission upon request
10(a)
(i) agreement on the creation and the operation
of euro disneyland en france, dated mar.25, 1987, and
(ii)letter relating thereto of the chairman of disney
enterprises, inc., dated mar.24, 1987
exhibits10(b) and 10(a), respectively, to
the current report on form8-k of dei, dated apr.4,
10(b)
memorandum of agreement dated june8, 2004,
among euro disney, s.c.a. and certain of its affiliates, the
company, caisse des dpts et consignations, the
lenders (as defined therein), bnp paribas and calyon
exhibit3 to the companys report on
schedule13d filed june29, 2004, with respect to euro
disney sca
-59-
table of contents
exhibit
location
10(c)
amendments to the june8, 2004 memorandum of
agreement
exhibit10.2 to the current report on
form8-k of the company filed october6, 2004
10(d)
composite limited recourse financing facility
agreement, dated as of apr.27, 1988, between dei and tdl
funding company, as amended
exhibit10(b) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(e)
amended and restated employment agreement, dated
june29, 2000, between the company and michael d. eisner
exhibit10(a) to the form 10-q of the
company for the period ended june30, 2000
10(f)
first amendment to amended and restated
employment agreement dated june29, 2004 between the
company and michael d. eisner
exhibit10(c) to the form 10-q of the
company for the period ended march31, 2004
10(g)
employment agreement, dated jan.24, 2000,
between the company and robert a. iger
exhibit10 to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended march30, 2000
10(h)
amendment, dated april15, 2002, to the
employment agreement between the company and robert a. iger
exhibit10(e) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2002
10(i)
consulting agreement dated as of
february22, 2003 between the company and louis m. meisinger
exhibit10(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended march31, 2003
10(j)
employment agreement, dated september26,
2003 between the company and alan n. braverman
exhibit10(g) to the form 10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2003
10(k)
employment agreement, dated september26,
2003 between the company and thomas o. staggs
exhibit10(h) to the form 10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2003
10(l)
description of directors compensation
incorporated by reference to report on form 8-k
of the company filed july2, 2004
10(m)
directors retirement policy
exhibit10(a) to the form 10-q of the
company for the period ended december31, 2002
10(n)
form of indemnification agreement for certain
officers and directors
annexc to the proxy statement for the 1988
annual meeting of dei
10(o)
1995 stock option plan for non-employee directors
exhibit20 to the forms-8 registration
statement (no.33-57811) of dei, dated feb.23, 1995
10(p)
amended and restated 1990 stock incentive plan
and rules
appendixb-2 to the joint proxy statement/
prospectus included in the forms-4 registration statement
(no. 33-64141) of dei, dated nov.13, 1995
10(q)
amended and restated 1995 stock incentive plan
and rules
exhibit4.3 to the forms-8
registration statement (no.333-74624) of the company,
dated december6, 2001
10(r)
amendment to amended and restated 1995 stock
incentive plan
incorporated by reference to item1.01(a) of
report on form8-k of the company filed september23,
10(s)
(i) 1987 stock incentive plan and rules and
(ii)1984 stock incentive plan and rules
exhibits1(a), 1(b), 2(a) and 2(b),
respectively, to the prospectus contained in the forms-8
registration statement (no.33-26106) of dei, dated
dec.20, 1988
-60-
table of contents
exhibit
location
10(t)
amendment, dated june26, 2000, to the
companys stock incentive plans
exhibit10(b) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended june30, 2000
10(u)
2002 executive performance plan
annex 1 to the proxy statement for the 2002
annual meeting of the company
10(v)
management incentive bonus program approved
september19, 2004
incorporated by reference to report on
form8-k of the company filed september23, 2004
10(w)
amended and restated 1997 non-employee directors
stock and deferred compensation plan
annexii to the proxy statement for the 2003
annual meeting of the company
10(x)
key employees deferred compensation and
retirement plan
exhibit10(u) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(y)
group personal excess liability insurance plan
exhibit10(o) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(z)
family income assurance plan (summary description)
exhibit10(p) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(aa)
form of restricted stock unit award agreement
(time-based vesting)
filed herewith
10(bb)
form of restricted stock unit award agreement
(bonus related)
filed herewith
10(cc)
form of performance-based stock unit award
filed herewith
subsidiaries of the company
filed herewith
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
filed herewith
31(a)
rule 13a-14(a) certification of chief executive
officer of the company in accordance with section302 of
the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
filed herewith
31(b)
rule13a-14(a) certification of chief
financial officer of the company in accordance with
section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
filed herewith
32(a)
section1350 certification of chief
executive officer of the company in accordance with
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002*
furnished herewith
32(b)
section1350 certification of chief
financial officer of the company in accordance with
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002*
furnished herewith
*
a signed original of this written statement
required by section906 has been provided to the company
and will be retained by the company and furnished to the
securities and exchange commission or its staff upon request.
-61-
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13
or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the walt disney company
(registrant)
date: december 13,2004
by: michael d. eisner
(michael d. eisner,
chief executive officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
principal executive officer
/s/ michael
d.eisner
(michael d.eisner)
chief executive officer
december 13, 2004
principal operating officer
/s/ robert a. iger
(robert a. iger)
president and chief
operating officer
december 13,2004
principal financial and accounting
officers
/s/ thomas o. staggs
(thomas o. staggs)
senior executive vice president and chief
financial officer
december 13,2004
/s/ john j. garand
(john j. garand)
executive vice president-planning and control
december 13,2004
directors
/s/ john e. bryson
(john e. bryson)
director
december 13,2004
/s/ john s. chen
(john s. chen)
director
december 13,2004
/s/ michael d. eisner
(michael d. eisner)
director
december 13,2004
/s/ judith l. estrin
(judith l. estrin)
director
december 13,2004
/s/ robert a. iger
(robert a. iger)
director
december 13,2004
/s/ aylwin b. lewis
(aylwin b. lewis)
director
december 13,2004
-62-
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ monica c. lozano
(monica c. lozano)
director
december 13,2004
/s/ robert w. matschullat
(robert w. matschullat)
director
december 13,2004
/s/ george j. mitchell
(george j. mitchell)
chairman of the board and director
december 13,2004
/s/ leo j. odonovan, s.j.
(leo j. odonovan, s.j.)
director
december 13,2004
/s/ gary l. wilson
(gary l. wilson)
director
december 13,2004
-63-
table of contents
the walt disney company and
subsidiaries
index to financial statements and supplemental
data
page
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
consolidated financial statements of the walt
disney company andsubsidiaries
consolidated statements of income for the years
ended september30, 2004, 2003 and 2002
consolidated balance sheets as of
september30, 2004 and 2003
consolidated statements of cash flows for the
years ended september30, 2004, 2003 and 2002
consolidated statements of shareholders
equity for the years ended september30, 2004, 2003 and 2002
notes to consolidated financial statements
quarterly financial summary (unaudited)
all schedules are omitted for the reason that
they are not applicable or the required information is included
in the financial statements or notes.
-64-
table of contents
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
to the board of directors and shareholders of the
walt disney company
in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets and the related consolidated statements of
income, shareholders equity, and cash flows present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
walt disney company and its subsidiaries (the company) at
september30, 2004 and 2003, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended september30, 2004, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america. also in our opinion, managements assessment,
included in the accompanying managements report on
internal control over financial reporting appearing under
item9a, that the company maintained effective internal
control over financial reporting as of september30, 2004
based on criteria established in internal control
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso), is fairly
stated, in all material respects, based on those criteria.
furthermore, in our opinion, the company maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial
reporting as of september30, 2004, based on criteria
established in internal control integrated
framework issued by the coso. the companys management
is responsible for these financial statements, for maintaining
effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting. our responsibility is to express opinions
on (i)these financial statements;
(ii)managements assessment; and (iii)the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting based on our audits.
we conducted our audits in accordance with the
standards of the public company accounting oversight board
(united states). those standards require that we plan and
perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement and
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. our audit of financial
statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements, assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. our audit of internal
control over financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting,
evaluating managements assessment, testing and evaluating
the design and operating effectiveness of internal control, and
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in
the circumstances. we believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinions.
a companys internal control over financial
reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a
companys internal control over financial reporting
includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the
maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the
assets of the company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance
that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance
with authorizations of management and directors of the company;
and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention
or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the companys assets that could have a
material effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal
control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect
misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures
may deteriorate.
as discussed in note 2 to the consolidated
financial statements, the company adopted fasb interpretation
46r, consolidation of variable interest entities and,
accordingly, began consolidating euro disney and hong kong
disneyland as of march31, 2004. additionally, the company
adopted eitf no.00-21, revenue arrangements with
multiple deliverables as of october1, 2002, changing
the timing of revenue from certain contracts.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
los angeles, california
december9, 2004
-65-
table of contents
consolidated statements of income
(in millions, except per share data)
year ended september 30,
revenues
$
30,752
$
27,061
$
25,329
costs and expenses
(26,704
)
(24,348
)
(22,945
)
gain on sale of business
net interest expense
(617
)
(793
)
(453
)
equity in the income of investees
restructuring and impairment charges
(64
)
(16
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting change
3,739
2,254
2,190
income taxes
(1,197
)
(789
)
(853
)
minority interests
(197
)
(127
)
(101
)
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
change
2,345
1,338
1,236
cumulative effect of accounting change
(71
)
net income
$
2,345
$
1,267
$
1,236
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting change
diluted
$
1.12
$
0.65
$
0.60
basic
$
1.14
$
0.65
$
0.61
cumulative effect of accounting change per share
$
$
(0.03
)
$
earnings per share:
diluted
$
1.12
$
0.62
$
0.60
basic
$
1.14
$
0.62
$
0.61
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding:
diluted
2,106
2,067
2,044
basic
2,049
2,043
2,040
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-66-
table of contents
consolidated balance sheets
(in millions, except per share data)
september 30,
assets
current assets
cash and cashequivalents
$
2,042
$
1,583
receivables
4,558
4,238
inventories
television costs
deferred income taxes
other current assets
total current assets
9,369
8,314
film and television costs
5,938
6,205
investments
1,292
1,849
parks, resorts and other property, at cost
attractions, buildings and equipment
25,168
19,499
accumulated depreciation
(11,665
)
(8,794
)
13,503
10,705
projects in progress
1,852
1,076
land
1,127
16,482
12,678
intangible assets, net
2,815
2,786
goodwill
16,966
16,966
other assets
1,040
1,190
$
53,902
$
49,988
liabilities and shareholders
equity
current liabilities
accounts payable and other
accruedliabilities
$
5,623
$
5,044
current portion ofborrowings
4,093
2,457
unearned royalties and other advances
1,343
1,168
total currentliabilities
11,059
8,669
borrowings
9,395
10,643
deferred income taxes
2,950
2,712
other long-term liabilities
3,619
3,745
minority interests
commitments and contingencies (note 13)
shareholders equity
preferred stock, $.01 par value
authorized 100million shares,
issued none
common stock
common stock disney, $.01 par value
authorized 3.6billion shares,
issued 2.1billion shares
12,447
12,154
common stock internet group, $.01 par
value
authorized 1.0billion shares,
issued none
retained earnings
15,732
13,817
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(236
)
(653
)
27,943
25,318
treasury stock, at cost, 101.6million
shares at september30, 2004 and 86.7million shares
at september30, 2003
(1,862
)
(1,527
)
26,081
23,791
$
53,902
$
49,988
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-67-
table of contents
consolidated statements of cash
flows
(in millions)
year ended september 30,
operating activities
net income
$
2,345
$
1,267
1,236
depreciation
1,198
1,059
1,021
amortization of intangible assets
deferred income taxes
(98
)
equity in the income of investees
(372
)
(334
)
(225
)
cash distributions received from equity investees
minority interests
change in film and television costs
(369
)
(97
)
gain on sale of business
(16
)
(34
)
gain on sale of knight-ridder, inc. shares
(216
)
restructuring and impairment charges
write-off of aircraft leveraged lease
other
(23
)
(55
)
2,076
1,370
1,077
changes in working capital
receivables
(115
)
(194
)
(535
)
inventories
(40
)
(6
)
(35
)
other current assets
(89
)
(28
)
(86
)
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
television costs
(44
)
(51
)
(27
)
cash provided by operations
4,370
2,901
2,286
investing activities
investments in parks, resorts and other property
(1,427
)
(1,049
)
(1,086
)
acquisitions (net of cash acquired)
(48
)
(130
)
(2,845
)
dispositions
proceeds from sale of investments
purchases of investments
(67
)
(14
)
(9
)
other
(47
)
(37
)
cash used by investing activities
(1,484
)
(1,034
)
(3,176
)
financing activities
borrowings
1,635
4,038
reduction of borrowings
(2,479
)
(2,059
)
(2,113
)
commercial paper borrowings, net
(721
)
(33
)
dividends
(430
)
(429
)
(428
)
exercise of stock options and other
repurchases of common stock
(335
)
hong kong disneyland minority interest capital
contributions
cash (used)provided by financing activities
(2,701
)
(1,523
)
1,511
increase in cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents due to the initial
consolidation of euro disney and hong kong disneyland
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
1,583
1,239
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
2,042
$
1,583
$
1,239
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
interest paid
$
$
$
income taxes paid
$
1,349
$
$
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-68-
table of contents
consolidated statements of shareholders
equity
(in millions, except per share data)
accumulated
other
twdc
compre-
stock
hensive
compen-
total
common
retained
income
treasury
sation
shareholders
shares
stock
earnings
(loss)(1)
stock
fund
equity
balance at september 30, 2001
2,038
$
12,096
$
12,171
$
$
(1,395
)
$
(210
)
$
22,672
exercise of stock options
dividends ($0.21 per share)
(428
)
(428
)
other comprehensive loss (net of tax of
$56million)
(95
)
(95
)
net income
1,236
1,236
balance at september 30, 2002
2,041
12,107
12,979
(85
)
(1,395
)
(161
)
23,445
exercise of stock options and issuance of
restricted stock
dividends ($0.21 per share)
(429
)
(429
)
expiration of the twdc stock compensation fund
(161
)
other comprehensive loss (net of tax of $334
million)
(568
)
(568
)
net income
1,267
1,267
balance at september 30, 2003
2,044
12,154
13,817
(653
)
(1,527
)
23,791
exercise of stock options and issuance of
restricted stock
common stock repurchases
(15
)
(335
)
(335
)
dividends ($0.21 per share)
(430
)
(430
)
other comprehensive income (net of tax of
$245million)
net income
2,345
2,345
balance at september 30, 2004
2,040
$
12,447
$
15,732
$
(236
)
$
(1,862
)
$
$
26,081
(1)
accumulated other comprehensive loss at
september30, 2004 and 2003 is as follows:
market value adjustments for investments and
hedges, net of tax
$
(61
)
$
(108
)
foreign currency translation and other, net of tax
additional minimum pension liability adjustment,
net of tax
(261
)
(608
)
$
(236
)
$
(653
)
comprehensive income is as follows:
net income
$
2,345
$
1,267
$
1,236
market value adjustments for investments and
hedges, net of tax
(77
)
(101
)
foreign currency translation, net of tax
additional minimum pension liability adjustment,
net of tax decrease/ (increase) (see note 8)
(564
)
(44
)
comprehensive income
$
2,762
$
$
1,141
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-69-
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial
statements
(tabular dollars in millions, except per share
amounts)
1 description of the business and
segment information
the walt disney company, together with the
subsidiaries through which the companys businesses are
conducted (the company), is a diversified worldwide
entertainment company with operations in the following business
segments: media networks, parks and resorts, studio
entertainment and consumer products.
description of the business
media networks
the company operates the abc television network
and ten owned television stations and the abc radio networks and
71 owned radio stations. both the television and radio networks
have affiliated stations providing coverage to households
throughout the united states. most of the owned television and
radio stations are affiliated with either the abc television
network or the abc radio networks. the companys
cable/satellite and international broadcast operations are
principally involved in the production and distribution of cable
television programming, the licensing of programming to domestic
and international markets and investing in foreign television
broadcasting, production and distribution entities. primary
cable/satellite programming services, which operate through
consolidated subsidiary companies, are the espn-branded
networks, disney channel, international disney channel, soapnet,
toon disney, abc family channel and jetix channels in europe and
latin america. other programming services that operate through
joint ventures, and are accounted for under the equity method,
include a&e television networks, lifetime entertainment
services and e! entertainment television. the company also
produces original television programming for network, first-run
syndication, pay and international syndication markets along
with original animated television programming for network, pay
and international syndication markets. additionally, the company
operates abc-, espn-, and disney-branded internet web site
businesses.
parks and resorts
the company owns and operates the walt disney
world resort in florida and the disneyland resort in california.
the walt disney world resort includes four theme parks (the
magic kingdom, epcot, disney-mgm studios and disneys
animal kingdom), seventeen resort hotels, a retail, dining and
entertainment complex, a sports complex, conference centers,
campgrounds, golf courses, water parks and other recreational
facilities. in addition, disney cruise line is operated out of
port canaveral, florida. the disneyland resort includes two
theme parks (disneyland and disneys california adventure),
three resort hotels and downtown disney. the company earns
royalties on revenues generated by the tokyo disneyland resort,
which includes two theme parks and two disney-branded hotels,
near tokyo, japan, and is owned and operated by an unrelated
japanese corporation. the company manages and has a 41% equity
investment in euro disney s.c.a. (euro disney), a publicly held
french entity that operates disneyland resort paris, which
includes the disneyland park, the walt disney studios park,
seven themed hotels, two convention centers, the disney village,
a shopping, dining and entertainment center and a 27 hole golf
facility. the company also manages and has a 43% equity interest
in hong kong disneyland which is under construction and is
scheduled to open in fiscal 2005. during fiscal 2004, the
company began consolidating euro disney and hong kong disneyland
(see note 2). the companys walt disney imagineering unit
designs and develops new theme park concepts and attractions, as
well as resort properties. the company also manages and markets
vacation ownership interests through the disney vacation club.
included in parks and resorts is the companys nhl
franchise, the mighty ducks of anaheim and espn zone which
operates sports-themed dining and entertainment facilities.
studio entertainment
the company produces and acquires live-action and
animated motion pictures for worldwide distribution to the
theatrical, home entertainment and television markets. the
company distributes these products through its own distribution
and marketing companies in the united states and most foreign
markets primarily under the
-70-
table of contents
walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures,
miramax and dimension banners. the company also produces stage
plays and musical recordings.
consumer products
the company licenses the name walt
disney, as well as the companys characters and
visual and literary properties, to various manufacturers,
retailers, show promoters and publishers throughout the world.
the company also engages in direct retail distribution
principally through the disney stores. the company produces
books and magazines for the general public, computer software
products for the entertainment market, as well as film, video
and computer software products for the educational marketplace.
the companys direct marketing business operates the disney
catalog, which markets disney-themed merchandise through the
direct mail channel. catalog offerings include merchandise
developed exclusively for the disney catalog and
disneydirect.com which is an internet shopping site, as well as
other internal disney businesses and disney licensees.
segment information
the operating segments reported below are the
segments of the company for which separate financial information
is available and for which operating results are evaluated
regularly by the chief executive officer in deciding how to
allocate resources and in assessing performance.
segment operating results evaluated include
earnings before corporate and unallocated shared expenses,
amortization of intangible assets, gain on sale of business, net
interest expense, equity in the income of investees,
restructuring and impairment charges, income taxes, minority
interests and the cumulative effect of accounting change.
corporate and unallocated shared expenses principally consist of
corporate functions, executive management and certain
unallocated administrative support functions.
the following segment results include allocations
of certain costs, including certain information technology
costs, pension, legal and other shared services, which are
allocated based on various metrics designed to correlate with
consumption. in addition, while all significant intersegment
transactions have been eliminated, studio entertainment revenues
and operating income include an allocation of consumer products
revenues, which is meant to reflect a portion of consumer
products revenues attributable to certain film properties
created by the studio. these allocations are agreed-upon amounts
between the businesses and may differ from amounts that would be
negotiated in an arms-length transaction.
revenues
media networks
$
11,778
$
10,941
$
9,733
parks and resorts
7,750
6,412
6,465
studio entertainment
third parties
8,637
7,312
6,622
intersegment
8,713
7,364
6,691
consumer products
third parties
2,587
2,396
2,509
intersegment
(76
)
(52
)
(69
)
2,511
2,344
2,440
total consolidated revenues
$
30,752
$
27,061
$
25,329
-71-
table of contents
segment operating income
media networks
$
2,169
$
1,213
$
parks and resorts
1,123
1,169
studio entertainment
consumer products
total segment operating income
$
4,488
$
3,174
$
2,822
reconciliation of segment operating income to
income
before income taxes, minority interests and the
cumulative effect of accounting change
segment operating income
$
4,488
$
3,174
$
2,822
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
(428
)
(443
)
(417
)
amortization of intangible assets
(12
)
(18
)
(21
)
gain on sale of business
net interest expense
(617
)
(793
)
(453
)
equity in the income of investees
restructuring and impairment charges
(64
)
(16
)
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the
cumulative effect of accounting change
$
3,739
$
2,254
$
2,190
capital expenditures
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
domestic
international(1)
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate
total consolidated capital expenditures
$
1,427
$
1,049
$
1,086
depreciation expense
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
domestic
international(1)
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate
total consolidated depreciation expense
$
1,198
$
1,059
$
1,021
identifiable assets
media networks(2)(3)
$
26,193
$
25,883
parks and resorts(2)
15,221
11,067
studio entertainment
6,954
7,832
consumer products
1,037
corporate(4)
4,497
4,240
total consolidated assets
$
53,902
$
49,988
-72-
table of contents
supplemental revenue data
media networks
advertising
$
6,611
$
6,319
$
5,566
affiliate fees
4,408
3,682
3,294
parks and resorts
merchandise, food and beverage
2,429
1,987
1,987
admissions
2,547
1,887
1,819
revenues
united states and canada
$
24,012
$
22,124
$
20,770
europe
4,721
3,171
2,724
asia pacific
1,547
1,331
1,325
latin america and other
$
30,752
$
27,061
$
25,329
segment operating income
united states and canada
$
2,934
$
2,113
$
1,739
europe
asia pacific
latin america and other
(48
)
$
4,488
$
3,174
$
2,822
identifiable assets
united states and canada
$
46,788
$
47,177
europe
5,370
2,200
asia pacific
1,622
latin america and other
$
53,902
$
49,988
(1)
represents 100% of euro disney and hong kong
disneylands capital expenditures and depreciation expense
beginning april1, 2004. hong kong disneylands
capital expenditures totaled $251million and were
partially funded by minority interest partner contributions
totaling $66million.
(2)
identifiable assets include amounts associated
with equity method investments, including notes and other
receivables, as follows:
media networks
$
$
parks and resorts
(3)
includes goodwill and other intangible assets
totaling $19,341 in 2004 and $19,344 in 2003
(4)
primarily deferred tax assets, investments, fixed
and other assets
2summary of significant accounting
policies
principles of consolidation
the consolidated financial statements of the
company include the accounts of the walt disney company and its
subsidiaries after elimination of intercompany accounts and
transactions. in december 1999, dvd financing, inc. (dfi), a
subsidiary of disney vacation development, inc. and an indirect
subsidiary of the company, completed a receivable sale
transaction. in connection with this sale, dfi prepares separate
financial statements, although its separate assets and
liabilities are also consolidated in these financial statements.
-73-
table of contents
accounting changes
fin 46r
in december 2003, fasb issued fin 46r which was
generally effective as of march31, 2004. variable interest
entities (vies) are primarily entities that lack sufficient
equity to finance their activities without additional financial
support from other parties or whose equity holders lack adequate
decision making ability. all vies with which the company is
involved must be evaluated to determine the primary beneficiary
of the risks and rewards of the vie. the primary beneficiary is
required to consolidate the vie for financial reporting purposes.
the company has minority equity interests in
certain entities, including euro disney s.c.a. (euro disney) and
hongkong international theme parks limited (hong kong
disneyland). in connection with the adoption of fin 46r, the
company concluded that euro disney and hong kong disneyland are
vies and that we are the primary beneficiary. pursuant to the
transition provisions of fin 46r, the company began
consolidating euro disney and hong kong disneylands
balance sheets on march31, 2004, the end of the
companys second quarter of fiscal year 2004 and the income
and cash flow statements beginning april1, 2004, the
beginning of the third quarter of fiscal year 2004. under fin
46r transition rules, the operating results of euro disney and
hong kong disneyland continued to be accounted for on the equity
method for the six month period ended march31, 2004. see
note 4 for the impact of consolidating the balance sheets,
income statement and cash flow statements of euro disney and
hong kong disneyland.
we have concluded that the rest of our equity
investments do not require consolidation as either they are not
vies, or in the event that they are vies, we are not the primary
beneficiary. the company also has variable interests in certain
other vies that will not be consolidated because the company is
not the primary beneficiary. these vies do not involve any
material exposure to the company.
fsp 106-2
in may 2004, the fasb issued fasb staff position
no.106-2, accounting and disclosure requirements
related to the medicare prescription drug, improvement and
modernization act of 2003 (fsp 106-2) in response to a new
law regarding prescription drug benefits under medicare as well
as a federal subsidy to sponsors of retiree healthcare benefit
plans. we expect that the impact of this act will not be
material.
eitf00-21
the company adopted emerging issues task force
(eitf)no.00-21, revenue arrangements with
multiple deliverables (eitf00-21), effective
october1, 2002, in the fiscal fourth quarter of 2003.
eitf00-21 addresses revenue recognition for revenues
derived from a single contract that contains multiple products
or services. the rule provides additional requirements to
determine when such revenues may be recorded separately for
accounting purposes. historically, the company had recognized
the nfl broadcast portion of espns affiliate revenue when
the nfl games were aired, as espns affiliate contracts
provided a basis for allocating such revenue between nfl and
non-nfl programming. since the cost of the nfl rights had also
been recognized as the games were aired, the company recognized
both the nfl revenues and nfl costs in the quarters the games
were aired.
under eitf00-21s requirements for
separating the revenue elements of a single contract, the
company no longer allocates espns affiliate revenue
between nfl and non-nfl programming for accounting purposes. as
a consequence, the company will no longer match all nfl revenue
with nfl costs as espn affiliate revenue (including the nfl
portion) is generally recognized ratably throughout the year,
while nfl contract costs continue to be recognized in the
quarters the games are aired. this accounting change impacts
only the timing of revenue recognition and has no impact on cash
flow.
the company elected to adopt this new accounting
rule using the cumulative effect approach. in the fiscal fourth
quarter of 2003, the company recorded an after-tax charge of
$71million for the cumulative effect of a change in
accounting as of the beginning of fiscal year 2003. this amount
represented the revenue recorded for nfl games in the fourth
quarter of fiscal year 2002, which would have been recorded
ratably over fiscal 2003 under the new accounting method.
results for fiscal 2003 were restated to reflect the impact of
eitf00-21 as of october1, 2002.
-74-
table of contents
the following table provides a reconciliation of
reported net earnings to adjusted earnings had eitf00-21
been followed in fiscal year 2002:
diluted
earnings
amount
per share
reported earnings before the cumulative effect of
accounting change
$
1,236
$
0.60
eitf00-21 adjustment, net of tax
(46
)
(0.02
)
adjusted net income
$
1,190
$
0.58
use of estimates
the preparation of financial statements in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and
footnotes thereto. actual results may differ from those
estimates.
revenue recognition
broadcast advertising revenues are recognized
when commercials are aired. revenues from television
subscription services related to the companys primary
cable programming services are recognized as services are
provided. certain of the companys contracts with cable
service providers include annual programming commitments. in
these cases, revenue subject to the commitment is deferred until
the annual commitments are satisfied which generally results in
revenue shifting from the first half of the year to the second.
revenues from advance theme park ticket sales are
recognized when the tickets are used. revenues from corporate
sponsors at the theme parks are generally recognized over the
period of the applicable agreements commencing with the opening
of the related attraction.
revenues from the theatrical distribution of
motion pictures are recognized when motion pictures are
exhibited. revenues from video sales are recognized on the date
that video units are made widely available for sale by
retailers. revenues from the licensing of feature films and
television programming are recorded when the material is
available for telecasting by the licensee and when certain other
conditions are met.
merchandise licensing advance and guarantee
payments are recognized when the underlying royalties are earned.
advertising expense
advertising costs are expensed as incurred.
advertising expense incurred for the years ended
september30, 2004, 2003, and 2002 totaled
$3.0billion, $2.5billion and $2.3billion,
respectively.
cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on hand
and marketable securities with original maturities of three
months or less.
investments
debt securities that the company has the positive
intent and ability to hold to maturity are classified as
held-to-maturity and reported at amortized cost.
debt securities not classified as held-to-maturity and
marketable equity securities are classified as either
trading or available-for-sale, and are
recorded at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included
in earnings or shareholders equity, respectively. all
other equity securities are accounted for using either the cost
method or the equity method.
the company continually reviews its investments
to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost
basis is other than temporary. if the decline in fair value is
judged to be other than temporary, the cost basis of the
security is written down to fair value and the amount of the
write-down is included in the consolidated statements of income.
-75-
table of contents
translation policy
the u.s.dollar is the predominant
functional currency for the majority of our international
operations. the local currency is the functional currency for
euro disney, hong kong disneyland and international locations of
the disney stores.
for u.s.dollar functional currency
locations, foreign currency assets and liabilities are
remeasured into u.s.dollars at end-of-period exchange
rates, except for property, plant and equipment, other assets
and deferred revenue, which are remeasured at historical
exchange rates. revenue and expenses are remeasured at average
exchange rates in effect during each period, except for those
expenses related to the previously noted balance sheet amounts,
which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. gains or
losses from foreign currency remeasurement are included in net
earnings.
for the local currency functional locations,
assets and liabilities are translated at end-of-period rates
while revenues and expenses are translated at average rates in
effect during the period. equity is translated at historical
rates and the resulting cumulative translation adjustments are
included as a component of accumulated other comprehensive
income (aoci).
inventories
carrying amounts of merchandise, materials and
supplies inventories are generally determined on a moving
average cost basis and are stated at the lower of cost or market.
film and television costs
film and television costs include capitalizable
direct negative costs, production overhead, interest,
development costs and acquired production costs and are stated
at the lower of cost, less accumulated amortization, or fair
value. acquired programming costs for the companys
television and cable/satellite networks are stated at the lower
of cost, less accumulated amortization, or net realizable value.
acquired television broadcast program licenses and rights are
recorded when the license period begins and the program is
available for use. marketing, distribution, and general and
administrative costs are expensed as incurred.
film and television production and participation
costs are expensed based on the ratio of the current
periods gross revenues to estimated remaining total gross
revenues from all sources on an individual production basis.
television network series costs and multi-year sports rights are
charged to expense based on the ratio of the current
periods gross revenues to estimated remaining total gross
revenues from such programs or on a straight-line basis, as
appropriate. estimated remaining gross revenue for film
productions includes revenue that will be earned within ten
years of the date of the initial theatrical release. for
television network series, we include revenues that will be
earned within 10years of the delivery of the first
episode, or if still in production, five years from the date of
delivery of the most recent episode. for acquired film
libraries, remaining revenues include amounts to be earned for
up to 20years from the date of acquisition. television
network and station rights for theatrical movies and other
long-form programming are charged to expense primarily on an
accelerated basis related to the projected usage of the
programs. development costs for projects that have been
determined will not go into production or have not been set for
production within three years are written-off.
estimates of total gross revenues can change
significantly due to a variety of factors, including advertising
rates and the level of market acceptance of the production.
accordingly, revenue estimates are reviewed periodically and
amortization is adjusted, if necessary. such adjustments could
have a material effect on results of operations in future
periods. the net realizable value of network television
broadcast program licenses and rights is reviewed using a
daypart methodology. a daypart is defined as an aggregation of
programs broadcast during a particular time of day or programs
of a similar type. the companys dayparts are early
morning, daytime, late night, primetime, news, children and
sports (sports includes network and cable). the net realizable
values of other cable programming are reviewed on an aggregated
basis for each cable channel.
capitalized software costs
the company expenses costs incurred in the
preliminary project stage of developing or acquiring internal
use software, such as research and feasibility studies, as well
as costs incurred in the post-implementation/operational
-76-
table of contents
stage, such as maintenance and training.
capitalization of software development costs occurs only after
the preliminary project stage is complete, management authorizes
the project, and it is probable that the project will be
completed and the software will be used for the function
intended. as of september30, 2004 and 2003, capitalized
software costs totaled $433million and $240million,
respectively. the capitalized costs are amortized on a
straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the
software, which ranges from 2-10years.
parks, resorts and other property
parks, resorts and other property are carried at
historical cost. depreciation is computed on the straight-line
method over estimated useful lives as follows:
attractions
25 40 years
buildings and improvements
40 years
leasehold improvements
life of lease or asset life if less
land improvements
25 40 years
furniture, fixtures and equipment
2 10 years
goodwill and other intangible assets
the company performs an annual impairment test at
fiscal year end for goodwill and other indefinite-lived
intangible assets, which include fcc licenses and trademarks.
goodwill is allocated to various reporting units, which are
either the operating segment or one reporting level below the
operating segment. for purposes of performing the impairment
test for goodwill as required by sfas142, we established
the following reporting units: cable networks, television
broadcasting, radio, studio entertainment, consumer products and
parks and resorts.
sfas142 requires the company to compare the
fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount on an
annual basis to determine if there is potential goodwill
impairment. if the fair value of the reporting unit is less than
its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent
that the fair value of the goodwill within the reporting unit is
less than its carrying value.
sfas142 requires the company to compare the
fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset to its
carrying amount. if the carrying amount of an indefinite-lived
intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is
recognized. fair values for goodwill and other indefinite-lived
intangible assets are determined based on discounted cash flows,
market multiples or appraised values as appropriate.
to determine the fair value of our reporting
units, we generally use a present value technique (discounted
cash flow) corroborated by market multiples when available and
as appropriate, for all of the reporting units except for the
television network which is included in the television
broadcasting group. the television broadcasting reporting unit
includes the television network and the owned and operated
television stations. these businesses have been grouped together
because their respective cash flows are dependent on one
another. for purposes of our impairment test, we used a revenue
multiple to value the television network. we did not use a
present value technique or a market multiple approach to value
the television network as a present value technique would not
capture the full fair value of the television network and there
is little comparable market data available due to the scarcity
of television networks. we applied what we believe to be the
most appropriate valuation methodology for each of the reporting
units. if we had established different reporting units or
utilized different valuation methodologies, the impairment test
results could differ.
amortizable intangible assets are amortized on a
straight-line basis over estimated useful lives as follows:
copyrights
10 31 years
risk management contracts
in the normal course of business, the company
employs a variety of financial instruments to manage its
exposure to fluctuations in interest rates, foreign currency
exchange rates and investments in equity and debt securities,
including interest rate and cross-currency swap agreements;
forward, option and swaption contracts and interest
rate caps.
-77-
table of contents
the company formally documents all relationships
between hedging instruments and hedged items, as well as its
risk management objectives and strategies for undertaking
various hedge transactions. there are two types of derivatives
into which the company enters: hedges of fair value exposure and
hedges of cash flow exposure. hedges of fair value exposure are
entered into in order to hedge the fair value of a recognized
asset, liability, or a firm commitment. hedges of cash flow
exposure are entered into in order to hedge a forecasted
transaction (e.g. forecasted revenue) or the variability of cash
flows to be paid or received, related to a recognized liability
or asset (e.g. floating rate debt).
the company designates and assigns the financial
instruments as hedges of forecasted transactions, specific
assets, or specific liabilities. when hedged assets or
liabilities are sold or extinguished or the forecasted
transactions being hedged are no longer expected to occur, the
company recognizes the gain or loss on the designated hedging
financial instruments.
option premiums and unrealized losses on forward
contracts and the accrued differential for interest rate and
cross-currency swaps to be received under the agreements are
recorded on the balance sheet as other assets. unrealized gains
on forward contracts and the accrued differential for interest
rate and cross-currency swaps to be paid under the agreements
are included in liabilities. realized gains and losses from
hedges are classified in the income statement consistent with
the accounting treatment of the items being hedged. the company
accrues the differential for interest rate and cross-currency
swaps to be paid or received under the agreements as interest
rates and exchange rates change as adjustments to interest
expense over the lives of the swaps. gains and losses on the
termination of effective swap agreements, prior to their
original maturity, are deferred and amortized to interest
expense over the remaining term of the underlying hedged
transactions.
cash flows from hedges are classified in the
consolidated statements of cash flows under the same category as
the cash flows from the related assets, liabilities or
forecasted transactions (see notes6 and 12).
earnings per share
the company presents both basic and diluted
earnings per share (eps) amounts. basic eps is calculated by
dividing net income by the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding during the year. diluted eps is based upon
the weighted average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding during the year which is calculated using the
treasury stock method for stock options and assumes conversion
of the companys convertible senior notes (see
note6). common equivalent shares are excluded from the
computation in periods in which they have an anti-dilutive
effect. stock options for which the exercise price exceeds the
average market price over the period have an anti-dilutive
effect on eps and, accordingly, are excluded from the
calculation.
a reconciliation of net income and the weighted
average number of common and common equivalent shares
outstanding for calculating diluted earnings per share is as
follows:
year ended
september30,
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
change
$
2,345
$
1,338
$
1,236
interest expense on convertible senior notes (net
of tax)
$
2,366
$
1,348
$
1,236
weighted average number of common shares
outstanding (basic)
2,049
2,043
2,040
weighted average dilutive stock options and
restricted stock
weighted average assumed conversion of
convertible senior notes
weighted average number of common and common
equivalent shares outstanding (diluted)
2,106
2,067
2,044
-78-
table of contents
for the years ended september30, 2004, 2003
and 2002, options for 124million, 184million , and
156million shares, respectively, were excluded from the
diluted eps calculation for common stock because they were
anti-dilutive.
stock options
the company uses the intrinsic value method of
accounting for stock-based awards granted to employees and,
accordingly, does not recognize compensation expense for its
stock-based awards in the consolidated statements of income.
the following table reflects pro forma net income
and earnings per share had the company elected to adopt the fair
value approach of statement of financial accounting standards
no.123, accounting for stock-based compensation:
year ended
september30,
net income
as reported
$
2,345
$
1,267
$
1,236
less stock option expense, net of
tax(1)
(255
)
(294
)
(306
)
pro forma after option expense
$
2,090
$
$
diluted earnings per share
as reported
$
1.12
$
0.62
$
0.60
pro forma after option expense
1.00
0.48
0.45
basic earnings per share
as reported
$
1.14
$
0.62
$
0.61
pro forma after option expense
1.02
0.48
0.46
(1)
does not include restricted stock expense that is
reported in net income (see note10).
these pro forma amounts may not be representative
of future disclosures since the estimated fair value of stock
options is amortized to expense over the vesting period, and
additional options may be granted in future years.
reclassifications
certain reclassifications have been made in the
2003 and 2002 financial statements to conform to the 2004
presentation.
3significant acquisitions and
dispositions
on february17, 2004, the company acquired
the film library and intellectual property rights for the
muppets and bear in the big blue house for $68million.
substantially all of the purchase price was allocated to
definite-lived identifiable intangible assets.
in fiscal 2003, the company sold the anaheim
angels baseball team, which resulted in a pre-tax gain of
$16million. in fiscal 2002, the company sold the disney
store operations in japan generating a pre-tax gain of
$34million. these gains are reported in the line
gain on sale of business in the consolidated
statements of income.
on october24, 2001, the company acquired
fox family worldwide, inc. (now called abc family)
for $5.2billion, which was funded with $2.9billion
of new long-term borrowings plus the assumption of
$2.3billion of long-term debt. among the businesses
acquired were the fox family channel, which has been renamed abc
family channel, a programming service that currently reaches
approximately 88million cable and satellite television
subscribers throughout the u.s.; a 75% interest in fox kids
europe, which has been renamed jetix
-79-
table of contents
europe and reaches more than 37million
subscribers across europe; jetix channels in latin america, and
the saban library and entertainment production businesses.
the purchase price was allocated to the fair
value of the acquired assets and liabilities and the excess
purchase price of $5.0billion was recorded as goodwill and
was assigned to the cable networks reporting unit within the
media networks segment. none of this amount is expected to be
deductible for tax purposes.
the companys consolidated results of
operations have incorporated abc familys activity on a
consolidated basis from october24, 2001, the date of
acquisition. on an unaudited pro forma basis assuming the
acquisition occurred on october1, 2001, revenues for the
year ended september30, 2002 were $25,360million.
as-reported and unaudited pro forma net income and earnings per
share for fiscal 2002 were approximately the same. the unaudited
pro forma information is not necessarily indicative of future
results.
4investments
investments consist of the following:
investments, at equity(1)
$
$
1,051
investments, at cost(2)
investment in leveraged leases
notes receivable and other investments
$
1,292
$
1,849
(1)
equity investments consist of investments in
affiliated companies over which the company has significant
influence but not the majority of the equity or risks and
rewards.
(2)
cost investments consist of marketable securities
classified as available-for-sale and investments in companies
over which the company does not have significant influence and
ownership of less than 20%.
euro disney and hong kong disneyland
the company has a 41% interest in euro disney
s.c.a., which operates the disneyland resort paris and a 43%
interest in hongkong international theme park limited, which is
responsible for constructing and operating hong kong disneyland.
as of march31, 2004, the company began accounting for euro
disney and hong kong disneyland as consolidated subsidiaries
pursuant to fin46r (see note2). the company began
consolidating the balance sheets of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland as of march31, 2004, and the income and cash
flow statements beginning april1, 2004.
-80-
table of contents
the following table presents the condensed
consolidating balance sheet of the company, reflecting the
impact of consolidating the balance sheets of euro disney and
hong kong disneyland as of september30, 2004.
before euro disney
and hong kong
euro disney, hong
disneyland
kong disneyland
consolidation
and adjustments
total
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,730
$
$
2,042
other current assets
7,103
7,327
total current assets
8,833
9,369
investments
1,991
(699
)
1,292
fixed assets
12,529
3,953
16,482
intangible assets
2,815
2,815
goodwill
16,966
16,966
other assets
6,843
6,978
total assets
$
49,977
$
3,925
$
53,902
current portion of borrowings(1)
$
1,872
$
2,221
$
4,093
other current liabilities
6,349
6,966
total current liabilities
8,221
2,838
11,059
borrowings
8,850
9,395
deferred income taxes
2,950
2,950
other long term liabilities
3,394
3,619
minority interests
shareholders equity
26,075
26,081
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
49,977
$
3,925
$
53,902
(1)
all of euro disneys borrowings of
$2.2billion are classified as current as they are subject
to acceleration if certain requirements of the moa are not
achieved as part of the current restructuring process as
discussed below.
the following table presents the condensed
consolidating income statement of the company for the year ended
september30, 2004, reflecting the impact of consolidating
the income statements of euro disney and hong kong disneyland
beginning april1, 2004(1).
before euro disney
and hong kong
euro disney, hong
disneyland
kong disneyland
consolidation
and adjustments
total
revenues
$
30,037
$
$
30,752
cost and expenses
(26,053
)
(651
)
(26,704
)
restructuring and impairment charges
(64
)
(64
)
net interest expense
(575
)
(42
)
(617
)
equity in the income of investees
(26
)
income before income taxes and minority interests
3,743
(4
)
3,739
income taxes
(1,199
)
(1,197
)
minority interests
(199
)
(197
)
net income
$
2,345
$
$
2,345
(1)
under fin46r transition rules, the
operating results of euro disney and hong kong disneyland are
accounted for on the equity method for the six month period
ended march31, 2004.
-81-
table of contents
the following table presents the condensed
consolidating cash flow statement of the company for the year
ended september30, 2004, reflecting the impact of
consolidating the cash flow statements of euro disney and hong
kong disneyland beginning april1, 2004.
before euro disney
and hong kong
euro disney, hong
disneyland
kong disneyland
consolidation
and adjustments(1)
total
cash provided by operations
$
4,283
$
$
4,370
investments in parks, resorts and other property
(1,138
)
(289
)
(1,427
)
other investing activities
(107
)
(57
)
cash provided (used)by financing activities
(2,891
)
(2,701
)
increase in cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
1,583
1,857
cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
1,730
$
$
2,042
(1)
includes cash flow of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland for the six months ended september30, 2004.
euro disney financial restructuring
on september28, 2004, euro disney announced
that euro disney, the company and euro disneys lenders
finalized a memorandum of agreement (moa) effective
october1, 2004, relating to the financial restructuring of
euro disney and subsequently finalized the legal documentation
called for by the moa. the moa provides for new financing as
well as restructuring euro disneys existing financing. the
key provisions of the moa are as follows:
royalties and management fees
royalties and management fees totaling
58million
for fiscal 2004 will be paid to the company following completion
of the rights offering discussed below
royalties and management fees for fiscal 2005
through fiscal 2009, totaling
25million
per year, payable to the company will be converted into
subordinated long-term borrowings
royalties and management fees for fiscal 2007
through fiscal 2014, of up to
25million
per year, payable to the company will be converted into
subordinated long-term borrowings if operating results do not
achieve specified levels
debt covenants
certain covenant violations for fiscal 2003 and
fiscal 2004 will be waived
euro disney will receive authorization for up to
240million
of capital expenditures for fiscal 2005 through fiscal 2009 for
new attractions
existing borrowings
approximately
110million
of amounts outstanding on the existing line of credit from the
company and
58million
of deferred interest payable to caisse des dpts et
consignations (cdc), a french state financial
institution, will be converted into long-term subordinated
borrowings
the interest rate on approximately
450million
of euro disneys senior borrowings will be increased by
approximately 2%
-82-
table of contents
approximately
300million
of principal payments on senior borrowings will be deferred for
three and one half years
principal payments on certain cdc borrowings will
be deferred for three and one half years
euro disneys security deposit requirement
will be eliminated and the existing deposit balance totaling
100million
will be paid to senior lenders as a principal payment
interest payments for fiscal 2005 through fiscal
2012, up to
20million
per year, payable to the cdc will be converted to long-term
subordinated borrowings if operating results do not achieve
specified levels
interest payments for fiscal 2013 through fiscal
2014, up to
23million
per year, payable to the cdc will be converted to long-term
subordinated borrowings if operating results do not achieve
specified levels
new financing
250million
equity rights offering, to which the company has committed to
subscribe for at least
100million
with the remainder to be underwritten by a group of financial
institutions
new ten-year
150million
line of credit from the company for liquidity needs, which
reduces to
100million
after five years
any subordinated long-term borrowings due to the
company and cdc cannot be paid until all senior borrowings have
been paid.
the moa additionally provides for the
contribution by euro disney of substantially all of its assets
and liabilities (including most of the proceeds of the equity
rights offerings referred to above) into euro disney
associs s.c.a. (disney sca) which will become
an 82% owned subsidiary of euro disney. other wholly-owned
subsidiaries of the company will retain the remaining 18%
ownership interest. this will enable euro disney to avoid having
to make
292million
of payments to disney sca that would be due if euro disney
exercised the options under certain leases from disney sca. as a
result of this contribution, the company will increase its
overall effective ownership interest in euro disneys
operations from 41% to 52%. pursuant to the moa, the company
must maintain at least a direct 39% ownership investment in euro
disney through december31, 2016.
the implementation of the moa remains subject to
certain conditions including: approval of the reorganization by
the shareholders (which the company has agreed to vote in favor
of) and the completion of the equity rights offering (referred
to above) by march31, 2005. once implemented, the
restructuring will provide euro disney with significant
liquidity, including protective measures intended to mitigate
the adverse impact of business volatility as well as capital to
invest in new rides and attractions. if the equity rights
offering does not occur by march31, 2005, the parties will
have 30days to negotiate a new arrangement. if the
negotiations do not succeed, most of the provisions of the moa
will become null and void, and euro disneys debt will
become due or subject to acceleration, and absent a further debt
covenant waiver or new agreement, euro disney would be unable to
pay certain of its debt obligations.
as discussed above, the moa will result in the
elimination of certain sublease arrangements between the
companys wholly-owned subsidiary, disney sca and euro
disney. these subleases arose in connection with a financial
restructuring of euro disney in 1994 whereby disney sca (which
was then in the form of a snc) entered into a lease agreement
with a financing company with a non-cancelable term of
12years related to substantially all of the disneyland
park assets, and then entered into a 12-year sublease agreement
with euro disney on substantially the same payment terms.
remaining lease rentals at september30, 2004 of
approximately $385million receivable from euro disney
under the sublease approximate the amounts payable by disney sca
under the lease. these lease transactions are currently
eliminated upon consolidation of euro disney by the company as a
result of the implementation of fin46r. if the
restructuring does not occur as planned above, at the conclusion
of the sublease term in 2006, euro disney would have the option
of assuming disney scas rights and obligations under the
lease for a payment of $97million over the ensuing
15months. if euro disney did not exercise its option,
disney sca would be able to purchase the assets, continue to
lease the assets or elect to
-83-
table of contents
terminate the lease. in the event that the lease
was terminated, disney sca would be obligated to make a
termination payment to the lessor equal to 75% of the
lessors then outstanding debt related to the disneyland
park assets, which payment would be approximately
$1.4billion. disney sca would then have the right to sell
or lease the assets on behalf of the lessor to satisfy the
remaining debt, with any excess proceeds payable to disney sca.
see note6 for the terms of euro
disneys borrowings.
euro disney had revenues and net loss of
$575million and $122million, respectively, for the
six months ended march31, 2004 while the company still
accounted for its investment on the equity method. euro disney
had revenues and net loss of $1,077million and
$56million, respectively, for the year ended
september30, 2003. for the year ended september30,
2002, euro disney had revenues and net loss of $909million
and $57million, respectively. total assets and total
liabilities of euro disney were $3,373million and
$3,304million at september30, 2003.
other equity investments
in addition to the companys investments in
euro disney and hong kong disneyland, the company has other
equity investments, primarily comprised of cable investments
such as a&e television networks (37.5% owned), lifetime
entertainment services (50% owned) and e! entertainment
television (39.6% owned).
a summary of combined financial information for
the other equity investments is as follows:
results of operations:
revenues
$
3,893
$
3,453
$
3,111
net income
$
1,017
$
$
balance sheet:
current assets
$
2,025
$
1,839
non-current assets
1,167
1,163
$
3,192
$
3,002
current liabilities
$
$
non-current liabilities
shareholders equity
1,563
1,553
$
3,192
$
3,002
cost investments
as of september30, 2004 and 2003, the
company held $60million and $17million,
respectively, of securities classified as available-for-sale. as
of september30, 2004 and 2003, the company also held
$105million and $89million, respectively, of
non-publicly traded cost method investments. realized gains and
losses are determined principally on an average cost basis. in
2004, 2003 and 2002, the company recognized $2million,
$8million and $239million, respectively, in net
gains on sales of securities. included in fiscal 2002 is a
$216million gain on the sale of the remaining shares of
knight ridder stock that the company had received in connection
with the disposition of certain publishing operations that had
been acquired in connection with the acquisition of abc.
in 2004, 2003 and 2002, the company recorded
non-cash charges of $23million, $23million and
$2million, respectively, to reflect other-than-temporary
losses in value of certain investments.
investment in leveraged leases
during the fourth quarter of 2004, the company
recorded a $16million pre-tax charge to write down its
leveraged lease investment in delta. during the first quarter of
fiscal 2003, the company wrote off its aircraft
-84-
table of contents
leveraged lease investment with united airlines,
which filed for bankruptcy protection, resulting in a pre-tax
charge of $114million, or $0.04per share. based on
the bankruptcy filing, we believe it is unlikely that the
company will recover this investment. the pre-tax charge of
$114million for the write-off is reported in net
interest expense in the consolidated statements of income.
as of september30, 2004, our remaining aircraft leveraged
lease investment totaled approximately $156million,
consisting of $101million and $55million, with delta
and fedex, respectively. given the current status of the airline
industry, we continue to monitor the recoverability of these
investments, particularly the delta leases. delta has disclosed
that if it is unsuccessful in reducing its operating expenses
and continues to experience significant losses, it will need to
seek to restructure its costs under chapter11 of the
u.s.bankruptcy code. although delta remains current on
their lease payments to us, the inability of delta to make their
lease payments, or the termination of our lease through a
bankruptcy proceeding, could result in a material charge for the
write-down of our investment and could accelerate certain income
tax payments.
5film and television costs
film and television costs are as follows:
theatrical film costs
released, less amortization
$
2,319
$
2,359
completed, not released
in-process
1,000
1,236
in development or pre-production
4,082
4,564
television costs
released, less amortization
completed, not released
in-process
in development or pre-production
1,384
1,381
television broadcast rights
6,422
6,773
less current portion
non-current portion
$
5,938
$
6,205
based on managements total gross revenue
estimates as of september30, 2004, approximately 42% of
completed and unamortized film and television costs (excluding
amounts allocated to acquired film and television libraries) are
expected to be amortized during fiscal 2005. approximately 73%
of unamortized film and television costs for released
productions (excluding acquired film libraries) are expected to
be amortized during the next three years. by september30,
2008, approximately 80% of the total released and unamortized
film and television costs are expected to be amortized. as of
september30, 2004, the company estimated that
approximately $530million of accrued participation and
residual liabilities will be payable in fiscal year 2005.
at september30, 2004, acquired film and
television libraries have remaining unamortized film costs of
$447million which are generally amortized straight-line
over a remaining period of approximately 5-15years.
-85-
table of contents
the following table provides detail of film and
television spending and amortization:
gross film and television spending
$
(2,364
)
$
(2,915
)
$
(2,315
)
film and television cost amortization
2,824
2,546
2,218
net investment in film and television costs
$
$
(369
)
$
(97
)
6borrowings
the companys borrowings at
september30, 2004 and 2003, including the impact of
interest rate swaps designated as hedges at september30,
2004 are summarized below:
interest rate and
stated
cross-currency swaps(2)
effective
interest
interest
swap
rate(1)
pay variable
pay fixed
rate(3)
maturities
commercial paper
$
$
1.78
%
$
$
4.37
%
u.s.medium-term notes
6,624
8,114
6.32
%
5.09
%
2006-2022
convertible senior notes
1,323
1,323
2.13
%
2.13
%
other u.s.dollar denominated debt
7.00
%
7.00
%
privately placed debt
7.02
%
3.49
%
european medium-term notes
1,099
1,519
1.81
%
1,099
2.31
%
2004-2007
preferred stock
9.00
%
9.00
%
capital cities/ abc debt
9.07
%
8.84
%
other(4)
10,722
13,100
5.21
%
2,063
4.43
%
euro disney (ed)and hong kong
disneyland (hkdl):
ed cdc loans
1,119
5.15
%
5.15
%
ed credit facilities& other
3.08
%
3.24
%
ed other advances
3.01
%
3.01
%
hkdl senior and subordinated loans
2.91
%
3.03
%
2,766
3.87
%
3.93
%
total borrowings
13,488
13,100
4.93
%
2,063
4.39
%
less current portion(5)
4,093
2,457
total long-term borrowings
$
9,395
$
10,643
$
1,231
$
(1)
the stated interest rate represents the
weighted-average coupon rate for each category of borrowings.
for floating rate borrowings, interest rates are based upon the
rates at september30, 2004; these rates are not
necessarily an indication of future interest rates.
(2)
amounts represent notional values of interest and
cross-currency rate swaps.
(3)
the effective interest rate includes only the
impact of interest rate and cross-currency swaps on the stated
rate of interest. other adjustments to the stated interest rate
such as purchase accounting adjustments and debt issuance costs
did not have a material impact on the overall effective interest
rate.
(4)
includes market value adjustments for current and
non-current debt with qualifying hedges totaling
$369million and $471million at september30,
2004 and 2003, respectively.
(5)
all of euro disneys borrowings of
$2.2billion are classified as current as they are subject
to acceleration if certain requirements of the moa are not
achieved as part of the current restructuring process (see
note4).
-86-
table of contents
commercial paper
the company currently maintains u.s. and european
commercial paper programs with a combined program size of
$4.5billion. as of september30, 2004, the company
had established bank facilities totaling $4.5billion to
support commercial paper borrowings, with half of the facilities
scheduled to expire in february 2005 and the other half in
february 2009. under the bank facilities, the company has the
option to borrow at libor-based rates plus a spread depending on
the companys senior unsecured debt rating. the
companys bank facilities contain only one financial
covenant, relating to interest coverage, which the company met
on september30, 2004 by a significant margin. the
companys bank facilities also specifically exclude certain
entities, including euro disney and hong kong disneyland, from
any representations, covenants or events of default. as of
september30, 2004, the company had not borrowed against
the facilities. the company also has the ability to issue up to
$500million of letters of credit under the facility
expiring in 2009, which if utilized, reduces available borrowing
under this facility. as of september30, 2004,
$205million of letters of credit had been issued under
this facility and $2.045billion was available for
borrowing. at september30, 2004, $100million of
commercial paper debt was outstanding.
$7.5 billion shelf registration
statement
in august 2001, the company filed a
u.s.shelf registration statement with the securities and
exchange commission (sec)that allows the company to issue
from time to time up to $7.5billion of securities,
including debt securities, preferred stock, common stock,
depository shares, warrants and purchase contracts. at
september30, 2004, $3.1billion of debt had been
issued under the companys u.s.medium-term note
program (described below) and $2.6billion of debt had been
issued under other u.s.dollar denominated debt programs of
which $1.0billion has been repaid to date (also described
below). the remaining unused capacity under the shelf
registration is $1.8billion. our ability to issue debt is
subject to market conditions and other factors impacting our
borrowing capacity.
u.s.medium-term note program
in september 2001, the company established a
$6.5billion u.s.medium-term note program under the
u.s.shelf registration statement described above for the
issuance of various types of debt instruments, such as fixed or
floating rate notes, u.s.dollar or foreign currency
denominated notes, redeemable notes, global notes and dual
currency or other indexed notes. in total, the company has
issued $3.1billion under the current program. the
remaining capacity under the program may be further reduced from
time to time to the extent that the company issues securities
outside of the existing u.s.medium-term note program but
under the current shelf registration statement. at
september30, 2004, the total debt outstanding under the
current and prior u.s.medium-term note programs was
$6.624billion. the maturities of current outstanding
borrowings range from 1 to 89years and stated interest
rates range from 0.86% to 7.55%.
other u.s.dollar denominated
debt
from time to time, the company may issue bonds or
notes, under the existing shelf registration statement but
separately from the u.s.medium-term note program. through
september30, 2004, $2.6billion of other
u.s.denominated debt has been issued under the
$7.5billion shelf registration. at september30,
2004, $1.6billion of total debt is outstanding from these
offerings. the offerings are comprised of $305million of
quarterly interest bonds (quibs), and $1.3billion of
convertible senior notes (described below). the maturities of
these outstanding borrowings range from 19 to 27years and
the stated interest rates range from 2.15% to 7.0%.
convertible senior notes
in april 2003, the company issued
$1.3billion of convertible senior notes due on
april15, 2023. the notes bear interest at a fixed annual
rate of 2.125% and are redeemable at the companys option
any time after april15, 2008 at par. the notes are
redeemable at the investors option at par on
april15, 2008, april15, 2013 and april15,
2018, and upon the occurrence of certain fundamental changes,
such as a change in control. the notes are convertible into
common stock, under certain circumstances, at an initial
conversion rate of 33.9443shares of common stock per
$1,000 principal amount of notes. this is equivalent to an
initial conversion price of $29.46. the conversion rate is
subject to adjustment if certain events occur, such as the
payment of a common stock dividend,
-87-
table of contents
the issuance of rights or warrants to all holders
of the companys common stock that allow the holders to
purchase shares of the companys common stock during a
specified period of time, and subdivision, combinations or
certain reclassifications of the companys common stock.
privately placed debt
in 1996, the company raised $850million of
privately placed financing. the notes pay 7.02% interest per
annum and amortize semi-annually. the outstanding principal as
of september30, 2004 was $254million.
european medium-term note program
in july 2002, the company renewed its european
medium-term note program for the issuance of various types of
debt instruments such as fixed or floating rate notes,
u.s.dollar or foreign currency denominated notes,
redeemable notes, index linked and dual currency notes. at such
time, the program size was increased from $3.0billion to
$4.0billion. in 2004, no new debt was issued under the
program. the remaining capacity under the program is
$2.9billion, subject to market conditions and other
factors impacting our borrowing capacity. the remaining capacity
under the program replenishes as outstanding debt under the
program matures. at september30, 2004, the total debt
outstanding under the program was $1.1billion. the
maturities of current outstanding borrowings range from 1 to
3years and stated interest rates range from 0.72% to
6.26%. the company has outstanding borrowings under the program
denominated in u.s.dollars, hong kong dollars, singapore
dollars and japanese yen.
preferred stock
as a result of the abc family acquisition in
october 2001, the company assumed seriesa preferred stock
with a 9% coupon and quarterly dividend payments valued at
approximately $400million with an effective cost of
capital of 5.25%. the seriesa preferred stock is callable
starting august1, 2007 and matures august1, 2027.
the seriesa preferred stock is classified as borrowings
given its substantive similarity to debt instruments. at
september30, 2004, the total balance outstanding was
$373million.
in july 1999, a subsidiary of the company issued
$102million of auction market preferred stock (amps).
these are perpetual, non-cumulative, non-redeemable instruments.
quarterly distributions, if declared, are at the rate of
5.427%per annum, for the first five years. in july 2004,
the amps were repurchased by the company.
capital cities/ abc debt
as a result of the capital cities/ abc, inc.
acquisition in 1996, the company assumed various debt previously
issued by capital cities/ abc, inc. at september30, 2004,
the outstanding balance was $189million with maturities
ranging from 5 to 17years and stated interest rates
ranging from 8.75% to 9.65%.
euro disney and hong kong disneyland
borrowings
the following is a summary of the key terms of
euro disney and hong kong disneyland borrowings which have been
included in our consolidated balance sheet as a result of the
implementation of fin46r.
euro disney cdc
loans. pursuant to euro disneys
original financing and the terms of a 1994 financial
restructuring, euro disney borrowed funds from the caisse des
dpts et consignations (cdc), a
french state bank. as of september30, 2004, these
borrowings consisted of approximately
128million
($156million at september30, 2004 exchange rates) of
senior debt and
403million
($495million at september30, 2004 exchange rates) of
subordinated debt. the senior debt is secured by certain fixed
assets of disneyland resort paris and the underlying land,
whereas the subordinated debt is unsecured. the loans originally
bore interest at a fixed rate of 7.85%; however, effective
september30, 1999, the terms of these loans were modified
so as to reduce the fixed interest rate to 5.15%, defer
principal repayments and extend the final maturity date from
fiscal year 2015 to fiscal year 2024.
euro disney also executed a credit agreement with
cdc to finance a portion of the construction costs of walt
disney studios park. as of september30, 2004,
approximately
381million
($468million at september30, 2004 exchange rates) of
subordinated loans were outstanding under this agreement. the
loans bear interest at a fixed
-88-
table of contents
rate of 5.15%per annum, unless interest or
principal payments are deferred under the provisions of the
loans, during which time the interest rate on the deferred
amounts is the greater of 5.15% or euribor plus 2.0%. the loans
will mature between fiscal years 2015 and 2028.
euro disney credit facilities and
other. pursuant to euro disneys
original financing with a syndicate of international banks and
the terms of a 1994 financial restructuring, euro disney
borrowed funds which are secured by certain fixed assets of
disneyland resort paris and the underlying land thereof. the
loans bear interest at euribor plus margins with rates ranging
from 2.55% to 8.25% at september30, 2004. the loans mature
between fiscal years 2008 and 2012.
euro disney other
advances. advances of
383million
($471million at september30, 2004 exchange rates)
bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.0%. the remaining advances of
19million
($23million at september30, 2004 exchange rates)
bear interest at euribor plus 1.125% (3.28% at
september30, 2004). the advances are scheduled to mature
between fiscal years 2014 and 2017. $23million of the
advances are secured by certain theme parks assets.
certain of euro disneys borrowing
agreements include covenants, which primarily consist of
restrictions on additional indebtedness and capital
expenditures, the provision of certain financial information and
compliance with certain financial ratio thresholds.
certain of euro disneys borrowings arose in
connection with a lease arrangement that was entered into in
connection with a financial restructuring of euro disney in
1994. see note4 for further discussion of this lease
arrangement.
as previously stated, all of euro disneys
borrowings totaling $2.2billion are classified as current
on the balance sheet as they are subject to acceleration if
certain requirements of the moa are not achieved as part of the
current restructuring process.
hong kong disneyland senior
loans. hong kong disneylands
senior loans are borrowings pursuant to a term loan facility of
hk$2.3billion ($295million at september30,
2004 exchange rates) and a revolving credit facility of
hk$1.0billion ($128million at september30,
2004 exchange rates). the balance of the senior loans as of
september30, 2004 was hk$1.1billion
($143million at september30, 2004 exchange rates).
the term loan facility can be drawn down until 6months
after the theme park opening day (scheduled for late fiscal year
2005) with re-payments to begin approximately three years after
the theme park opening day. as of september30, 2004, up to
25% of the revolving credit facility is available to be drawn
down. the remaining 75% is unavailable until the earlier of
i)the theme park opening or ii) all other senior and
subordinated debt facilities and equity funding have been fully
utilized and there is sufficient liquidity available to
accommodate working capital requirements. both facilities are
secured by the assets of the hong kong disneyland theme park,
currently carry a rate of 3month hibor + 1.0% and are
scheduled to mature in fiscal 2016. the spread above hibor is
1.0% through november15, 2005, 1.25% for the next five
years and 1.375% for the last five years of the facilities. as
of september30, 2004, the rate on the senior loans was
1.82%.
hong kong disneyland subordinated
loans. hong kong disneyland has a
subordinated unsecured loan facility of hk$5.6billion
($720million at september30, 2004 exchange rates)
that is scheduled to mature 25years after the theme park
opening day. the balance drawn on the subordinated unsecured
loan facility as of september30, 2004 was hk
$3.1billion ($402million at september30, 2004
exchange rates). interest rates under this loan are subject to
biannual revisions (up or down) under certain conditions, but
capped at an annual rate of 6.75% (until eight and one half
years after opening day), 7.625% (for the next eight years) and
8.50% (over the last eight and one half years).
-89-
table of contents
total borrowings excluding market value
adjustments, have the following scheduled maturities:
before euro disney and
euro disney and
hong kong disneyland
hong kong
consolidation
disneyland(1)
total
$
1,732
$
$
1,834
1,514
1,609
1,762
1,878
thereafter
4,798
2,203
7,001
$
10,353
$
2,766
$
13,119
(1)
maturities of euro disneys borrowings are
included based on the contractual terms.
the company capitalizes interest on assets
constructed for its parks, resorts and other property and on
theatrical and television productions. in 2004, 2003 and 2002,
total interest capitalized was $35million,
$33million and $36million, respectively.
7income taxes
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting change
domestic (including u.s.exports)
$
3,279
$
1,802
$
1,832
foreign subsidiaries
$
3,739
$
2,254
$
2,190
income tax (benefit) provision
current
federal
$
$
(55
)
$
state
foreign (including withholding)
1,275
deferred
federal
(103
)
state
(78
)
$
1,197
$
$
-90-
table of contents
components of deferred tax assets and
liabilities
deferred tax assets
accrued liabilities
$
(1,412
)
$
(1,255
)
foreign subsidiaries
(842
)
(269
)
retirement benefits
(22
)
(193
)
loss and credit carryforwards
(30
)
(80
)
other, net
(17
)
total deferred tax assets
(2,306
)
(1,814
)
deferred tax liabilities
depreciable, amortizable and other property
3,818
3,036
licensing revenues
leveraged leases
investment in euro disney
other, net
total deferred tax liabilities
4,410
3,778
net deferred tax liability before valuation
allowance
2,104
1,964
valuation allowance
net deferred tax liability
$
2,178
$
2,038
reconciliation of effective income tax
rate
federal income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
state taxes, net of federal benefit
2.0
2.3
2.6
dispositions
0.4
impact of audit settlements
(3.2
)
(2.5
)
foreign sales corporation and extraterritorial
income
(2.6
)
(3.1
)
(3.1
)
other, including tax reserves and related interest
0.8
2.9
4.4
32.0
%
35.0
%
38.9
%
deferred tax assets at september30, 2004
and 2003 were reduced by a valuation allowance relating to a
portion of the tax benefits attributable to certain net
operating losses (nols) reflected on state tax returns of
infoseek and its subsidiaries for periods prior to the infoseek
acquisition on november18, 1999 where applicable state
laws limit the utilization of such nols. in addition, deferred
tax assets at september30, 2004 and 2003 were reduced by a
valuation allowance relating to a portion of the tax benefits
attributable to certain nols reflected on tax returns of abc
family worldwide, inc. and its subsidiaries for periods prior to
the abc family acquisition on october24, 2001 (see
note3). since the valuation allowances associated with
both acquisitions relate to acquired deferred tax assets, the
subsequent realization of these tax benefits would result in
adjustments to the allowance amount being applied as reductions
to goodwill. in addition, at september30, 2004,
approximately $42million of other acquired nol carry
forwards from the acquisition of abc family are available to
offset future taxable income through the year 2022.
in 2004, 2003, and 2002, income tax benefits
attributable to employee stock option transactions of
$25million, $5million and $8million,
respectively, were allocated to shareholders equity.
in 2004 the company derived tax benefits of
$97million from an exclusion provided under
u.s.income tax laws with respect to certain
extraterritorial income attributable to foreign trading gross
receipts (ftgrs). this exclusion was repealed as
part of the american jobs creation act of 2004 (the
act), which was enacted on october22, 2004.
the act provides for a phase-out such that the exclusion for the
companys otherwise qualifying ftgrs generated in fiscal
2005, 2006 and 2007 will be limited to approximately 85%, 65%
and 15%, respectively. no exclusion will be available in fiscal
years 2008 and thereafter.
-91-
table of contents
the act makes a number of other changes to the
income tax laws which will affect the company in future years,
the most significant of which is a new deduction for qualifying
domestic production activities. the impact of this and other
changes made by the act cannot be quantified at this time.
as a matter of course, the company is regularly
audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. from time
to time, these audits result in proposed assessments. during the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2004, the company reached a settlement
with the internal revenue service regarding all assessments
proposed with respect to the companys federal income tax
returns for 1993 through 1995. this settlement resulted in the
company releasing $120million in tax reserves which are no
longer required with respect to these matters. this release of
reserves is reflected in the current year income tax provision.
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2003, the company resolved
certain state income tax audit issues and the corresponding
release of $56million of related tax reserves is reflected
in the 2003 income tax provision.
-92-
table of contents
8pension and other benefit programs
the company maintains pension plans and
postretirement medical benefit plans covering most of its
domestic employees not covered by union or industry-wide plans.
employees hired after january1, 1994 and abc employees
generally hired after january1, 1987 are not eligible for
postretirement medical benefits. with respect to its qualified
defined benefit pension plans, the companys policy is to
fund, at a minimum, the amount necessary on an actuarial basis
to provide for benefits in accordance with the requirements of
the employee retirement income security act of 1974. pension
benefits are generally based on years of service and/or
compensation. the following chart summarizes the balance sheet
impact, as well as the benefit obligations, assets, funded
status and rate assumptions associated with the pension and
postretirement medical benefit plans.
postretirement
pension plans
medical plans
reconciliation of funded status of the plans
and the amounts included in the companys consolidated
balance sheets:
projected benefit obligations
beginning obligations
$
(3,747
)
$
(2,889
)
$
(1,035
)
$
(680
)
service cost
(150
)
(115
)
(35
)
(23
)
interest cost
(216
)
(204
)
(60
)
(48
)
plan amendments
actuarial gain/ (loss)
(651
)
(302
)
benefits paid
ending obligations
$
(3,769
)
$
(3,747
)
$
(954
)
$
(1,035
)
fair value of plans assets
beginning fair value
$
2,655
$
2,660
$
$
actual return on plan assets
employer contributions
benefits paid
(120
)
(112
)
(24
)
(18
)
expenses
(16
)
(15
)
ending fair value
$
3,139
$
2,655
$
$
funded status of the plans
$
(630
)
$
(1,092
)
$
(739
)
$
(838
)
unrecognized net loss
1,231
unrecognized prior service cost (benefit)
(18
)
(20
)
contributions after measurement date
net balance sheet impact
$
$
$
(450
)
$
(323
)
amounts recognized in the balance sheet
consist of
prepaid benefit cost
$
$
$
$
accrued benefit liability
(394
)
(843
)
(450
)
(340
)
additional minimum pension liability adjustment
$
$
$
(450
)
$
(323
)
-93-
table of contents
the components of net periodic benefit cost are
as follows:
postretirement
pension plans
medical plans
servicecosts
$
$
$
$
$
$
interestcosts
expected return on plan assets
(215
)
(262
)
(241
)
(15
)
(19
)
(21
)
amortization of prior year servicecosts
(1
)
(1
)
recognized net actuarial loss
(1
)
net periodic benefit cost
$
$
$
$
$
$
assumptions:
discount rate
6.30
%
5.85
%
7.20
%
6.30
%
5.85
%
7.20
%
rate of return on plan assets
7.50
%
7.50
%
8.50
%
7.50
%
7.50
%
8.50
%
salary increases
4.00
%
3.75
%
4.65
%
n/a
n/a
n/a
year 1 increase in cost of benefits
n/a
n/a
n/a
10.00
%
10.00
%
10.00
%
net periodic benefit cost for the current year is
based on assumptions from the prior year.
plan funded status
as a result of pension plan asset performance
below expected returns in fiscal 2002 and 2003 and a reduction
in the discount rate over the last two years, a number of the
companys pension plans were underfunded at
september30, 2004, having accumulated benefit obligations
exceeding the fair value of plan assets. for these plans, the
fair value of plan assets aggregated $2.4billion, the
accumulated benefit obligations aggregated $2.8billion and
the projected benefit obligations aggregated $3.0billion.
as a result, the company has recorded additional minimum pension
liability adjustments of $415million and $969million
as of september30, 2004 and september30, 2003,
respectively. the decrease in the additional minimum pension
liability adjustment of $554million in the current year
was primarily due to an increase in the discount rate from 5.85%
at september30, 2003 to 6.30% at september30, 2004
and improved plan asset performance. this decrease resulted in
an after-tax adjustment of $347million that was recorded
as an increase of shareholders equity through accumulated
other comprehensive income in fiscal 2004.
the companys total accumulated pension
benefit obligations at september30, 2004 and
september30, 2003 were $3.5billion and
$3.5billion, respectively, of which 95.2% and 98.6%,
respectively, were vested.
the accumulated postretirement medical benefit
obligations and fair value of plan assets for postretirement
medical plans with accumulated postretirement medical benefit
obligations in excess of plan assets were $954million and
$215million, respectively, for 2004 and
$1,035million and $197million, respectively, for
2003.
plan assets
the assets of the companys defined benefit
plans are managed on a commingled basis in a third party master
trust. the investment policy and allocation of the assets in the
master trust were approved by the companys investment and
administrative committee, which has oversight responsibility for
the companys retirement plans. the investment policy
ranges for each major asset class are as follows:
minimum
maximum
equity securities
%
%
debt securities
%
%
alternative investments
%
%
cash
%
%
-94-
table of contents
alternative investments include venture capital
funds, private equity funds and real estate, among other things.
the companys pension plan asset mix at
june30, 2004 and 2003 (the plan measurement date), by
asset class, is as follows:
asset category
equity securities
%
%
debt securities
alternative investments
cash
total
%
%
equity securities include $63million (2% of
total plan assets) and $56million (2% of total plan
assets) of company common stock at september30, 2004 and
september30, 2003, respectively.
plan contributions
during fiscal 2004, the company contributed
$155million and $18million to its pension and
postretirement plans, respectively. the company expects to
contribute $148million to its pension plans and
$17million to its postretirement medical plans during
fiscal 2005.
estimated future benefit payments
the following table presents estimated future
benefit payments:
postretirement
pension plans
medical plans
$
$
2010-2014
1,119
total
$
1,870
$
multi-employer plans
the company participates in various
multi-employer pension plans under union and industry-wide
agreements. in 2004, 2003, and 2002, the contributions to these
plans which are generally expensed as incurred were
$38million, $37million, and $41million,
respectively.
assumptions
certain actuarial assumptions, such as the
discount rate, long-term rate of return and the healthcare cost
trend rate have a significant effect on the amounts reported for
postretirement medical benefit and net periodic pension expense
as well as the respective benefit obligation amounts.
discount rate the assumed discount
rate for pension plans represents the market rate for
high-quality fixed income investments or a long-term high
quality corporate bond rate. for 2004, we increased our rate to
6.30% to reflect market interest rate conditions.
long-term return on assets the
assumed rate of return on plan assets represents an estimate of
long-term returns on an investment portfolio consisting of a
mixture of equities, fixed income, and alternative investments.
-95-
table of contents
when determining the expected return on plan
assets, the company considers long-term rates of return on the
asset classes (both historical and forecasted) in which the
company expects the pension funds to be invested. the following
rates of return by asset class were considered in setting the
long-term return on assets assumption:
equity securities
9%10%
debt securities
5%7%
alternative investments
8%10%
healthcare cost trend rate the
company reviews external data and its own historical trends for
healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates
for the postretirement medical benefit plans. for 2004, we
assumed a 10.0% annual rate of increase in the per capita cost
of covered healthcare claims with the rate decreasing in even
increments over seven years until reaching 5.0%.
the effects of a one percentage point change in
the key assumptions would have had the following effects
increase/(decrease) in cost and/or obligation on the results for
fiscal year 2004:
pension plans
expected
long-term
rate of
assumed healthcare
return on
cost trend rate
discount rate
assets
total service
postretirement
total service
projected
and interest
medical
and interest
benefit
net
costs
obligations
costs
obligations
periodic cost
1% point decrease
$
(20
)
$
(188
)
$
$
$
1% point increase
(29
)
(515
)
(29
)
defined contribution plans
the company has savings and investment plans that
allow eligible employees to allocate up to 20% of salary through
payroll deductions depending on the plan in which the employee
participates. the company matches 50% of the employees
pre-tax contributions, up to plan limits. in 2004, 2003 and
2002, the costs of these plans were $33million,
$32million and $29million, respectively.
medicare modernization act
in may 2004, the fasb issued fasb staff position
no.106-2, accounting and disclosure requirements
related to the medicare prescription drug, improvement and
modernization act of 2003 (fsp 106-2) in response to a new
law regarding prescription drug benefits under medicare as well
as a federal subsidy to sponsors of retiree healthcare benefit
plans. we expect that the impact of this act will not be
material.
9shareholders equity
the company declared an annual dividend of
$0.24per share on december1, 2004 related to fiscal
2004. the dividend is payable on january6, 2005 to
shareholders of record on december10, 2004. the company
paid a $430million dividend ($0.21per share) during
the first quarter of fiscal 2004 applicable to fiscal 2003 and
paid a $429million dividend ($0.21per share) during
the first quarter of fiscal 2003 applicable to fiscal 2002.
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004, the
company repurchased 14.9million shares of disney common
stock for approximately $335million. as of
september30, 2004, the company had authorization in place
to repurchase approximately 315million additional shares.
the par value of the companys outstanding
common stock totaled approximately $21million.
-96-
table of contents
in december 1999, pursuant to the companys
repurchase program, the company established the twdc stock
compensation fundii to acquire shares of company common
stock for the purpose of funding certain future stock-based
compensation. the fund expired on december12, 2002. on
that date, the 5.4million shares of the companys
common stock still owned by the fund were transferred back to
the company and classified as treasury stock.
10stock incentive plans
under various plans, the company may grant stock
options and other equity based awards to executive, management
and creative personnel at exercise prices equal to or exceeding
the market price at the date of grant. effective in january
2003, options granted for common stock become exercisable
ratably over a four-year period from the grant date while
options granted prior to january 2003 generally vest ratably
over a five-year period from the grant date. all options expire
10years after the date of grant. at the discretion of the
compensation committee, options can occasionally extend up to
15years after date of grant. shares available for future
option grants at september30, 2004 totaled 57million.
the following table summarizes information about
stock option transactions (shares in millions):
weighted
weighted
weighted
average
average
average
exercise
exercise
exercise
shares
price
shares
price
shares
price
outstanding at beginning of year
$
26.44
$
27.48
$
29.54
awards forfeited
(8
)
24.40
(14
)
44.41
(14
)
33.64
awards granted
24.61
17.34
21.99
awards exercised
(11
)
18.77
(3
)
14.57
(2
)
18.02
awards expired
(6
)
33.56
(10
)
47.73
(6
)
34.72
outstanding at september30
$
26.50
$
26.44
$
27.48
exercisable at september30
$
28.39
$
27.86
$
26.89
the following table summarizes information about
stock options outstanding at september30, 2004 (shares in
millions):
outstanding
exercisable
range of
weighted average
weighted
weighted
exercise
number
remaining years
average
number
average
prices
of options
of contractual life
exercise price
of options
exercise price
$10 $14
5.6
$
14.59
$
14.34
$15 $19
7.0
17.37
17.64
$20 $24
6.4
22.55
21.65
$25 $29
4.7
27.04
27.06
$30 $34
5.7
31.50
31.72
$35 $39
4.1
37.32
37.45
$40 $44
6.1
41.25
41.36
$45 $395
5.3
112.68
111.91
-97-
table of contents
the weighted average fair values of options at
their grant date during 2004, 2003 and 2002 were $9.94, $6.71
and $8.02, respectively. the weighted average assumptions used
in the black-scholes option-pricing model used to determine fair
value were as follows:
risk-free interest rate
3.5
%
3.4
%
4.8
%
expected years until exercise
6.0
6.0
6.0
expected stock volatility
%
%
%
dividend yield
0.85
%
1.21
%
0.96
%
during the years ended september30, 2004,
2003 and 2002, the company granted restricted stock units of
5.4million, 2.9million and 1.9million,
respectively, and recorded compensation expense of
$66million, $20million and $3million,
respectively. units totaling 750,000shares and
250,000shares were awarded to four executives in 2002 and
2004, respectively, that vest upon the achievement of certain
performance conditions. otherwise, the units are not performance
related and generally vest 50% two years from grant date and 50%
four years from the grant date. units are forfeited if the
employee terminates prior to vesting.
11detail of certain balance sheet
accounts
current receivables
accounts receivable
$
4,403
$
4,018
income tax receivable
other
allowance for doubtful accounts
(148
)
(169
)
$
4,558
$
4,238
other current assets
prepaid expenses
$
$
other
$
$
parks, resorts and other property, at
cost
attractions, buildings and improvements
$
12,348
$
9,251
leasehold improvements
furniture, fixtures and equipment
9,403
7,507
land improvements
2,924
2,142
25,168
19,499
accumulated depreciation
(11,665
)
(8,794
)
projects in progress
1,852
1,076
land
1,127
$
16,482
$
12,678
-98-
table of contents
intangible assets
copyrights
$
$
other amortizable intangible assets
accumulated amortization
(59
)
(47
)
amortizable intangible assets
fcc licenses
1,489
1,486
trademarks
other indefinite lived intangible assets
$
2,815
$
2,786
other non-current assets
receivables
$
$
other prepaid expenses
prepaid benefit costs
other
$
1,040
$
1,190
accounts payable and other accrued
liabilities
accounts payable
$
4,531
$
4,095
payroll and employee benefits
1,009
income tax payable
other
$
5,623
$
5,044
other long-term liabilities
deferred revenues
$
$
capital lease obligations
program licenses and rights
participation liabilities
accrued benefit liability
1,183
other
1,342
1,212
$
3,619
$
3,745
12financial instruments
interest rate risk management
the company is exposed to the impact of interest
rate changes primarily through its borrowing activities. the
companys objective is to mitigate the impact of interest
rate changes on earnings and cash flows and on the market value
of its investments and borrowings. in accordance with policy,
the company maintains its fixed rate debt expressed as a
percentage of its net debt between a minimum and maximum
percentage.
the company typically uses pay-floating and
pay-fixed interest rate swaps to facilitate its interest rate
risk management activities. pay-floating swaps effectively
convert fixed rate medium and long-term obligations to variable
rate instruments indexed to libor. swap agreements in place at
year-end expire in three to 19years. pay-fixed swaps
effectively convert floating rate obligations to fixed rate
instruments. the pay-fixed swaps in place at year-end expire in
one to eight years. as of september30, 2004 and 2003
respectively, the company held $148million and
$711million notional value of pay-fixed swaps that do not
qualify as hedges. the changes in market values of all swaps
that do not qualify as hedges have been included in earnings.
-99-
table of contents
the impact of ineffective interest rate risk
management activities was not significant for fiscal 2004, 2003
and 2002. the net amount of deferred gains and losses in aoci
from interest rate risk management transactions at
september30, 2004 was a gain of $10million while the
balance at september30, 2003 was immaterial.
foreign exchange risk management
the company transacts business globally and is
subject to risks associated with changing foreign exchange
rates. the companys objective is to reduce earnings and
cash flow fluctuations associated with foreign exchange rate
changes thereby enabling management to focus attention on core
business issues and challenges.
the company enters into various contracts that
change in value as foreign exchange rates change to protect the
value of its existing foreign currency assets, liabilities, firm
commitments and forecasted but not firmly committed foreign
currency transactions. the company uses option strategies and
forward contracts to hedge forecasted transactions. in
accordance with policy, the company hedges a minimum percentage
(not to exceed a maximum percentage) of its forecasted foreign
currency transactions for periods generally not to exceed five
years. the company uses forward contracts to hedge foreign
currency assets, liabilities and firm commitments. the gains and
losses on these contracts offset changes in the u.s.dollar
equivalent value of the related forecasted transaction, asset,
liability or firm commitment. the principal currencies hedged
are the euro, british pound, japanese yen and canadian dollar.
cross-currency swaps are used to effectively convert foreign
currency-denominated borrowings to u.s.dollars.
gains and losses on contracts hedging forecasted
foreign currency transactions are initially recorded to aoci,
and reclassified to current earnings when such transactions are
recognized, offsetting changes in the value of the foreign
currency transactions. at september30, 2004 and 2003, the
company had pre-tax deferred gains of $45million and
$23million, respectively, and pre-tax deferred losses of
$147million and $203million, respectively, related
to foreign currency hedges on forecasted foreign currency
transactions.
deferred amounts to be recognized change with
market conditions and will be substantially offset by changes in
the value of the related hedged transactions. the company
expects to reclassify a pre-tax loss of $88million from
aoci to earnings over the next twelve months. the company
reclassified an after-tax loss of $144million and a
$62million after-tax gain from aoci to earnings during
fiscal 2004 and 2003, respectively. these losses were offset by
changes in the u.s.dollar equivalent value of the items
being hedged.
at september30, 2004 and 2003, changes in
value related to cash flow hedges included in aoci were a
pre-tax loss of $102million and $175million,
respectively. in addition, the company reclassified deferred
losses related to certain cash flow hedges from aoci to
earnings, due to the uncertainty of the timing of the original
forecasted transaction. during fiscal 2004 and 2003, the company
recorded the change in fair market value related to fair value
hedges and the ineffectiveness related to cash flow hedges to
earnings. the amounts of hedge ineffectiveness on fair value and
cash flow hedges were not material for fiscal 2004 and fiscal
2003. the impact of foreign exchange risk management activities
on operating income in 2004 and in 2003 was a net loss of
$277million and $273million, respectively. the
impact of foreign exchanges risk management activities on
operating income in 2002 was a gain of $44million.
fair value of financial instruments
at september30, 2004 and 2003, the
companys financial instruments included cash, cash
equivalents, investments, receivables, accounts payable,
borrowings and interest rate and foreign exchange risk
management contracts.
at september30, 2004 and 2003, the fair
values of cash and cash equivalents, receivables and accounts
payable approximated carrying values because of the short-term
nature of these instruments. the estimated fair values of other
financial instruments subject to fair value disclosures,
determined based on broker quotes or
-100-
table of contents
quoted market prices or interest rates for the
same or similar instruments and the related carrying amounts are
as follows:
carrying
fair
carrying
fair
amount
value
amount
value
investments
$
$
$
$
borrowings
(13,488
)
(13,811
)
(13,100
)
(13,692
)
risk management contracts:
foreign exchange forwards
$
(54
)
$
(54
)
$
(131
)
$
(131
)
foreign exchange options
(26
)
(26
)
(22
)
(22
)
interest rate swaps
forward sale contracts
cross-currency swaps
credit concentrations
the company continually monitors its positions
with, and the credit quality of, the financial institutions that
are counterparties to its financial instruments and does not
anticipate nonperformance by the counterparties.
the company would not realize a material loss as
of september30, 2004 in the event of nonperformance by any
single counterparty. the company enters into transactions only
with financial institution counterparties that have a credit
rating of a- or better. the companys current policy
regarding agreements with financial institution counterparties
is generally to require collateral in the event credit ratings
fall below a- or in the event aggregate exposures exceed limits
as defined by contract. in addition, the company limits the
amount of investment credit exposure with any one institution.
as of september30, 2004, counterparties had pledged a
total of $37million of cash collateral.
the companys trade receivables and
investments do not represent a significant concentration of
credit risk at september30, 2004 due to the wide variety
of customers and markets into which the companys products
are sold, their dispersion across many geographic areas, and the
diversification of the companys portfolio among issuers.
13commitments and contingencies
the company has various contractual commitments
for the purchase of broadcast rights for sports, feature films
and other programming, aggregating approximately
$9.6billion, including approximately $840million for
available programming as of september30, 2004, and
approximately $6.5billion related to sports programming
rights, primarily nfl, nba, college football and mlb.
the company has various real estate and equipment
operating leases, including retail outlets and distribution
centers for consumer products, broadcast equipment and office
space for general and administrative purposes. rental expense
for the operating leases during 2004, 2003 and 2002, including
common-area maintenance and contingent rentals, was
$518million, $528million and $511million,
respectively.
the company also has contractual commitments
under various creative talent and employment agreements
including obligations to actors, producers, sports personnel,
television and radio personalities and executives.
-101-
table of contents
contractual commitments for broadcast programming
rights, future minimum lease payments under the non-cancelable
operating leases, creative talent and other commitments totaled
$14.0billion at september30, 2004, payable as
follows:
broadcast
operating
programming
leases
other
total
$
4,122
$
$
1,069
$
5,497
2,455
3,213
1,233
1,734
1,339
thereafter
1,408
$
9,600
$
2,172
$
2,100
$
13,872
the company has certain non-cancelable capital
leases primarily for land and broadcast equipment. future
payments under these leases as of september30, 2004 are as
follows:
$
thereafter
total minimum obligations
less amount representing interest
(530
)
present value of net minimum obligations
current portion
long-term portion
$
the company has guaranteed certain special
assessment and water/sewer revenue bond series issued by the
celebration community development district and the enterprise
community development district (collectively, the districts).
the bond proceeds were used by the districts to finance the
construction of infrastructure improvements and the water and
sewer system in the mixed-use, residential community of
celebration, florida. as of september30, 2004, the
remaining debt service obligation guaranteed by the company was
$96million, of which $59million was principal. the
company is responsible to satisfy any shortfalls in debt service
payments, debt service and maintenance reserve funds, and to
ensure compliance with specified rate covenants. to the extent
that the company has to fund payments under its guarantees, the
districts have an obligation to reimburse the company from
district revenues.
the company has also guaranteed certain bond
issuances by the anaheim public authority that were used by the
city of anaheim to finance construction of infrastructure and a
public parking facility adjacent to the disneyland resort.
revenues from sales, occupancy and property taxes from the
disneyland resort and non-disney hotels are used by the city of
anaheim to repay the bonds. in the event of a debt service
shortfall, the company will be responsible to fund the
shortfall. as of september30, 2004, the remaining debt
service obligation guaranteed by the company was
$402million, of which $109million was principal. to
the extent that tax revenues exceed the debt service payments in
subsequent periods, the company would be reimbursed for any
previously funded shortfalls.
to date, tax revenues have exceeded the debt
service payments for both the celebration and anaheim bonds.
-102-
table of contents
the company has guaranteed payment of certain
facility and equipment leases on behalf of a third-party service
provider that supplies the company with broadcasting
transmission, post production, studio and administrative
services in the u.k. if the third-party service provider
defaults on the leases, the company would be responsible for the
remaining obligation unless the company finds another service
provider to take over the leases. as of september30, 2004,
the remaining facility and equipment lease obligation was
$85million. these leases expire in march 2014.
stephen slesinger, inc.v. the walt
disney company. in this lawsuit, filed
on february27, 1991 in the los angeles county superior
court, the plaintiff claims that a company subsidiary defrauded
it and breached a 1983 licensing agreement with respect to
certain winnie the pooh properties, by failing to account for
and pay royalties on revenues earned from the sale of winnie the
pooh movies on videocassette and from the exploitation of winnie
the pooh merchandising rights. the plaintiff seeks damages for
the licensees alleged breaches as well as confirmation of
the plaintiffs interpretation of the licensing agreement
with respect to future activities. the plaintiff also seeks the
right to terminate the agreement on the basis of the alleged
breaches. if each of the plaintiffs claims were to be
confirmed in a final judgment, damages as argued by the
plaintiff could total as much as several hundred million dollars
and adversely impact the value to the company of any future
exploitation of the licensed rights. the company disputes that
the plaintiff is entitled to any damages or other relief of any
kind, including termination of the licensing agreement. on
april24, 2003, the matter was removed to the united states
district court for the central district of california, which, on
may19, 2003, dismissed certain claims and remanded the
matter to the los angeles superior court. the company appealed
from the district courts order to the court of appeals for
the ninth circuit, but served notice that it was withdrawing its
appeal in september 2004. on march29, 2004, the superior
court granted the companys motion for terminating
sanctions against the plaintiff for a host of discovery abuses,
including the withholding, alteration, and theft of documents
and other information, and, on april5, 2004, dismissed
plaintiffs case with prejudice. on may6, 2004, the
plaintiff moved to disqualify the judge who issued the
march29, 2004 decision, and on may13, 2004, the
plaintiff moved for a new trial on the issue of the
terminating sanctions. on july19, 2004, the
plaintiffs motion to disqualify the judge who issued the
march29, 2004 decision was denied, and on august2,
2004, the plaintiff filed with the state court of appeal a
petition for a writ of mandate to challenge the denial, which
was also denied. in september 2004, plaintiffs moved a second
time to disqualify the trial judge. that motion is pending.
milne and disney enterprises, inc.v.
stephen slesinger, inc. on
november5, 2002, clare milne, the granddaughter of a. a.
milne, author of the winnie the pooh books, and the
companys subsidiary disney enterprises, inc. filed a
complaint against stephen slesinger, inc. (ssi) in
the united states district court for the central district of
california. on november4, 2002, ms.milne served
notices to ssi and the companys subsidiary terminating a.
a. milnes prior grant of rights to winnie the pooh,
effective november5, 2004, and granted all of those rights
to the companys subsidiary. in their lawsuit,
ms.milne and the companys subsidiary seek a
declaratory judgment, under united states copyright law, that
ms.milnes termination notices were valid; that
ssis rights to winnie the pooh in the united states
terminated effective november5, 2004; that upon
termination of ssis rights in the united states, the 1983
licensing agreement that is the subject of the stephen
slesinger, inc.v. the walt disney company lawsuit
terminated by operation of law; and that, as of november5,
2004, ssi was entitled to no further royalties for uses of
winnie the pooh. in january 2003, ssi filed (a)an answer
denying the material allegations of the complaint and
(b)counterclaims seeking a declaration that
(i)ms.milnes grant of rights to disney
enterprises, inc. is void and unenforceable and (ii)disney
enterprises, inc. remains obligated to pay ssi royalties under
the 1983 licensing agreement. ssi also filed a motion to dismiss
the complaint or, in the alternative, for summary judgment. on
may8, 2003, the court ruled that milnes termination
notices are invalid and dismissed ssis counterclaims as
moot. following further motions, on august1, 2003, ssi
filed an amended answer and counterclaims and a third-party
complaint against harriet hunt (heir to e. h. shepard,
illustrator of the original winnie the pooh stories), who had
served a notice of termination and a grant of rights similar to
ms.milnes. by order dated october27, 2003, the
court certified an interlocutory appeal from its may 8 order to
the court of appeals for the ninth circuit, but on
january15, 2004, the court of appeals denied the
companys and milnes petition for an interlocutory
appeal. by order dated august3, 2004, the court granted
ssi leave to amend its answer to assert counterclaims against
the company allegedly arising from the milne and hunt
terminations and the grant of rights to the companys
subsidiary for (a)unlawful and unfair business practices;
-103-
table of contents
and (b)breach of the 1983 licensing
agreement. in october 2004, milne, joined by the company, moved
to amend its complaint to dismiss its claim against ssi for the
purpose of obtaining a final order of dismissal against it, so
as to permit its appeal to the court of appeals to proceed, and
the district court granted that motion by order dated
november12, 2004.
management believes that it is not currently
possible to estimate the impact if any, that the ultimate
resolution of these matters will have on the companys
results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
the company, together with, in some instances,
certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant or
co-defendant in various other legal actions involving copyright,
breach of contract and various other claims incident to the
conduct of its businesses. management does not expect the
company to suffer any material liability by reason of such
actions.
14restructuring and impairment
charges
on november21, 2004, the company sold
substantially all of the disney store chain in north america
under a long-term licensing arrangement to a wholly-owned
subsidiary of the childrens place (tcp).
pursuant to the terms of the sale, the disney store north
america will retain its lease obligation and will become a
wholly owned subsidiary of tcp. tcp will pay the company a
royalty on the physical retail store sales beginning on the
second anniversary of the closing date of the sale.
during the year, the company recorded
$64million of restructuring and impairment charges related
to the disney store. the bulk of the charge ($50million)
was an impairment of the carrying value of the fixed assets
related to the stores to be sold which was recorded in the third
quarter based on the terms of the sale. additional charges
recorded during the year related to the closure of stores that
would not be sold and to transaction costs related to the sale.
additional charges for working capital and other
adjustments will be expensed at the date of closing. additional
restructuring costs will also be recognized later in fiscal
2005. we expect that the total costs that will be recorded in
fiscal 2005 will range from $40million to $50million.
the company is currently considering options with
respect to the stores in europe, including a potential sale. the
carrying value of the fixed and other long-term assets of the
chain in europe totaled $36million at september30,
2004. depending on the terms of a sale, an impairment of these
assets is possible. the base rent lease obligations for the
chain in europe totaled $206million at september30,
2004.
-104-
table of contents
quarterly financial summary
(in millions, except per share data)
(unaudited)
december31
march31
june30
september30
revenues
$
8,549
$
7,189
$
7,471
$
7,543
net income
earnings per share:
diluted
$
0.33
$
0.26
$
0.29
$
0.25
basic
0.34
0.26
0.29
0.25
2003(1)
revenues
$
7,170
$
6,500
$
6,377
$
7,014
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
change
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting change:
diluted
$
0.05
$
0.15
$
0.24
$
0.20
basic
0.05
0.15
0.25
0.20
(1)
income and earnings per share before the
cumulative effect of accounting change for fiscal 2003 does not
reflect the after-tax charge for the adoption of eitf00-21
of $71million ($0.03per share) in the first quarter
of 2003. see note2 to the consolidated financial
statements.
-105-
