10-k
v14978e10vk.htm
the walt disney company - 10/1/2005
e10vk
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington,d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section13 or
15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended october1, 2005
commission file number 1-11605
incorporated in delaware
500 south buena vista street, burbank, california 91521
(818) 560-1000
i.r.s. employer identification no.
95-4545390
securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
name of each exchange
title of each class
on which registered
common stock, $.01par value
new york stock exchange
and pacific stock exchange
7% quarterly interest bonds due 2031
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to
section12(g) of the act: none.
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a
well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the
securities act.
yesno
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not
required to file reports pursuant to section13 or
section15(d) of the act.
yesno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months, and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.
yesno
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to rule405 of
regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be
contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by
reference in partiii of this form10-k or any
amendment to this form10-k.
[]
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
an accelerated filer (as defined in rule12b-2 of the act).
yesno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the act).
yes no
the aggregate market value of common stock held
by non-affiliates (based on the closing price on the last
business day of the registrants most recently completed
second fiscal quarter as reported on the new york stock
exchange-composite transactions) was $58.3billion. all
executive officers and directors of the registrant and all
persons filing a schedule13d with the securities and
exchange commission in respect to registrants common stock
have been deemed, solely for the purpose of the foregoing
calculation, to be affiliates of the registrant.
there were 1,923,609,276 shares of common stock
outstanding as of december2, 2005.
documents incorporated by reference
certain information required for partiii of
this report is incorporated herein by reference to the proxy
statement for the 2006 annual meeting of the companys
shareholders.
the walt disney company and
subsidiaries
table of contents
page
parti
item1.
business
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a
vote of security holders
executive officers of the
company
partii
item5.
market for the
companys common equity, related stockholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative
disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial statements and
supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements
with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
item9b.
other information
partiii
item10.
directors and executive
officers of the company
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of
certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
item13.
certain relationships and
related transactions
item14.
principal accountant fees
and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits and financial
statement schedules
signatures
consolidated financial
information the walt disney company
(this page intentionally left blank)
parti
item1.
business
the walt disney company, together with its
subsidiaries, is a diversified worldwide entertainment company
with operations in four business segments: media networks, parks
and resorts, studio entertainment and consumer products. for
convenience, the terms company and we
are used to refer collectively to the parent company and the
subsidiaries through which our various businesses are actually
conducted.
information on revenues, operating income,
identifiable assets and supplemental revenue of the
companys business segments and by geographical area
appears in note1 to the consolidated financial statements
included in item8 hereof. the company employed
approximately 133,000 people as of october1, 2005.
media networks
the media networks segment is comprised of
domestic broadcast television network, domestic television
stations, cable/satellite networks and international broadcast
operations, television production and distribution, domestic
broadcast radio networks and stations and internet operations.
domestic broadcast television
network
the company operates the abc television network,
which as of october1, 2005 had 226 affiliated stations
operating under agreements and reaching 99% of all
u.s.television households. the abc television network
broadcasts programs in dayparts as follows: early
morning, daytime, primetime, late night, news, children and
sports.
generally, the television network produces its
own programs or acquires broadcast rights from other producers
and rights holders for network programming, and pays varying
amounts of compensation to affiliated stations for broadcasting
the programs and commercial announcements included therein. the
abc television network derives substantially all of its revenues
from the sale to advertisers of time in network programs for
commercial announcements. the ability to sell time for
commercial announcements and the rates received are primarily
dependent on the size and nature of the audience that the
network can deliver to the advertiser as well as overall
advertiser demand for time on network broadcasts.
domestic broadcast television
stations
we own nine very high frequency
(vhf)television stations, five of which are located in the
top ten markets in the united states and one ultra high
frequency (uhf)television station. all our television
stations are affiliated with the abc television network,
transmit both analog and digital signals, and collectively reach
24% of the nations television households.
-1-
markets, frequencies and other station details
are as follows:
television
analog
market
market
tv station
channel
ranking(1)
new york, ny
wabc-tv
los angeles, ca
kabc-tv
chicago, il
wls-tv
philadelphia, pa
wpvi-tv
sanfrancisco, ca
kgo-tv
houston, tx
ktrk-tv
raleigh-durham, nc
wtvd-tv
fresno, ca
kfsn-tv
flint, mi
wjrt-tv
toledo, oh
wtvg-tv
(1)
based on nielsen media research,
u.s.television household estimates, january1, 2005
cable/satellite networks and international
broadcast operations
our cable/satellite networks and international
broadcast operations are principally involved in the
distribution of television programming, the licensing of
programming to domestic and international markets and investing
in foreign television broadcasting, production and distribution
entities.
generally, the cable networks produce their own
programs or acquire programming rights from other producers and
rights holders for network programming. cable operations derive
substantially all of their revenues from affiliate fees charged
to cable service providers and/or the sale to advertisers of
time in network programs for commercial announcements. the
amounts that we can charge to our service providers for our
cable services are largely dependent on competition and the
quality and quantity of programming that we can provide.
generally, the companys cable networks are committed to
multi-year carriage agreements with contractually determined
prices. the ability to sell time for commercial announcements
and the rates received are primarily dependent on the size and
nature of the audience that the network can deliver to the
advertiser as well as overall advertiser demand.
the companys most significantly penetrated
cable properties and their ownership percentage and subscribers
as of october1, 2005 are set forth in the following table:
subscribers
property
ownership %
(in millions)
espn(1)
80.0
espn2(1)
80.0
espn classic(1)
80.0
espnews(1)
80.0
disney channel(1)
100.0
international disney channels(2)
100.0
toon disney(1)
100.0
soapnet(1)
100.0
abc family channel(1)
100.0
jetix europe(2)
74.4
jetix latin america(2)
100.0
a&e(1)
37.5
-2-
subscribers
property
ownership %
(in millions)
the history channel(1)
37.5
the biography channel(1)
37.5
history international(1)
37.5
a&e international(2)
37.5
lifetime television(1)
50.0
lifetime movie network(2)
50.0
lifetime real women(2)
50.0
e! entertainment television(1)
39.6
style(1)
39.6
(1)
u.s.subscriber counts according to nielsen
media research as of october1, 2005
(2)
not rated by nielsen. subscriber count represents
number of subscribers receiving the service based on internal
management reports
the company has various other international
investments in broadcast and cable properties in addition to
those listed in the above table.
espn. espn, inc. is
a cable and satellite television service which operates six
domestic television sports networks: espn, espn2, espn classic,
espnews, espn deportes (a spanish language network launched in
january 2004) and espnu (a network devoted to college sports
which launched in march 2005). espn also operates two
high-definition television simulcast services, espn hd and espn2
hd. espn, inc. owns, has equity interests in, or has
distribution agreements with 29 international networks, reaching
households in more than 190 countries and territories. in
addition, espn holds a 50% equity interest in espn star sports,
which delivers sports programming throughout most of asia and a
30% equity interest in ctv specialty television, inc., which
owns the sports network, le rseau des sports, espn classic
canada, the nhl network and discovery canada, among other media
properties in canada.
espn also operates several other brand
extensions, including espn.com, an internet sports content
provider; espn regional television; espn radio, which is
distributed through the abc radio networks; espn the magazine;
bass, the largest fishing organization in the world; and espn
enterprises, which develops branded licensing opportunities. in
addition, espn zone sports-themed dining and entertainment
facilities are operated by and included in the parks and resorts
segment. espn also provides content for newer technologies such
as broadband, wireless, and video-on-demand.
disney channel.
disney channel is a cable and satellite television service.
shows developed for initial exhibition on disney channel include
live-action comedy series such as the suitelife of
zack& cody and thats so raven;
animated programming including american dragon: jake long
and the buzz on maggie, both produced by walt disney
television animation; and educational preschool series like
higglytown heroes, jojos circus and the upcoming
disneys little einsteins for the channels
playhouse disney programming block, as well as projects for its
popular disney channel original movie franchise. the balance of
the programming consists of products acquired from third parties
and products from our owned theatrical film and television
programming library.
the fall 2005 season on disney channel saw the
return of the suitelife of zack& cody and
thats so raven with new episodes. upcoming series
premieres include the new live action serieshannah
montana and the new animated seriesdisneys
the emperors new school, both produced by disney
channel and set to premiere in early 2006. many of the
childrens live action and animated series produced for the
disney channel and the companys other cable properties are
also aired during the
-3-
saturday morning childrens daypart, abc
kids including the suitelife of zack&
cody, the buzz on maggie, power rangers: s.p.d., the proud
family, disneys lilo and stitch, thats so raven,
disneys kim possible, and phil of the future.
disney channel also reaches beyond the united
states via its international operations. programming on these
operations consists primarily of the companys originally
produced series and movies, library theatrical films and
television programs, products acquired from third parties and
locally produced programming. we continue to explore the further
development of disney channel in other countries around the
world.
international disney channels and launch dates
are set forth in the following table:
channel
launch date
taiwan
march 1995
uk
october 1995
australia
june 1996
malaysia(1)
october 1996
france
march 1997
middle east
april 1997
spain
april 1998
italy
october 1998
germany
october 1999
philippines(1)
january 2000
singapore(1)
february 2000
brunei(1)
february 2000
north latin america(2)
july 2000
south latin america(2)
july 2000
brazil
april 2001
portugal
november 2001
south korea(1)
march 2002
indonesia(1)
july 2002
sweden(3)
february 2003
norway(3)
february 2003
denmark(3)
february 2003
japan
november 2003
new zealand(4)
december 2003
hong kong(1)
march 2004
india
december 2004
(1)
represents feed extensions from the asia regional
channel
(2)
represents feed extensions from the latin america
regional channel
(3)
represents feed extensions from the scandinavian
regional channel (note that these three feeds comprise one
channel)
(4)
represents feed extensions from the australian
regional channel
toon disney. toon
disney was launched in 1998 and is intended to appeal to
children and features an array of family-friendly, predominantly
animated programming from the disney library. toon disney is the
primetime home of jetix, a block consisting of action adventure
programming.
-4-
this year, toon disney added several new series
in the jetix block including power rangers: s.p.d.,
w.i.t.c.h. and the original animated seriesget
ed, produced by walt disney television animation.
soapnet. soapnet was
launched in january 2000 and offers a wide variety of soap opera
and related programming 24hours a day, seven days a week.
soapnets primetime schedule features same-day repeat
telecasts of the top-rated daytime series including all my
children, days of our lives, one life to live and general
hospital. in addition, the network provides inside access to
stars and storylines with original programs, including the
emmy-nominated one-hour talk show, soap talk, and the
reality seriesi wanna be a soap star. soapnet also
offers primetime classics including melrose place, dynasty,
dallas and knots landing.
abc family. in
october 2001, the company acquired fox family channel, which was
later renamed abc family, through its acquisition of fox family
worldwide, inc. abcfamily is a u.s.television
programming service which targets adults 18-34 and provides
programming that consists of originally produced series and
movies, product acquired from third parties and products from
our owned theatrical film library.
jetix. as part of
the acquisition of fox family worldwide, inc., the company
acquired a 76% ownership interest in jetix europe, a publicly
traded pan-european integrated childrens entertainment
company formerly known as fox kids europe, and a 100% ownership
interest in jetix latin america, formerly known as fox kids
latin america, which is operated by disney channel latin america.
a&e television
networks. the a&e television
networks are television programming services devoted to cultural
and entertainment programming and include a&e, a&e
international, the history channel, history international, a
network that provides viewers with a window into
non-u.s.perspectives, and the biography channel, launched
in 1998, which is dedicated to exploration of the lives of
exceptional people.
lifetime entertainment
services. lifetime entertainment
services includes: lifetime television, which is devoted to
womens lifestyle programming; the lifetime movie network,
a 24-hour movie channel; and lifetime real women, a 24-hour
cable network with programming from a womans point of view.
e! entertainment
television. e! entertainment
television is a television programming service focused on the
entertainment world. e! entertainment television also includes
style, a 24-hour television service devoted to style, beauty and
home design.
the companys share of the financial results
of a&e, lifetime, e! entertainment television and other
broadcast and cable equity investments is reported under the
heading equity in the income of investees in the
companys consolidated statements of income.
television production and
distribution
we also develop and produce television
programming for distribution to global broadcasters and cable
and satellite operators, including the major television
networks, disney channel and other cable and satellite networks,
under the buena vista television, buena vista productions,
touchstone television and walt disney television labels. program
development is carried out in collaboration with a number of
independent writers, producers and creative teams, with a focus
on the development, production and distribution of half-hour
comedies and one-hour dramas for network primetime broadcast.
the one-hour dramas produced by touchstone television alias,
desperate housewives, greys anatomy, and lost
and the half-hour comedies according to jim,
hope& faith, less than perfect, rodney, and
scrubs (for nbc), were all renewed for the 2005/2006
television season. in addition, according to jim and
scrubs will enter the domestic syndication market in
2006. new primetime series that premiered in the fall of 2005
included the one-hour dramas commander in chief, criminal
minds (for cbs), ghost whisperer (for cbs) and
night stalker. planned midseason shows include one-hour
-5-
dramas in justice and what about brian
and comedies crumbs and everything i know about
men (for cbs). for the abc family channel, the company
produces the successful childrens program, power
ranger: s.p.d. the latest version of the popular power
rangers franchise.
under the walt disney television and buena vista
television labels the company develops and produces animated
childrens television programming for distribution to
broadcasters throughout the world, including disney channel, the
abc television network, and other cable broadcasters.
the company also licenses its animated television
properties in a number of foreign television markets. in
addition, we syndicate certain of our television programs abroad.
the company also produces original television
movies for the wonderful world of disney, which the abc
television network airs on saturday evenings along with
theatricals which air as abc movies of the week
under the buena vista production label, we
produce a variety of primetime specials for exhibition on
network television, as well as live-action syndicated
programming, which includes live! with regis and kelly
and the tony danza show, daily talk shows,
ebert& roeper, a weekly motion picture review
program, and game shows, such as who wants to be a
millionaire.
domestic broadcast radio networks and
stations
we operate the abc radio networks, which include
the espn network and radio disney network and provide
programming to approximately 4,600 affiliated radio stations
reaching approximately 108million domestic listeners
weekly. we own 52 standard am radio stations and 19fm
radio stations. the abc radio networks produce and distribute to
affiliates a variety of programs and formats, including abc news
radio and other news network programming, syndicated talk and
music programs, and 24-hour music formats. in addition, the abc
radio networks produce radio disney, a 24-hour music and talk
format intended to appeal to children and their parents. radio
disney is carried in 54 markets, covering more than
60percent of the u.s.market. abc radio networks also
distributes the espn radio format, which is carried on more than
700 stations, including 306full-time (five of which are
owned by the company), making it the largest radio sports
network in the united states.
of the companys 42 owned radio stations
located in the top 20 u.s.radio markets, 24 carry
predominantly locally originated music and talk programming, 14
carry the radio disney format and four carry the espn radio
format. of the companys 29 radio stations in the
non-top-20 markets, 26carry the radio disney format, two
carry non-abc programming, and one carries the espn radio
format. our radio stations reach 14million people weekly
in the top 20 united states radio markets.
the business model for the radio networks is
substantially the same as that for abc television network.
markets, frequencies and other station details
are as follows:
radio
radio
market
market
station
frequency
ranking(1)
new york, ny
wabc
am
new york, ny
wplj
fm
new york, ny
wepn
am
los angeles, ca
kabc
am
los angeles, ca
kspn
am
los angeles, ca
kdis
am
los angeles, ca
klos
fm
chicago, il
wls
am
-6-
radio
radio
market
market
station
frequency
ranking(1)
chicago, il
wmvp
am
chicago, il
wrdz
am
chicago, il
wzzn
fm
sanfrancisco, ca
kgo
am
sanfrancisco, ca
ksfo
am
sanfrancisco, ca
kmky
am
dallas-fortworth, tx
wbap
am
dallas-fortworth, tx
kmki
am
dallas-fortworth, tx
ktys
fm
dallas-fortworth, tx
kscs
fm
dallas-fortworth, tx
kesn
fm
philadelphia, pa
wwjz
am
houston, tx
kmic
am
washington,d.c.
wmal
am
washington,d.c.
wrqx
fm
washington,d.c.
wjzw
fm
detroit, mi
wjr
am
detroit, mi
wdvd
fm
detroit, mi
wdrq
fm
atlanta, ga
wdwd
am
atlanta, ga
wkhx
fm
atlanta, ga
wyay
fm
boston, ma
wmki
am
miami, fl
wmym
am
seattle, wa
kkdz
am
phoenix, az
kmik
am
minneapolis, mn
kdiz
am
minneapolis, mn
kqrs
fm
minneapolis, mn
kxxr
fm
minneapolis, mn(2)
wgvx
fm
minneapolis, mn(2)
wgvy
fm
minneapolis, mn(2)
wgvz
fm
tampa, fl
wwmi
am
st.louis, mo
wsdz
am
denver, co
kddz
am
pittsburgh, pa
weae
am
portland, or
kdzr
am
portland, or
kksl
am
cleveland, oh
wwmk
am
sacramento, ca
kiid
am
kansas city, mo
kphn
am
sanantonio, tx
krdy
am
salt lake city, ut
kwdz
am
milwaukee, wi
wksh
am
charlotte, nc
wgfy
am
providence, ri
wddz
am
orlando, fl
wdyz
am
norfolk, va
whkt
am
-7-
radio
radio
market
market
station
frequency
ranking(1)
norfolk, va
wpmh
am
indianapolis, in
wrdz
fm
greensboro, nc
wcog
am
west palm beach, fl
wmne
am
new orleans, la
wbyu
am
jacksonville, fl
wbwl
am
hartford, ct
wdzk
am
louisville, ky
wdrd
am
richmond, va
wdzy
am
albany, ny
wddy
am
tulsa, ok
kmus
am
albuquerque, nm
kaly
am
little rock, ar
kdis
fm
wichita, ks
kqam
am
flint, mi
wfdf
am
(1)
based on 2005 arbitron radio market rankings
(2)
the three radio signals are operated as a single
station
internet
the internet operations of the media networks
segment develop, publish and distribute content for online and
wireless services intended to appeal to broad consumer interest
in sports, news, family and entertainment. internet web sites
and products include abc.com, abcnews.com, disney.com, espn.com
and enhanced tv. the companys internet operations derive
revenue from a combination of advertising and sponsorships,
subscription services and e-commerce.
abc.com is the official web site of the abc
television network, while abcnews.com draws on the knowledge and
expertise of abc news correspondents throughout the world. abc
news offers broadband subscriptions to the 24-hour live internet
news channel, abc news now, and to video on demand
reports from all abc news broadcasts through abcnews.com and
through alliances with aol broadband, comcast, sbc yahoo and
real networks. content from abc and abc news is also available
on select domestic cellular carrier networks.
disney.com is a centralized disney web site which
integrates many of the companys disney-branded internet
sites including sites for the disney channel, walt disney parks
and resorts, and walt disney pictures. disney online offers a
number of premium broadband services, including disney
connection and disneys toontown online, and disney mobile
studios produces content which is distributed through mobile
carriers and content distributors worldwide. in july 2005, the
walt disney internet group announced plans to develop and launch
disney mobile, a branded mobile phone service for families.
espn.com delivers comprehensive sports news,
information and video to millions of fans each month. espn360 is
a broadband service that delivers live games, highlights, and
inside analysis, among other content features. espn also
distributes mobile content and is developing a mobile phone
service for sports fans. espn.com averages14million
users per month.
enhanced tv provides interactive television
programming and advertising services during abc telecasts, such
as monday night football.
-8-
competition
the abc television network, disney channel, espn,
abc family channel and our other broadcast and cable/satellite
services compete for viewers primarily with other television
networks, independent television stations and other video media,
such as cable and satellite television programming services,
videocassettes, dvds, video games and the internet. in the sale
of advertising time, the broadcasting operations compete with
other television networks, independent television stations,
suppliers of cable/satellite services and other advertising
media such as newspapers, magazines, billboards and the
internet. the abc radio networks likewise compete with other
radio networks and radio programming services, independent radio
stations and other advertising media.
the companys television and radio stations
compete with other television and radio stations, cable and
satellite programming services, videocassettes, dvds and other
advertising media such as newspapers, magazines, billboards and
the internet. competition occurs primarily in individual market
areas. a television or radio station in one market generally
does not compete directly with stations in other market areas.
the growth in the cable/satellite industrys
share of viewers has resulted in increased competitive pressures
for advertising revenues. the companys cable/satellite
networks also face competition for carriage by cable and
satellite service operators and distributors. the companys
contractual agreements with cable and satellite operators are
renewed or renegotiated from time to time in the ordinary course
of business. consolidation and other market conditions in the
cable and satellite distribution industry and other factors may
adversely affect the companys ability to obtain and
maintain contractual terms for the distribution of its various
cable and satellite programming services that are as favorable
as those currently in place.
the companys media networks segment also
competes for the acquisition of sports and other programming.
the market for programming is very competitive, particularly for
sports programming. the company currently has sports rights
agreements with the nfl, nba, and mlb, as well as for other
sporting events, including the college football bowl
championship series, various college football and basketball
conferences, the pga tour, and the indy racing league, including
the indianapolis 500. the current agreement with the nfl expires
after the telecast of the 2006 pro bowl. beginning with the
2006/2007 season, monday night football will be telecast on
espn, and the abc television network will not have rights to
televise nfl monday night football in future seasons.
federal regulation
television and radio broadcasting are subject to
extensive regulation by the federal communications commission
(fcc)under federal laws and regulations, including the
communications act of 1934, as amended. violation of fcc
regulations can result in substantial monetary forfeitures,
limited renewals of licenses and, in egregious cases, denial of
license renewal or revocation of a license. fcc regulations that
affect our media networks segment include the following:
licensing of television and radio
stations. each of the television and
radio stations we own must be licensed by the fcc. these
licenses are granted for periods of up to eight years, and we
must obtain renewal of licenses as they expire in order to
continue operating the stations. we (or the acquiring entity in
the case of a divestiture) must also obtain fcc approval
whenever we seek to have a license transferred in connection
with the acquisition or divestiture of a station. the fcc may
decline to renew or approve the transfer of a license in certain
circumstances. although we have generally received such renewals
and approvals in the past, there can be no assurance that we
will always obtain necessary renewals and approvals in the
future.
television and radio station ownership
limits. the fcc imposes limitations on
the number of television stations and radio stations we can own
in a specific market, on the combined number
-9-
of television and radio stations we can own in a
single market and on the aggregate percentage of the national
audience that can be reached by television stations we own.
currently:
fcc regulations presently permit us to own an
additional television station in all of the markets in which we
have television stations except toledo, ohio; flint, michigan;
and raleigh-durham, north carolina. we do not own more than one
television station in any of the ten markets in which we own a
television station.
federal statutes permit our television stations
in the aggregate to reach a maximum of 39% of the national
audience (fcc regulations attribute to uhf television stations
only 50% of the television households in their market). our
stations reach approximately 24% of the national audience
(approximately 23% when calculated using the fccs
attribution rule).
fcc regulations in some cases impose restrictions
on our ability to acquire additional radio or television
stations in the markets in which we own radio stations, but we
do not believe any such limitations are material to our current
operating plans.
in july 2003, the fcc adopted revised limits on
television and radio station ownership. the rules adopted
generally would relax existing ownership restrictions and would
permit entities to own more television and radio stations in
some markets, but would also eliminate the 50% discount for
calculating households reached by uhf television stations
operated by the top four broadcast television networks
(including abc). the new rules, however, were challenged in
federal court and were remanded by the court to the fcc to
review the rules. as a result, most of the revised rules adopted
by the fcc in july 2003 are not in effect. although it is
possible that the fcc may implement more liberal media ownership
rules than those currently in effect (other than those governed
by statute), we cannot predict whether the revised rules will be
implemented and if so, when such rules will become effective.
dual networks. fcc
rules currently prohibit any of the four major television
networks abc, cbs, fox and nbc from
being under common ownership or control. the new fcc rules, if
implemented, would not modify this limitation.
regulation of
programming. the fcc regulates
programming by, among other things, banning indecent
programming, regulating political advertising, and imposing
commercial time limits during childrens programming.
broadcasters face a heightened risk of being found in violation
of the indecency prohibition by the fcc because of recent fcc
decisions, coupled with the spontaneity of live programming.
recently, the fcc has indicated that it is stepping up
enforcement activities as they apply to indecency, and has
indicated it would consider license revocation for serious
violations. moreover, legislation has been introduced in
congress that would increase penalties for broadcasting indecent
programming.
federal legislation and fcc rules also limit the amount of
commercial matter that may be shown on broadcast or cable
channels during programming designed for children 12years
of age and younger. in addition, broadcast channels are
generally required to provide a minimum of three hours per week
of programming that has as a significant purpose
meeting the educational and informational needs of children
16years of age and younger. fcc rules also give television
station owners the right to reject or refuse network programming
in certain circumstances or to substitute programming that the
licensee reasonably believes to be of greater local or national
importance.
cable and satellite carriage of broadcast
television stations. with respect to
cable systems operating within a television stations
designated market area, fcc rules require that every three years
each television station elect either must carry
status, pursuant to which cable operators generally must carry a
local television station in the stations market, or
retransmission consent status, pursuant to which the
cable operator must negotiate with the television station to
obtain the consent of the television station prior to carrying
its signal. under the
-10-
satellite home viewer improvement act and its
successor, the satellite home viewer extension and
reauthorization act, satellite carriers are permitted to
retransmit a local television stations signal into its
local market with the consent of the local television station.
if a satellite carrier elects to carry one local station in a
market, the satellite carrier must carry the signals of all
local television stations that also request carriage. certain of
the satellite carriage provisions are set to expire on
december31, 2009.
digital television.
fcc rules currently require full-power analog television
stations, such as ours, to provide digital service on a second
broadcast channel granted specifically for the phase-in of
digital broadcasting. fcc rules also regulate digital
broadcasting to ensure continued quality carriage of mandated
free over-the-air program service. all of the companys
stations have launched digital facilities, and we are evaluating
various options with respect to use of digital channels. under
current law, all broadcasters are required to operate
exclusively in digital mode and permanently surrender one of
their two channels by december31, 2006. however, the fcc
has the authority in certain circumstances to extend this
deadline in a particular market upon the request of a station.
congress is contemplating legislation that would create a
hard date by which television stations would have to
surrender one channel and which would eliminate the fcc
extension process.
the foregoing is a brief summary of certain
provisions of the communications act and other legislation and
of specific fcc rules and policies. this summary focuses on
provisions material to our business. reference should be made to
the communications act, other legislation, fcc rules and public
notices and rulings of the fcc for further information
concerning the nature and extent of the fccs regulatory
authority.
fcc laws and regulations are subject to change,
and the company generally cannot predict whether new
legislation, court action or regulations, or a change in the
extent of application or enforcement of current laws and
regulations, would have an adverse impact on our operations.
parks and resorts
the company owns and operates the walt disney
world resort and disney cruise line in florida, the disneyland
resort in california and espn zone facilities in several states.
the company manages and has effective ownership interests of 51%
and 43%, respectively, in the disneyland resort paris in france
and hong kong disneyland, which opened september 2005. the
company also licenses the operations of the tokyo disney resort
in japan. the companys walt disney imagineering unit
designs and develops new theme park concepts and attractions as
well as resort properties.
the businesses in the parks and resorts segment
generate revenues predominately from the sale of admissions to
the theme parks, room nights at the hotels and rentals at the
resort properties. costs consist primarily of the fixed cost
base for physical properties and base level staffing necessary
to operate the theme park and resort properties. in addition to
the fixed cost base, there is a variable cost component that
increases or decreases with the volume of business.
walt disney world resort
the walt disney world resort is located
15miles southwest of orlando, florida on approximately
30,500acres of owned land. the resort includes theme parks
(the magic kingdom, epcot, disney-mgm studios and disneys
animal kingdom); hotels; vacation ownership units; a retail,
dining and entertainment complex; a sports complex; conference
centers; campgrounds; golf courses; water parks and other
recreational facilities designed to attract visitors for an
extended stay.
the entire walt disney world resort is marketed
through a variety of national, international and local
advertising and promotional activities. several attractions in
each of the theme parks are sponsored by corporate participants.
-11-
magic
kingdom the magic kingdom,
which opened in 1971, consists of seven themed lands: main
street usa, adventureland, fantasyland, frontierland, liberty
square, mickeys toontown fair and tomorrowland. each land
provides a unique guest experience, featuring themed rides and
attractions, live disney character interaction, restaurants,
refreshment areas and merchandise shops. additionally, there are
daily parades and a nighttime fireworks extravaganza
wishes.
epcot
epcot, which opened in 1982, consists of two major themed areas:
future world and world showcase. future world dramatizes certain
historical developments and addresses the challenges facing the
world today through major pavilions devoted to showcasing
science and technology improvements, communication, energy,
transportation, using your imagination, life and health, nature
and food production, the ocean environment, and space. world
showcase presents a community of nations focusing on the
culture, traditions and accomplishments of people around the
world. countries represented with pavilions include the united
states, canada, china, france, germany, italy, japan, mexico,
morocco, norway and the united kingdom. both areas feature
themed rides and attractions, restaurants and merchandise shops.
disney-mgm
studios disney-mgm
studios, which opened in 1989, consists of a theme park, a radio
studio and a film and television production facility. the park
centers on hollywood as it was during the 1930s and
1940s and provides various attractions, themed food
service and merchandise facilities. the production facility
consists of three sound stages, merchandise shops and a back lot
area and currently hosts both feature film and television
productions. disney-mgm studios also features fantasmic!,
a nighttime entertainment spectacular.
disneys animal
kingdom disneys
animal kingdom, which opened in 1998, consists of a 145-foot
tree of life centerpiece surrounded by six themed areas:
dinoland u.s.a., africa, rafikis planet watch, asia,
discovery island and camp minnie mickey. each themed
area contains adventure attractions, entertainment shows,
restaurants and merchandise shops. the park features more than
300 species of mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians and 3,000
varieties of trees and plants on more than 500acres of
land.
resort
facilities as of
october1, 2005, the company owned and operated 17 resort
hotels at the walt disney world resort, with a total of
approximately 22,000 rooms and 318,000square feet of
conference meeting space. in addition, disneys
fortwilderness camping and recreational area offers
approximately 800 campsites.
the disney vacation club (dvc)offers
ownership interests in seven resort facilities, located at the
walt disney world resort, as well as in vero beach, florida, and
hilton head island, south carolina. available units at each
facility are offered for sale under a vacation ownership plan
and are operated as rental property until the units are sold.
disneys saratoga springs resort& spa in orlando,
florida opened its first phase of vacation ownership properties
in may 2004. upon the completion of saratoga springs, the walt
disney world resort will have nearly 2,400 vacation ownership
units.
recreational amenities and activities available
at the walt disney world resort include five championship golf
courses, miniature golf courses, full-service spas, tennis,
sailing, water skiing, swimming, horseback riding and a number
of other noncompetitive sports and leisure time activities. the
resort also includes two water parks: blizzard beach and typhoon
lagoon.
we have also developed a 120-acre retail, dining
and entertainment complex known as downtown disney, which
consists of the marketplace, pleasure island and west side. a
number of the downtown disney facilities are operated by third
parties who pay rent and license fees to the company. in
addition to more than 20 specialty retail shops and restaurants,
the downtown disney marketplace is home to the
50,000-square-foot world of disney retail store featuring
disney-branded merchandise. pleasure island, a nighttime
entertainment center adjacent to the downtown disney
marketplace, includes restaurants, nightclubs and shopping
facilities. downtown disney west side is
-12-
situated on 66acres on the west side of
pleasure island and includes the disneyquest facility, cirque du
soleil, house of blues and several retail, dining and
entertainment operations.
disneys wide world of sports, which opened
in 1997, is a 220acre sports complex providing
professional caliber training and competition, festival and
tournament events and interactive sports activities. the
complexs venues accommodate more than 30 different
sporting events, including baseball, tennis, basketball,
softball, track and field, football and soccer. its stadium is
the spring training site for mlbs atlanta braves and has a
seating capacity of 9,000. additionally, the complex is the
pre-season training site of the nfls tampa bay buccaneers,
and the nbas orlando magic. the amateur athletic union
hosts approximately 30 championship events per year at the
facility.
in the downtown disney resort area, seven
independently operated hotels are situated on property leased
from the company. these hotels have a capacity of approximately
3,700 rooms. additionally, two hotels, the walt disney world
swan and the walt disney world dolphin, with an aggregate
capacity of approximately 2,300 rooms, are independently
operated on property leased from the company near epcot.
disneyland resort
the company owns 460acres and has under
long-term lease an additional 50acres of land in anaheim,
california. the disneyland resort includes two theme parks
(disneyland and disneys california adventure), three
hotels and a retail, dining and entertainment district designed
to attract visitors for an extended stay.
the entire disneyland resort is marketed through
international, national and local advertising and promotional
activities as a destination resort. a number of the attractions
and restaurants at each of the theme parks are sponsored by
other corporations through long-term agreements.
disneyland
disneyland, which opened in 1955, consists of main street usa
and seven principal areas: adventureland, critter country,
fantasyland, frontierland, new orleans square, tomorrowland and
toontown. these areas feature themed rides and attractions,
shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and refreshment stands.
disneys california
adventure disneys
california adventure, which opened in 2001, is adjacent to
disneyland and includes four principal areas: golden state,
hollywood pictures backlot, paradise pier and a bugs
land. these areas include rides, attractions, shows,
restaurants, merchandise shops and refreshment stands.
resort
facilities disneyland
resort includes three company-owned hotels: the
1,000-roomdisneyland hotel, 500-roomdisneys
paradise pier hotel and disneys grand californian hotel, a
deluxe 750-room hotel located adjacent to disneys
california adventure.
the resort also includes downtown disney, a
themed 310,000square foot outdoor complex of
entertainment, dining and shopping venues, located adjacent to
both disneyland park and disneys california adventure. a
number of the downtown disney facilities are operated by third
parties who pay rent and license fees to the company.
disneyland resort paris
the company has a 51% effective ownership
interest in the disneyland resort paris, which is a
4,800acre development located in marne-la-valle,
approximately 20miles east of paris, france. euro disney
s.c.a., a publicly-traded french entity and its subsidiaries
operate the disneyland resort paris, which includes the
disneyland park; the walt disney studios park; seven themed
hotels with approximately 5,800 rooms; two convention centers;
the disney village, a shopping, dining and entertainment center;
and a 27-hole golf facility. of the 4,800acres comprising
the site, 2,400acres have been developed to date. the
project is being developed pursuant to a 1987 master agreement
with the french governmental authorities.
-13-
disneyland
park disneyland park,
which opened in 1992, consists of main street and four principal
themed areas: adventureland, discoveryland, fantasyland and
frontierland. these areas include themed rides, attractions,
shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and refreshment stands.
walt disney studios
park walt disney studios
park opened in march 2002 adjacent to disneyland park. the park
takes guests into the worlds of cinema, animation and television
and includes four principal themed areas: front lot, animation
courtyard, production courtyard and backlot. these areas each
include themed rides, attractions, shows, restaurants,
merchandise shops and refreshment stands.
development of the site continues with the val
deurope project, a planned community near disneyland
resort paris. the already completed phases of the site include a
town center, which consists of a shopping center; a 150-room
hotel; office, commercial and residential space; and a regional
train station. third parties operate these developments on land
leased or purchased from euro disney s.c.a. and its
subsidiaries. in september 2003, euro disney s.c.a. signed an
agreement with the regional development authority to begin the
third phase of development. included in this phase will be an
expansion of disney village and projects aimed at increasing val
deuropes capacity to welcome new residents.
in addition, there are several on-site hotels
which were opened in 2003 and 2004 that are owned and operated
by third party developers that provide approximately 2,080
rooms. agreements have been signed with additional third party
developers to provide approximately 300 additional on-site hotel
rooms and/or time share units over the next two years.
in fiscal 2005, euro disney s.c.a. completed a
financial restructuring, which provided for an increase in
capital and refinancing of its borrowings. subject to certain
deferrals, euro disney s.c.a. is required to pay royalties and
management fees to certain wholly-owned subsidiaries of the walt
disney company based on performance of the operations of the
park. pursuant to the financial restructuring, the company has
agreed to conditionally and unconditionally defer certain
management fees and royalties and convert them into long-term
subordinated debt. see note4 to the consolidated financial
statements for further discussion.
hong kong disneyland
in 1999, the company and the government of the
hong kong special administrative region signed a master project
agreement for the development and operation of hong kong
disneyland. phasei of the development, located on
311acres of land on lantau island, includes the hong kong
disneyland theme park. the resort also includes the
400-roomhong kong disneyland hotel, and the
600-roomhollywood hotel. the master project agreement
permits further phased buildout of the development under certain
circumstances. the company owns its interest in hong kong
disneyland through hongkong international theme parks limited,
an entity in which the hong kong government owns a 57% interest
and a subsidiary of the company owns the remaining 43%. a
separate hong kong subsidiary of the company is responsible for
managing hong kong disneyland. based on the current exchange
rate between the hong kong dollar and u.s.dollar, the
companys equity contribution obligation is limited to
u.s.$314million. as of october1, 2005, the
company had contributed u.s.$279million and the
remaining $35million is payable over the next year. hong
kong disneyland commenced operations in september 2005 and
company subsidiaries are entitled to receive management fees and
royalties in addition to the companys equity interest.
tokyo disney resort
tokyo disney resort is located on approximately
494acres of land, six miles east of downtown tokyo, japan.
the resort includes two theme parks (tokyo disneyland and tokyo
disneysea); two disney-branded hotels; five independently
operated hotels; and a retail, dining and entertainment complex.
-14-
tokyo
disneyland tokyo
disneyland, which opened in 1983, was the first disney theme
park to open outside the united states. tokyo disneyland
consists of seven principal areas: adventureland, critter
country, fantasyland, tomorrowland, toontown, westernland and
world bazaar.
tokyo
disneysea tokyo disneysea,
adjacent to tokyo disneyland, opened in 2001. the park is
divided into seven unique ports of call, including
mediterranean harbor, american waterfront, port discovery, lost
river delta, mermaid lagoon, mysterious island and arabian coast.
the resort includes the 502-roomtokyo
disney sea hotel miracosta, the 504-roomdisney ambassador
hotel, as well as the disney resort line monorail, which links
theme parks and resort hotels with ikspiari; a retail, dining
and entertainment complex and with bon voyage, a disney-themed
merchandise location.
the company earns royalties on revenues generated
by the tokyo disney resort, which is owned and operated by
oriental land co., ltd. (olc), a japanese corporation in which
the company has no investment. olc markets the tokyo disney
resort primarily through a variety of local, domestic and
international advertising and promotional activities. in
addition, third parties sponsor many of the theme park
attractions under long-term arrangements.
disney cruise line
disney cruise line, which is operated out of port
canaveral, florida, is a cruise vacation line that includes two
85,000-ton ships, the disney magic and the disney
wonder. both ships cater to children, families and adults,
with distinctly themed areas and activities for each group. each
ship features 877staterooms, 71% of which are outside
staterooms providing guests with ocean views. cruise vacations
often include a visit to disneys castaway cay, a
1,000-acre private bahamian island. the company packages three,
four, and seven day cruise vacations with visits to the walt
disney world resort and also offers cruise-only options.
espn zone
the espn zone concept combines three interactive
areas under one roof for a complete sports and entertainment
experience: the studio grill, offering dining in an espn studio
environment; the screening room, offering fans an exciting
sports viewing environment; and the sports arena, challenging
guests with a variety of interactive and competitive
attractions. the company currently operates eight espn zone
restaurants located in anaheim, california; atlanta, georgia;
baltimore, maryland; chicago, illinois; denver, colorado; las
vegas, nevada; new york, new york and washington dc.
walt disney imagineering
walt disney imagineering provides master
planning, real estate development, attraction and show design,
engineering support, production support, project management and
other development services, including research and development,
for the companys operations.
the mighty ducks of anaheim and anaheim
angels
the company sold the anaheim angels l.p. in may
2003 and the mighty ducks of anaheim in june 2005.
seasonality and competition
all of the theme parks and the associated resort
facilities are operated on a year-round basis. historically, the
theme parks and resort business experiences fluctuations in
theme park attendance and resort occupancy resulting from the
seasonal nature of vacation travel and local entertainment
excursions. peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur
during the summer months when school vacations occur and during
early-winter and spring holiday periods.
the companys theme parks and resorts
compete with all other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism
and recreational activities. the profitability of the
leisure-time industry is influenced by
-15-
various factors that are not directly
controllable, such as economic conditions including business
cycle and exchange rate fluctuations, travel industry trends,
amount of available leisure time, oil and transportation prices
and weather patterns.
studio entertainment
the studio entertainment segment produces and
acquires live-action and animated motion pictures, animated
direct-to-video programming, musical recordings and live stage
plays.
the company distributes produced and acquired
films (including its film and television library) to the
theatrical, home entertainment, pay-per-view, video-on-demand,
pay television and free-to-air television markets. each of these
market windows is discussed in more detail below.
theatrical distribution
walt disney pictures and television, a subsidiary
of the company, produces and acquires live-action motion
pictures that are distributed primarily under the walt disney
pictures and touchstone pictures banners. another subsidiary,
miramax film corp., acquires and produces motion pictures that
are distributed under the miramax banner. the company
distributed motion pictures under the dimension banner through
september30, 2005. all new releases under the dimension
banner after september30, 2005 are now owned and
distributed by the weinstein company, a third party company
operated by the former co-chairmen of miramax. the company
retains a license to continue to use the dimension banner on
titles that were released prior to september30, 2005. the
company also produces and distributes animated motion pictures
under the banner walt disney pictures, and co-finances and
distributes animated motion pictures developed in conjunction
with pixar, inc. the companys relationship with pixar is
discussed in more detail below in the section labeled
relationship with pixar.
during fiscal 2006, we expect to distribute in
domestic markets approximately 18 feature films under the walt
disney pictures and touchstone pictures banners and
approximately 7 films under the miramax banner. these expected
releases include several live-action family films and
full-length animated films, with the remainder targeted to
teenagers, families and/or adults. as of october1, 2005,
the company had released domestically 870 full-length
live-action features (primarily color), 73 full-length animated
color features, approximately 540 cartoon shorts and 53 live
action shorts under the walt disney pictures, touchstone
pictures, hollywood pictures, miramax and dimension banners.
we distribute and market our filmed products
principally through our own distribution and marketing companies
in the u.s. in the international market, we distribute our
filmed products both directly and through independent foreign
distribution companies. films released theatrically in the
u.s.can be released simultaneously theatrically in
international territories or generally up to six months later.
the company incurs significant marketing and
advertising costs before and throughout the theatrical release
of a film in an effort to generate public awareness of the film,
to increase the publics intent to view the film and to
help generate significant consumer interest in the subsequent
home entertainment and other ancillary markets. these costs are
expensed as incurred, and therefore we typically incur losses in
the theatrical markets on a film, including the quarters before
the theatrical release of the film.
home entertainment
in the domestic market, we distribute home
entertainment releases under each of our motion picture banners.
in the international market, we distribute home entertainment
releases under each of our motion picture banners both directly
and through independent foreign distribution companies. in
addition, we develop, acquire and produce original programming
for direct-to-video release.
-16-
the domestic and international home entertainment
window typically starts four to six months after each theatrical
release with the issuance of dvd and vhs versions of each title
(primarily dvd). domestically, most titles are sold
simultaneously to both rentailers, such as
blockbuster inc., and retailers, such as wal-mart stores, inc.
and best buy co., inc. upon a titles home entertainment
release, consumers are afforded the option to rent for a limited
period of time, typically two to seven days, or purchase the
titles outright (sell-through).
in the international home entertainment market,
titles are either released simultaneously in the rental and
retail channels or with a rental window before the retail
window, depending on local market regulations, dvd hardware
penetration and demand for dvds. the international market has
experienced a trend in the compression of, or in some cases the
disappearance of, the rental window.
as of october1, 2005, under the banners
walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures,
miramax and dimension, 1,174 produced and acquired titles,
including 1,005 live action titles and 169 cartoon shorts and
animated features, were available to the domestic home
entertainment marketplace and 2,508 produced and acquired
titles, including 2,029 live action titles and 479 cartoon
shorts and animated features, were available to the
international home entertainment market.
television distribution
pay-per-view (ppv):
generally about two months after the home entertainment window
begins, the studios television distributor, buena vista
television, licenses titles to cable, satellite and internet
platforms for showing on a pay-per-view basis. ppv services,
such as in demand and directv, deliver one-time rentals
electronically to consumers televisions at a price
comparable to that of physical media rentals. video on demand
(vod)is an extension of ppv, and currently shares the ppv
window. the ppv/ vod window generally lasts about three months.
pay television (pay
1): there are generally two pay
television windows. the first window is generally fifteen months
in duration and follows the ppv/ vod window. the company has
licensed exclusive domestic pay television rights to certain
films released under the walt disney pictures, touchstone
pictures, hollywood pictures, miramax and dimension banners to
the encore pay television services over a multi-year period.
free television (free
1): the pay 1 window is followed by a
free television window wherein telecasts are accessible to
consumers without charge. this free window may last up to
84months. motion pictures are usually sold in the free 1
window on an ad hoc basis to major networks and basic cable
services. for films released theatrically prior to
october1, 2004, the studio maintained only one output
arrangement with the abc television network, covering branded
live action and animated product to be broadcast in the
wonderful world of disney slot. films released after that
date can be sold on an ad hoc basis to other networks besides
abc.
pay television2 (pay 2)and free
television2 (free 2): in the
u.s., free 1 is generally followed by a twelve month pay 2
window, included under our license arrangement with encore, and
finally by a free 2 window. the free 2 window is a syndication
window where films are licensed both to basic cable networks and
to station groups, such as tribune co. major packages of the
companys feature films and animated television programming
have been licensed for broadcast under multi-year agreements.
international
television: the company also licenses
its theatrical and television properties outside of the
u.s.the typical windowing sequence is broadly consistent
with the domestic cycle such that titles premiere on television
in ppv/ vod, then air in pay tv before airing in free tv.
windowing strategies are developed in response to local market
practices and conditions, and the exact sequence and length of
each window can vary country by country.
certain properties may be re-licensed in one or
more of the above television windows.
-17-
audio products and music publishing
walt disney records produces and distributes
compact discs and music dvds in the united states. music
categories include infant, childrens, read-along, teens,
all-family and soundtracks from animated and other films
distributed under the walt disney pictures banner. we also
license the creation of similar products throughout the rest of
the world. our hollywood records subsidiary, under the hollywood
records and buena vista records labels, develops, produces and
markets recordings from new talent across the spectrum of
popular music, as well as soundtracks from certain live-action
motion pictures. we also own the nashville-based music label
lyric street records, which produces and markets recordings in
the genre of country music.
in addition, each of our labels commissions new
music for the companys motion pictures and television
programs, and records the songs and licenses the song copyrights
to others for printed music, records, audiovisual devices and
public performances and digital distribution.
disney music publishing controls the copyrights
of thousands of musical compositions derived from the
companys motion picture, television, record and theme park
properties, as well as musical compositions written by
songwriters under exclusive contract. it is responsible for the
management, protection, growth and licensing of the disney song
catalog on a worldwide basis, including licensing for printed
music, records, audio-visual works and new media.
buena vista theatrical group
the buena vista theatrical group includes both
disney theatrical productions and disney live family
entertainment.
disney theatrical productions develops, produces
and licenses stage musicals worldwide. to date, the
companys shows have included beauty and the beast, the
lion king, elton john and tim rices aida, on the
record, and mary poppins (a co-production with
cameron mackintosh ltd). the company generally elects to produce
its own shows in the united states, the united kingdom and
australia and licenses its shows to local producers in other
territories. as of october1, 2005, disney theatrical
productions had 14productions running worldwide. one new
production scheduled to open in fiscal 2006 is the world
premiere of tarzan in new york in may 2006.
disney live family entertainment licenses the
live entertainment touring productions of disney on ice and
disney live! in fiscal 2005, eight different productions of
disney on ice toured in more than 30 countries worldwide. in
september 2005, disney on ice launched its 26thice show,
disney presents pixars the incredibles in a magic
kingdom adventure. disney live!, our newest brand of live
touring stage shows, continues the worldwide roll-out of its
first stage show production disney live! winnie the pooh
with the united states premiere in september 2005, mexico
premiere in january 2006 and japan in march 2006. both disney on
ice and disney live! are licensed to feld entertainment.
relationship with pixar
the company entered into a feature film agreement
with pixar in 1991, which resulted in the release of its first
film with pixar, toy story, in november 1995. in 1997,
the company extended its relationship with pixar by entering
into a co-production agreement, under which pixar agreed to
produce, on an exclusive basis, five original computer-animated
feature films for distribution by the company. both parties
agreed to co-finance and co-brand the films and share equally in
the profits of each picture and any related merchandise or
ancillary products, after the company recovers all marketing
costs and receives a distribution fee. the first four films
under the extension were a bugs life, monsters, inc.,
finding nemo and the incredibles. pixar is currently
in production on the final film under the agreement,
cars. the company retains the right to produce sequels to
the films that it co-produced with pixar, and pixar has the
right to participate in these productions.
-18-
competition and intellectual property
protection
the success of studio entertainment operations is
heavily dependent upon public taste and preferences. in
addition, studio entertainment operating results fluctuate due
to the timing and performance of releases in the theatrical,
home entertainment and television markets. release dates are
determined by several factors, including competition and the
timing of vacation and holiday periods.
the studio entertainment businesses compete with
all forms of entertainment. a significant number of companies
produce and/or distribute theatrical and television films,
exploit products in the home entertainment market, provide pay
television programming services and sponsor live theater. we
also compete to obtain creative and performing talents, story
properties, advertiser support, broadcast rights and market
share, which are essential to the success of our studio
entertainment businesses.
the companys ability to exploit and protect
rights in its content, including its motion pictures, television
programs and sound recordings, is affected by the strength and
effectiveness of intellectual property laws in the united states
and abroad. inadequate laws or enforcement mechanisms to protect
intellectual property in a country can adversely affect the
results of the companys operations, despite the
companys strong efforts to protect its intellectual
property rights throughout the world. in addition, some
technological advances, such as peer-to-peer technology and some
features of digital video recorders, and other factors have made
infringement easier and faster and enforcement more challenging.
therefore, the company devotes significant resources to
protecting its intellectual property against unauthorized use in
the united states and foreign markets.
the companys businesses are also subject to
the risk of challenges by third parties claiming infringement of
their proprietary rights. regardless of their validity, such
claims may result in substantial costs and diversion of
resources, which could have an adverse effect on the company.
see further discussion under consumer
products competition, seasonality and intellectual
property protection below.
consumer products
the consumer products segment partners with
licensees, manufacturers, publishers and retailers throughout
the world to design, promote and sell a wide variety of products
based on existing and new disney characters and other
intellectual property. in addition to leveraging the
companys film and television properties, consumer products
develops new intellectual property within its publishing and
interactive gaming divisions with the potential of being
leveraged across the company. the company also engages in
retail, direct mail and online distribution of products based on
the companys characters and films through the disney
store, the disney catalog and disneydirect.com, respectively.
the disney store is owned and operated internationally and is
franchised in north america. as discussed in note3 to the
consolidated financial statements, the company sold the disney
store chain in north america in november 2004.
character merchandise and publications
licensing
the companys worldwide merchandise
licensing operations are divided among four lines of business:
disney hardlines, which includes product categories such as
consumer electronics, stationery, food and personal care
products; disney softlines, which includes apparel, accessories
and footwear; disney toys; and disney home, which includes
product categories such as furnishings, dcor and
accessories. in addition, disney publishing licenses books,
magazines and continuity programs. through these lines of
business, the company earns royalties, which are usually based
on a fixed percentage of the wholesale or retail-selling price
of the products. the company licenses characters from its film,
television and other properties. some of the major properties
licensed by the company include mickey mouse, winnie the pooh
and disney princess. the company has also
-19-
expanded its ability to design individual
products across all categories and create exclusive themed and
seasonal promotional campaigns for retailers based on
characters, movies and tv shows. direct-to-retail
relationships have enabled the company to offer disney products
at prices competitive with the worlds major retailers.
books and magazines
the company publishes childrens books and
magazines in multiple countries and languages, reaching more
than 100million readers each month. disney publishes both
disney branded and non-disney branded titles through its
u.s.childrens book group (which includes hyperion
and disney press), disney libri in italy, and disney hachette jv
in france. during 2005, the companys
u.s.childrens book group published several titles
including fairy dust and the quest for the egg, by
newbery honor-winning author gail carson levine, knuffle
bunny: a cautionary tale, by caldecott honor-winning author
moe willems, and artemis fowl: the opal deception, by
eoin colfer. the u.s.magazine business includes such
titles as disney adventure and familyfun. the
global childrens magazine business includes titles such as
w.i.t.c.h., which has several international editions
published in multiple countries worldwide.
buena vista games
buena vista games (bvg)creates, develops,
markets and distributes multi-platform video games worldwide.
bvg primarily focuses on multi-platform games derived from the
companys creative content, such as the chronicles of
narnia, chicken little, nightmare before christmas and
kingdom hearts. in addition to its historical focus on
licensed products, bvg is expanding its efforts with internally
developed and published games.
direct marketing
the direct marketing business operates the disney
catalog and disneydirect.com, offering disney-themed merchandise
through the direct mail and online channels, respectively.
disneydirect.com offers internally developed disney merchandise
as well as exclusive merchandise from other disney units and
disney licensees.
the disney store
the company markets disney-themed products
directly through retail facilities operated under the disney
store name. these facilities are generally located in leading
shopping malls and other retail complexes. the stores carry a
wide variety of disney merchandise and promote other businesses
of the company. the company owns and operates 104 stores
primarily in europe. in fiscal 2005, 315 stores in north america
were sold to a wholly owned subsidiary of the childrens
place, which operates them under a licensing arrangement. see
note3 to the consolidated financial statements for
discussion on the sale of the disney store chain in north
america.
competition, seasonality, and intellectual
property protection
the company competes in its character
merchandising and other licensing, publishing, interactive and
retail activities with other licensors, publishers and retailers
of character, brand and celebrity names. although public
information is limited, we believe the company is the largest
worldwide licensor of character-based merchandise and
producer/distributor of childrens film-related products
based on retail sales. operating results for the licensing and
retail distribution business are influenced by seasonal consumer
purchasing behavior and by the timing and performance of
animated theatrical releases.
the companys licensing businesses, as well
as its media networks, studio entertainment and theme park and
resort operations, are affected by the companys ability to
exploit and protect its intellectual property, including
trademarks, trade names, copyrights, patents and trade secrets,
throughout the world. as a result, domestic and foreign laws
protecting intellectual property rights
-20-
are important to the company. the right and
ability to enforce intellectual property rights against
infringement are essential to the companys businesses.
these businesses are also subject to the risk of challenges by
third parties claiming infringement of their proprietary rights.
regardless of their validity, such claims may result in
substantial costs and diversion of resources which could have an
adverse effect on the companys licensing operations.
available information
our annual report on form10-k, quarterly
reports on form10-q, current reports on form8-k and
amendments to those reports are available without charge on our
website, www.disney.com/investors, as soon as reasonably
practicable after they are filed electronically with the sec. we
are providing the address to our internet site solely for the
information of investors. we do not intend the address to be an
active link or to otherwise incorporate the contents of the
website into this report.
item 1a.risk factors
for an enterprise as large and complex as the
company, a wide range of factors could materially affect future
developments and performance. in addition to the factors
affecting specific business operations identified in connection
with the description of these operations and the financial
results of these operations elsewhere in this report, the most
significant factors affecting our operations include the
following:
changes in u.s., global or regional economic
conditions could adversely affect the profitability of any of
our businesses.
a decrease in economic activity in the united
states or in other regions of the world in which we do business
could adversely affect demand for any of our businesses, thus
reducing our revenue and earnings. a decline in economic
conditions could reduce attendance and spending at one or more
of our parks and resorts, purchase of or prices for advertising
on our broadcast or cable networks or owned stations, prices
that cable operators will pay for our cable programming,
performance of our theatrical and home entertainment releases
and purchases of company-licensed consumer products. in
addition, an increase in price levels generally, or in price
levels in a particular sector such as the energy sector, could
result in a shift in consumer demand away from the entertainment
and consumer products we offer, which could also adversely
affect our revenues and, at the same time, increase our costs.
changes in exchange rates for foreign currencies may reduce
international demand for our products, increase our labor or
supply costs in non-united states markets or reduce the united
states dollar value of revenue we receive from other markets.
changes in public and consumer tastes and
preferences for entertainment and consumer products could reduce
demand for our entertainment offerings and products and reduce
profitability.
each of our businesses creates entertainment or
consumer products whose success depends substantially on
consumer tastes and preferences that change in often
unpredictable ways. the success of our businesses depends on our
ability to consistently create and distribute filmed
entertainment, broadcast and cable programming, theme park
attractions, resort facilities and consumer products that meet
the changing preferences of the broad consumer market. many of
our businesses increasingly depend on worldwide acceptance of
our offerings and products, and their success therefore depends
on our ability to successfully predict and adapt to changing
consumer tastes and preferences outside as well as inside the
united states. moreover, we must often invest substantial
amounts in film production, broadcast and cable programming,
theme park attractions or resort facilities before we learn the
extent to which products will earn consumer acceptance. if our
entertainment offerings and products do not achieve sufficient
consumer acceptance, our revenue from advertising sales (which
are based in part on ratings for the programs in which
advertisements
-21-
air) or subscription fees for broadcast and cable
programming, from theatrical film receipts or home video sales,
from theme park admissions, from sales of licensed consumer
products or from sales of our other consumer products and
services may decline and adversely affect the profitability of
one or more of our businesses.
changes in technology and in consumer
consumption patterns may affect demand for our entertainment
products or the cost of producing or distributing
products.
the media and entertainment businesses in which
we participate depend significantly on our ability to acquire,
develop, adopt and exploit new technologies to distinguish our
products and services from those of our competitors. in
addition, new technologies affect the demand for our products
and the time and manner in which consumers acquire and view some
of our entertainment products. for example:
the success of our offerings in the home
entertainment market depends in part on consumer preferences
with respect to home entertainment formats, including dvd
players and personal video recorders, as well as the
availability of alternative home entertainment offerings and
technologies;
technological developments offer consumers an
expanding array of entertainment options and if consumers favor
options we have not yet fully developed rather than the
entertainment products we offer, our sales may be adversely
affected.
the unauthorized use of our intellectual
property rights may increase the cost of protecting these rights
or reduce our revenues.
the success of our businesses is highly dependent
on maintenance of intellectual property rights in the
entertainment products and services we create. new technologies
such as peer-to-peer technology, high speed digital transmission
(including digital distribution of theatrical films) and some
features of digital video recorders have made infringement of
our intellectual property in films and television programming
easier and faster and enforcement of intellectual property
rights more challenging. there is evidence that unauthorized use
of intellectual property rights in the entertainment industry
generally is a significant and rapidly growing phenomenon. these
developments require us to devote substantial resources to
protecting our intellectual property against unauthorized use
and present the risk of increased losses of revenue as a result
of sales of unauthorized products.
a variety of uncontrollable events may reduce
demand for our products and services or impair our ability to
provide or increase the cost of providing products and
services.
demand for our products and services,
particularly our theme parks and resorts, is highly dependent on
the general environment for travel and tourism. the environment
for travel and tourism as well as demand for other entertainment
products can be significantly adversely affected in the united
states, globally or in specific regions as a result of a variety
of factors beyond our control, including: adverse weather
conditions or natural disasters (such as excessive heat or rain,
hurricanes and earthquakes); health concerns; international,
political or military developments; and terrorist attacks. these
events, and others such as fluctuations in travel and energy
costs and computer virus attacks or other widespread computing
or telecommunications failures, may also damage our ability to
provide our products and services. these events could therefore
reduce our revenue or result in a reduction in demand for or
ability to provide products and services or increase our costs
to the extent damage is not covered by insurance or is subject
to self-insurance.
sustained increases in costs of pension and
post-retirement medical and other employee health and welfare
benefits may reduce our profitability.
with more than 133,000 employees, our
profitability is substantially affected by costs of pension
benefits and current and post-retirement medical benefits. in
recent years, we have experienced significant increases in these
costs as a result of macro-economic factors beyond our control,
including
-22-
increases in health care costs, declines in
investment returns on plan assets and changes in discount rates
used to calculate pension and related liabilities. at least some
of these macro-economic factors may continue to put upward
pressure on the cost of providing pension and medical benefits.
although we have actively sought to control increases in these
costs, there can be no assurance that we will succeed in
limiting cost increases, and continued upward pressure could
reduce the profitability of our businesses.
changes in our business strategy or
restructuring of our businesses may increase our costs or
otherwise affect the profitability of our businesses.
as changes in our business environment occur we
may need to adjust our business strategies to meet these changes
or we may otherwise find it necessary to restructure our
operations or particular businesses or assets. in addition,
external events including acceptance of our theatrical offerings
and changes in macro-economic conditions may impair the value of
our assets. when these changes or events occur, we may incur
costs to change our business strategy and may need to write down
the value of assets. we may also need to invest in new
businesses that have short-term returns that are negative or low
and whose ultimate business prospects are uncertain. in any of
these events, our costs may increase, we may have significant
charges associated with the write-down of assets or returns on
new investments may be lower than prior to the change in
strategy or restructuring.
macro-economic factors may impede access to or
increase the cost of financing our operations and
investments.
changes in u.s. and global financial and equity
markets, including market disruptions and significant interest
rate fluctuations, may make it more difficult for us to obtain
financing for our operations or investments or increase the cost
of obtaining financing. in addition, our borrowing costs can be
affected by short and long-term debt ratings assigned by
independent rating agencies which are based, in significant
part, on the companys performance as measured by credit
metrics such as interest coverage and leverage ratios. a
decrease in these ratings could increase our cost of borrowing
or make it more difficult for us to obtain financing.
increased competitive pressures may reduce our
revenues or increase our costs.
we face substantial competition in each of our
businesses from alternative providers of the products and
services we offer and from other forms of entertainment,
lodging, tourism and recreational activities. we also must
compete to obtain human resources, programming and other
resources we require in operating our business. for example:
our broadcast and cable networks and stations
compete for viewers with other broadcast, cable and satellite
services as well as with home video products and internet usage.
our broadcast and cable networks and stations
compete for the sale of advertising time with other broadcast,
cable and satellite services, as well as newspaper, magazines,
billboards and the internet.
our cable networks compete for carriage of their
programming with other programming providers.
our broadcast and cable networks compete for the
acquisition of creative talent and sports and other programming
with other broadcast and cable networks.
our theme parks and resorts compete for guests
with all other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and
recreation activities.
our studio operations compete for customers with
all other forms of entertainment.
-23-
our studio operations, broadcast and cable
networks and publishing businesses compete to obtain creative
and performing talent, story properties, advertiser support,
broadcast rights and market share.
our consumer products segment competes in the
character merchandising and other licensing, publishing,
interactive and retail activities with other licensors,
publishers and retailers of character, brand and celebrity names.
competition in each of these areas may divert
consumers from our creative or other products, or to other
products or other forms of entertainment, which could reduce our
revenue or increase our marketing costs. competition for the
acquisition of resources can increase the cost of producing our
products and services.
our results may be adversely affected if
long-term programming or carriage contracts are not renewed on
sufficiently favorable terms.
we enter into long-term contracts for both the
acquisition and the distribution of media programming and
products, including contracts for the acquisition of programming
rights for sporting events and other programs, and contracts for
the distribution of our programming to cable and satellite
operators. as these contracts expire, we must renew or
renegotiate the contracts, and if we are unable to renew them on
acceptable terms, we may lose programming rights or distribution
rights. even if these contracts are renewed, the cost of
obtaining programming rights may increase (or increase at faster
rates than our historical experience) or the revenue from
distribution of programs may be reduced (or increase at slower
rates than our historical experience). with respect to the
acquisition of programming rights, particularly sports
programming rights, the impact of these long-term contracts on
our results over the term of the contracts depends on a number
of factors, including the strength of advertising markets,
effectiveness of marketing efforts and the size of viewer
audiences. there can be no assurance that revenues from
programming based on these rights will exceed the cost of the
rights plus the other costs of producing and distributing the
programming.
changes in regulations applicable to our
businesses may impair the profitability of our
businesses.
our broadcast networks and television stations
are highly regulated, and each of our other businesses is
subject to a variety of united states and overseas regulations.
these regulations include:
united states fcc regulation of our television
and radio networks and owned stations, including licensing of
stations, ownership limits, prohibitions on indecent
programming and restrictions on commercial time in
childrens programming and regulation of our broadcasting
businesses in non-united states markets. additional information
regarding fcc regulation is provided in
item1 business media
networks, federal regulation.
environmental protection regulations.
federal, state and foreign privacy and data
protection laws and regulations.
regulation of the safety of consumer products and
theme park operations.
imposition by foreign countries of trade
restrictions or motion picture or television content
requirements or quotas.
domestic and international tax laws or currency
controls.
changes in any of these regulatory areas may
require us to spend additional amounts to comply with the
regulations, or may restrict our ability to offer products and
services that are profitable.
-24-
labor disputes may disrupt our operations and
impair our profitability.
a significant number of employees in various of
our businesses are covered by collective bargaining agreements,
including employees of our theme parks and resorts as well as
writers, directors, actors, production personnel and others
employed in our media networks and studio operations. in
addition, the employees of licensees who manufacture and
retailers who sell our consumer products may be covered by
collective labor agreements with their employers. a labor
dispute involving our employees or the employees of our
licensees or retailers who sell our consumer products may
disrupt our operations and reduce our revenues, and resolution
of disputes with our employees may increase our costs.
provisions in our corporate documents and
delaware state law could delay or prevent a change of control,
even if that change would be beneficial to
shareholders.
our restated certificate of incorporation
contains a provision regulating the ability of shareholders to
bring matters for action before annual and special meetings and
authorizes our board of directors to issue and set the terms of
preferred stock. the regulations on shareholder action could
make it more difficult for any person seeking to acquire control
of the company to obtain shareholder approval of actions that
would support this effort. the issuance of preferred stock could
effectively dilute the interests of any person seeking control
or otherwise make it more difficult to obtain control. in
addition, we are subject to the anti-takeover provisions of the
delaware general corporation law, which could have the effect of
delaying or preventing a change of control in some circumstances.
the seasonality of certain of our businesses
could exacerbate negative impacts on our operations.
each of our businesses is normally subject to
seasonal variations, as follows:
revenues in our media networks segment are
influenced by advertiser demand and the seasonal nature of
programming, and generally peak in the spring and fall.
revenues in our parks and resorts segment
fluctuate with changes in theme park attendance and resort
occupancy resulting from the seasonal nature of vacation travel.
peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur during the
summer months, when school vacations occur, and during
early-winter and spring holiday periods.
revenues in our studio entertainment segment
fluctuate based on the timing of theatrical motion picture, home
entertainment and television releases. release dates for
theatrical, home entertainment and television products are
determined by several factors, including timing of vacation and
holiday periods and competition in the market.
revenues in our consumer products segment are
influenced by seasonal consumer purchasing behavior and the
timing of animated theatrical releases and generally peak in our
first fiscal quarter due to the holiday season.
accordingly, if a short term negative impact on
our business occurs during a time of high seasonal demand (such
as hurricane damage to our parks during the summer travel
season), the effect could have a disproportionate effect on the
results of that business for the year.
item 1b.unresolved staff
comments
the company has received no written comments
regarding its periodic or current reports from the staff of the
securities and exchange commission that were issued
180days or more preceding the end of its 2005 fiscal year
and that remain unresolved.
-25-
item2.properties
the walt disney world resort, disneyland park and
other properties of the company and its subsidiaries are
described in item1 under the caption parks and
resorts. film library properties are described in
item1 under the caption studio entertainment. radio
and television stations owned by the company are described under
the caption media networks.
the company and its subsidiaries own and lease
properties throughout the world. the table below provides a
brief description of the significant properties and the related
business segment.
location
property/ approximate size
use
business segment(1)
burbank, ca
land (51acres)& buildings
(2,400,000 ft2)
owned office/production/warehouse
corp/studio/media/cp
burbank, ca& surrounding cities
buildings (1,100,000 ft2)
leased office/ warehouse
corp/ studio/ media/cp
glendale, ca& surrounding cities
land (125acres)& buildings
(2,300,000 ft2)
owned office/warehouse (includes 660,000 ft2
sublet to third party tenants)
corp/ studio/ media/cp/ tp&r
glendale, ca
building (300,000 ft2)
leased office/ warehouse (includes 80,000
ft2 sublet to third party tenants)
corp/cp
los angeles, ca
land (22acres)& building (600,000
ft2)
owned office/ production/ technical
media
new york, ny
land (6.5acres)& building
(1,400,000 ft2)
owned office/ production/ technical
media
new york, ny
buildings (800,000 ft2)
leased office/ production/ warehouse (includes
10,000ft 2 sublet to third party tenants)
corp/ studio/ media/cp
bristol, ct
land (74acres)& buildings
(600,000 ft2)
owned office/ production/ technical
media
bristol, ct
buildings (400,000 ft2)
leased office/ warehouse/ technical
media
usa& canada
buildings (multiple sites and sizes)
office/ production/ transmitter/ retail/
warehouse (includes 25,000ft2 sublet to third
party tenants)
studio/ cp/media
england
building (330,000 ft2)
owned office/ retail
corp/ studio/ media/cp
europe, asia, australia& latin america
buildings (multiple sites and sizes)
office/ retail/ warehouse
corp/ studio/ media/cp
(1)
corp corporate, cp
consumer products and tp&r theme parks and
resorts
item3.legal proceedings
milne and disney enterprises, inc.v.
stephen slesinger, inc. on
november5, 2002, clare milne, the granddaughter of
a.a.milne, author of the winnie the pooh books, and
the companys subsidiary disney enterprises, inc. (dei)
filed a complaint against stephen slesinger, inc. (ssi) in the
united states district court for the central district of
california. on november4, 2002, ms.milne served
notices to ssi and dei terminating a.a.milnes
prior grant of rights to winnie the pooh, effective
november5, 2004, and granted all of those rights to dei.
in their lawsuit, ms.milne and dei seek a declaratory
judgment, under united states copyright law, that
ms.milnes termination notices were valid; that
ssis rights to winnie the pooh in the united states
terminated effective november5, 2004; that upon
termination of ssis rights in the united states, the 1983
licensing agreement that is the subject of the stephen
slesinger, inc.v. the walt disney company lawsuit
terminated by operation of law; and that, as of november5,
2004, ssi was entitled to no further royalties for uses of
winnie the pooh. ssi filed (a)an answer denying the
material allegations of the complaint and (b)counterclaims
seeking a declaration that (i)ms.milnes grant
of rights to dei is void and
-26-
unenforceable and (ii)dei remains obligated
to pay ssi royalties under the 1983 licensing agreement. ssi
also filed a motion to dismiss the complaint or, in the
alternative, for summary judgment. subsequently, the court ruled
that milnes termination notices are invalid and dismissed
ssis counterclaims as moot. following further motions ssi
filed an amended answer and counterclaims and a third-party
complaint against harriet hunt (heir to e.h.shepard,
illustrator of the original winnie the pooh stories), who had
served a notice of termination and a grant of rights similar to
ms.milnes. by order dated august3, 2004, the
court granted ssi leave to amend its answer to assert
counterclaims against the company allegedly arising from the
milne and hunt terminations and the grant of rights to dei for
(a)unlawful and unfair business practices; and
(b)breach of the 1983 licensing agreement. in november
2004, the district court granted a motion by milne to dismiss
her complaint for the purpose of obtaining a final appealable
order of dismissal, so as to permit her appeal to the court of
appeals to proceed. oral argument of that appeal was heard on
september13, 2005.
in re the walt disney company derivative
litigation. william and geraldine
brehm and thirteen other individuals filed an amended and
consolidated complaint on may28, 1997 in the delaware
court of chancery seeking, among other things, a declaratory
judgment against each of the companys directors as of
december 1996 that the companys 1995 employment agreement
with its former president michael s. ovitz, was void, or
alternatively that mr.ovitzs termination should be
deemed a termination for cause and any severance
payments to him forfeited. on october8, 1998, the delaware
court of chancery dismissed all counts of the amended complaint.
plaintiffs appealed, and on february9, 2000, the supreme
court of delaware affirmed the dismissal but ruled also that
plaintiffs should be permitted to file an amended complaint in
accordance with the courts opinion. the plaintiffs filed
their amended complaint on january3, 2002. on
february6, 2003, the companys directors motion
to dismiss the amended complaint was converted by the court to a
motion for summary judgment and the plaintiffs were permitted to
take discovery. the company and its directors answered the
amended complaint on april1, 2003. on may28, 2003,
the court (treating as a motion to dismiss the motion for
summary judgment into which it had converted the original motion
on february6, 2003) denied the directors motion to
dismiss the amended complaint. trial commenced on
october20, 2004 and on august9, 2005, the delaware
court of chancery issued an order entering judgment against the
plaintiffs and in favor of all defendants on all counts.
plaintiffs have appealed from the order.
similar or identical claims have also been filed
by the same plaintiffs (other than william and geraldine brehm)
in the superior court of the state of california, los angeles
county, beginning with a claim filed by richard and david kaplan
on january3, 1997. on may18, 1998, an additional
claim was filed in the same california court by dorothy l.
greenfield. all of the california claims were consolidated and
stayed pending final resolution of the delaware proceedings. the
claim filed by dorothy l. greenfield was voluntarily dismissed
with prejudice on october24, 2005.
stephen slesinger, inc.v. the walt
disney company. in this lawsuit, filed
on february27, 1991 in the los angeles county superior
court, the plaintiff claims that a company subsidiary defrauded
it and breached a 1983 licensing agreement with respect to
certain winnie the pooh properties, by failing to account for
and pay royalties on revenues earned from the sale of winnie the
pooh movies on videocassette and from the exploitation of winnie
the pooh merchandising rights. the plaintiff seeks damages for
the licensees alleged breaches as well as confirmation of
the plaintiffs interpretation of the licensing agreement
with respect to future activities. the plaintiff also seeks the
right to terminate the agreement on the basis of the alleged
breaches. if each of the plaintiffs claims were to be
confirmed in a final judgment, damages as argued by the
plaintiff could total as much as several hundred million dollars
and adversely impact the value to the company of any future
exploitation of the licensed rights. on march29, 2004, the
court granted the companys motion for terminating
sanctions against the plaintiff for a host of discovery abuses,
including the withholding, alteration, and theft of documents
and other information, and, on april5, 2004, dismissed
plaintiffs case with
-27-
prejudice. plaintiffs subsequent attempts
to disqualify the judge who granted the terminating sanctions
were denied in 2004, and its motion for a new trial
was denied on january26, 2005, allowing plaintiff to
proceed with its noticed appeal from the april5, 2004,
order of dismissal.
management believes that it is not currently
possible to estimate the impact, if any, that the ultimate
resolution of these matters will have on the companys
results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
the company, together with, in some instances,
certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant or
co-defendant in various other legal actions involving copyright,
breach of contract and various other claims incident to the
conduct of its businesses. management does not expect the
company to suffer any material liability by reason of such
actions.
item4.submission of matters to a
vote of security holders
no matters were submitted to a vote of
shareholders during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year
covered by this report.
executive officers of the company
the executive officers of the company are elected
each year at the organizational meeting of the board of
directors, which follows the annual meeting of the shareholders,
and at other board of directors meetings as appropriate. each of
the executive officers has been employed by the company in the
position or positions indicated in the list and pertinent notes
below. each of the executive officers have been employed by the
company for more than five years.
at october1, 2005, the executive officers
of the company were as follows:
executive
name
age
title
officer since
michael d. eisner
chief executive officer(1)
robert a. iger
president and chief operating
officer(2)
thomas o. staggs
senior executive vice president and chief
financial officer
alan n. braverman
senior executive vice president, general counsel
and secretary(3)
christine m. mccarthy
executive vice president, corporate finance and
real estate and treasurer(4)
(1)
mr.eisner was replaced by mr.iger as
chief executive officer effective october2, 2005.
mr.eisner also served as chairman of the board from 1984
through march 2004.
(2)
mr.iger was appointed president and chief
executive officer effective october2, 2005. he was
president and chief operating officer from january 2000, having
served (from february 1999 until january 2000) as president of
walt disney international and chairman of the abc group.
mr.iger previously held a number of increasingly
responsible positions at abc, inc. and its predecessor capital
cities/ abc, inc., culminating in service as president and chief
operating officer of abc, inc. from 1994 to 1999.
(3)
mr.braverman was named executive vice
president and general counsel of the company in january 2003 and
promoted to senior executive vice president and general counsel
of the company in october 2003. prior to his appointment as
general counsel of the company, mr.braverman had been
executive or senior vice president and general counsel of abc,
inc. since august 1996 and also deputy general counsel of the
company since august 2001.
(4)
ms.mccarthy was named executive vice
president, corporate finance and real estate in june 2005 and
has been treasurer since january 2000. prior to her appointment
as executive vice president, corporate finance and real estate,
ms.mccarthy was senior vice president and treasurer from
january 2000 to june 2005.
-28-
on october3, 2005, kevina. mayer was
designated an executive officer of the company. mr.mayer,
43, has served as executive vice president, corporate strategy,
business development and technology, of the company since june
2005. prior to that, he was partner and head of the global media
and entertainment practice of l.e.k. consulting llc, a
consulting firm, from february 2002, and chairman and chief
executive officer of clear channel interactive, a division of
clear channel worldwide, a media company, from september 2000 to
december 2001.
-29-
partii
item5.
market for the companys common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
the companys common stock is listed on the
new york and pacific stock exchanges under the ticker symbol
dis. the following table shows, for the periods
indicated, the high and low sales prices per share of common
stock as reported in the bloomberg financial markets services.
sales price
high
low
4thquarter
$
26.50
$
22.90
3rdquarter
29.00
24.96
2ndquarter
29.99
27.05
1stquarter
28.03
22.51
4thquarter
$
25.50
$
20.88
3rdquarter
26.65
21.39
2ndquarter
28.41
22.90
1stquarter
23.76
20.36
the company declared a dividend of $0.27per
share on december1, 2005 with respect to fiscal 2005, and
a dividend of $0.24per share on december1, 2004,
with respect to fiscal 2004.
as of october1, 2005, the approximate
number of common shareholders of record was 986,187.
the following table provides information about
company purchases of equity securities that are registered by
the company pursuant to section12 of the exchange act
during the quarter ended october1, 2005:
total number of
shares purchased
as part of
maximum number of
total number
publicly
shares that may yet be
of shares
average price
announced plans
purchased under the
period
purchased(1)
paid per share
or programs
plans or programs(2)
july3, 2005 july30, 2005
138,609
$
25.52
267million
july31, 2005 august27,
13,137,630
$
25.98
13,000,400
254million
august28, 2005 october1,
29,523,525
$
24.55
29,339,300
225million
total
42,799,764
$
24.99
42,339,700
225million
(1)
460,064shares were purchased on the open
market to provide shares to participants in the walt disney
investment plan and employee stock purchase plan. these
purchases were not made pursuant to a publicly announced
repurchase plan or program.
(2)
under a share repurchase program most recently
reaffirmed by the companys board of directors on
april21, 1998, and implemented effective june10,
1998, the company was authorized to repurchase up to
400million shares of its common stock. the repurchase
program does not have an expiration date.
-30-
item6.
selected financial data
(in millions, except per share data)
2005(1)
2004(2)
2003(3)
2002(4)
2001(5)
statements of income
revenues
$
31,944
$
30,752
$
27,061
$
25,329
$
25,172
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
change
2,569
2,345
1,338
1,236
per common share
earnings before the cumulative effect of
accounting change:
diluted
$
1.24
$
1.12
$
0.65
$
0.60
$
0.11
basic
1.27
1.14
0.65
0.61
0.11
dividends
0.24
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
balance sheets
total assets
$
53,158
$
53,902
$
49,988
$
50,045
$
43,810
borrowings
12,467
13,488
13,100
14,130
9,769
shareholders equity
26,210
26,081
23,791
23,445
22,672
statements of cash flows
cash provided (used)by:
operating activities
$
4,269
$
4,370
$
2,901
$
2,286
$
3,048
investing activities
(1,691
)
(1,484
)
(1,034
)
(3,176
)
(2,015
)
financing activities
(2,897
)
(2,701
)
(1,523
)
1,511
(1,257
)
(1)
during fiscal 2005, the company adopted statement
of financial accounting standards no.123r, share based
payment (sfas123r), which resulted in
$253million of pre-tax expense, or ($0.08) per diluted
share. see note2 to the consolidated financial statements.
in addition, as shown in the table on page35, the 2005
results include certain items which affected comparability. the
impact on diluted earnings per share of these items was an
aggregate favorable impact of $0.03per share. the amounts
do not reflect the cumulative effect of adopting emerging issues
task force (eitf)topic d-108, use of the residual
method to value acquired assets other than goodwill, which
was a non-cash charge of $57million ($36million
after-tax or $0.02per diluted share). see note2 to
the consolidated financial statements.
(2)
during fiscal 2004, the company adopted fasb
interpretation no.46r, consolidation of variable
interest entities (fin46), and as a result,
consolidated the balance sheets of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland as of march31, 2004 and the income and cash
flow statements beginning april1, 2004, the beginning of
the companys fiscal third quarter. under fin46
transition rules, euro disney and hong kong disneylands
operating results continued to be accounted for on the equity
method for the six-month period ended march31, 2004. in
addition, as shown in the table on page35, the 2004
results include certain items which affected comparability. the
impact on diluted earnings per share of these items was an
aggregate favorable impact of $0.04per share.
(3)
as shown in the table on page35, the 2003
results include certain items which affected comparability. the
impact on diluted earnings per share of these items was an
aggregate unfavorable impact of $0.01per share. the
amounts do not reflect the cumulative effect of adopting
eitf00-21, revenue arrangements with multiple
deliverables, which was an after-tax charge of
$71million or ($0.03) per diluted share. see note2
to the consolidated financial statements.
(4)
the 2002 results include a $216million
pre-tax gain on the sale of investments and a $34million
pre-tax gain on the sale of the disney stores in japan. these
items had a $0.06 and $0.01 impact on diluted earnings per
share, respectively. during fiscal 2002, the company acquired
fox family
-31-
worldwide, inc. for $5.2billion. effective
at the beginning of fiscal 2002, the company adopted statement
of financial accounting standards no.142, goodwill and
other intangible assets and, accordingly, ceased
amortization of goodwill and substantially all other intangible
assets.
(5)
the 2001 results include restructuring and
impairment charges totaling $1.5billion pre-tax. the
charges were primarily related to the closure of go.com,
investment write downs and a work force reduction. the diluted
earnings per share impact of these charges was ($0.52). the
amounts do not reflect the cumulative effect of required
accounting changes related to film and derivative accounting
which were after-tax charges of $228million and
$50million, respectively or ($0.11) and ($0.02) per
diluted share, respectively.
-32-
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
consolidated results
(in millions, except per share data)
change
vs.
vs.
revenues
$
31,944
$
30,752
$
27,061
%
%
costs and expenses
(27,837
)
(26,704
)
(24,348
)
%
%
gain on sale of businesses and restructuring and
impairment charges
(6
)
(64
)
(91
)%
nm
net interest expense
(597
)
(617
)
(793
)
(3
)%
(22
)%
equity in the income of investees
%
%
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
3,987
3,739
2,254
%
%
income taxes
(1,241
)
(1,197
)
(789
)
%
%
minority interests
(177
)
(197
)
(127
)
(10
)%
%
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes
2,569
2,345
1,338
%
%
cumulative effect of accounting changes
(36
)
(71
)
nm
nm
net income
$
2,533
$
2,345
$
1,267
%
%
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting changes:
diluted(1)
$
1.24
$
1.12
$
0.65
%
%
basic
$
1.27
$
1.14
$
0.65
%
%
cumulative effect of accounting changes per share
$
(0.02
)
$
$
(0.03
)
nm
nm
earnings per share:
diluted(1)
$
1.22
$
1.12
$
0.62
%
%
basic
$
1.25
$
1.14
$
0.62
%
%
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding:
diluted
2,089
2,106
2,067
basic
2,028
2,049
2,043
(1)
the calculation of diluted earnings per share
assumes the conversion of the companys convertible senior
notes issued in april 2003 into 45million shares of common
stock, and adds back related after-tax interest expense of
$21million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, and $10million
for fiscal year 2003.
-33-
organization of information
managements discussion and analysis
provides a narrative on the companys financial performance
and condition that should be read in conjunction with the
accompanying financial statements. it includes the following
sections:
consolidated results
business segment results 2005 vs. 2004
corporate and other non-segment items
2005 vs. 2004
pension and benefit costs
business segment results 2004 vs. 2003
corporate and other non-segment items
2004 vs. 2003
liquidity and capital resources
contractual obligations, commitments and off
balance sheet arrangements
accounting policies and estimates
accounting changes
forward-looking statements
consolidated results
2005 vs. 2004
revenues for the year increased 4%, or
$1.2billion, to $31.9billion. the increase in
revenues was due to growth at media networks and parks and
resorts, partially offset by a decline at studio entertainment.
the media networks growth was driven by higher affiliate fees at
cable networks and higher advertising revenues. the increase at
parks and resorts was due to an additional six months of euro
disney revenues in fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004, and
higher occupied room nights, theme park attendance and guest
spending at the domestic resorts. the decline at studio was
primarily due to an overall decline in dvd unit sales.
net income for the year increased 8%, or
$188million, to $2.5billion. the increase in net
income was primarily due to growth at media networks, partially
offset by a decrease at studio entertainment (see business
segment results below for further discussion). additionally, we
adopted statement of financial accounting standards
no.123r, share based payment (sfas123r),
which increased expense for the year by $253million
($160million after-tax or $0.08per share). diluted
earnings per share before the cumulative effect of an accounting
change for the valuation of certain fcc licenses was $1.24, an
increase of 11%, or $0.12, compared to the prior-year earnings
per share of $1.12. we adopted emerging issues task force
topicd-108, use of the residual method to value
acquired assets other than goodwill (eitf d-108), which
resulted in a cumulative effect of accounting change totaling
$57million ($36million after-tax or $0.02per
share) relating to the valuation of certain fcc licenses (see
note2 to the consolidated financial statements). diluted
earnings per share after the cumulative effect of the accounting
change was $1.22.
-34-
in addition to the items discussed above, results
for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 included items in the following
table which affect the comparability of the results from year to
year and had aggregate favorable/(unfavorable) impacts of
$0.03per share, $0.04per share and ($0.01) per
share, respectively, as follows (in millions, except for per
share data):
net
net
net
favorable/(unfavorable) impact to
income
eps
income
eps
income
eps
benefit from the resolution of certain income tax
matters (note7)
$
$
0.06
$
$
0.06
$
$
0.03
benefit from the restructuring of euro
disneys borrowings (note4)
0.02
income tax benefit from the repatriation of
foreign earnings under the american jobs creation act
(note7)
0.02
gain on the sale of the mighty ducks of anaheim
(note3)
0.01
write-off of investments in leveraged leases
(note4)
(68
)
(0.03
)
(83
)
(0.04
)
write-down related to moviebeam venture
(35
)
(0.02
)
impairment charge for a cable television
investment in latin america
(20
)
(0.01
)
restructuring and impairment charges related to
the sale of the disney stores north america (note3)
(20
)
(0.01
)
(40
)
(0.02
)
total(1)
$
$
0.03
$
$
0.04
$
(27
)
$
(0.01
)
(1)
total diluted earnings per share impact for the
year ended october1, 2005 does not equal the sum of the
column due to rounding.
cash flow from operations in fiscal 2005 allowed
us to continue making capital investments in our properties and
reduce our borrowings, which in turn reduced our interest
expense. during fiscal 2005, we generated cash flow from
operations of $4.3billion which funded capital
expenditures totaling $1.8billion. in addition, we
repurchased $2.4billion of our common stock and had a net
repayment of borrowings of $699million.
2004 vs. 2003
revenues for the year increased 14% or
$3.7billion, to $30.8billion. the increase in
revenues for the year was due to growth in segment revenues in
all of the operating segments (see business segment results
below for further discussion).
net income for fiscal 2004 was $2.3billion,
which was $1.1billion higher than fiscal 2003. the
increase in net income for fiscal 2004 was driven by growth at
all of the operating segments. diluted earnings per share for
fiscal 2004 was $1.12, an increase of $0.47 compared to the
prior-year earnings per share of $0.65 before the cumulative
effect of an accounting change. as shown in the preceding table,
results for fiscal 2004 and 2003 included certain items which
affected comparability. these items had an aggregate favorable
impact of $0.04per share on fiscal 2004 results and an
aggregate unfavorable impact of $0.01per share on fiscal
2003 results.
-35-
additionally, we made an accounting change
effective as of the beginning of fiscal 2003 to adopt a new
accounting rule for multiple element revenue accounting
(eitf00-21, see note2 to the consolidated financial
statements) which changed the timing of revenue recognition of
nfl programming at espn resulting in an after-tax charge of
$71million for the cumulative effect of the change.
diluted earnings per share after this cumulative effect was
$0.62 for fiscal 2003.
business segment results 2005 vs.
change
vs
vs
(in millions)
revenues:
networks
$
13,207
$
11,778
$
10,941
%
%
parks and resorts
9,023
7,750
6,412
%
%
studio entertainment
7,587
8,713
7,364
(13
)%
%
consumer products
2,127
2,511
2,344
(15
)%
%
$
31,944
$
30,752
$
27,061
%
%
segment operating income:
media networks
$
2,749
$
2,169
$
1,213
%
%
parks and resorts
1,178
1,123
%
%
studio entertainment
(69
)%
%
consumer products
(3
)%
%
$
4,654
$
4,488
$
3,174
%
%
the company evaluates the performance of its
operating segments based on segment operating income and
management uses aggregate segment operating income as a measure
of the overall performance of the operating businesses. the
company believes that information about aggregate segment
operating income assists investors by allowing them to evaluate
changes in the operating results of the companys portfolio
of businesses separate from factors other than business
operations that affect net income. the following table
reconciles segment operating income to income before income
taxes, minority interests and the cumulative effect of
accounting changes.
change
vs.
vs.
(in millions)
segment operating income
$
4,654
$
4,488
$
3,174
%
%
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
(536
)
(428
)
(443
)
%
(3
)%
amortization of intangible assets
(11
)
(12
)
(18
)
(8
)%
(33
)%
gain on sale of businesses and restructuring and
impairment charges
(6
)
(64
)
(91
)%
nm
net interest expense
(597
)
(617
)
(793
)
(3
)%
(22
)%
equity in the income of investees
%
%
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
$
3,987
$
3,739
$
2,254
%
%
-36-
depreciation expense is as follows:
(in millions)
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
domestic
international(1)
studio entertainment
consumer products
segment depreciation expense
1,196
1,043
corporate
total depreciation expense
$
1,328
$
1,198
$
1,059
(1)
represents 100% of euro disney and hong kong
disneylands depreciation expense for all periods since the
company began consolidating the results of operations and cash
flows of these businesses beginning april1, 2004.
segment depreciation expense is included in
segment operating income and corporate depreciation expense is
included in corporate and unallocated shared expenses.
media networks
the following table provides supplemental revenue
and segment operating income detail for the media networks
segment:
change
vs.
vs.
(in millions)
revenues
cable networks
$
7,262
$
6,410
$
5,523
%
%
broadcasting
5,945
5,368
5,418
%
(1
)%
13,207
11,778
10,941
%
%
segment operating income:
cable networks
2,285
1,924
1,176
%
%
broadcasting
%
nm
$
2,749
$
2,169
$
1,213
%
%
revenues
media networks revenues increased 12%, or
$1.4billion, to $13.2billion, consisting of a 13%
increase, or $852million, at the cable networks, and an
11% increase, or $577million, at broadcasting.
increased cable networks revenues were primarily
due to growth of $690million from cable and satellite
operators and $172million in advertising revenues.
revenues from cable and satellite operators are generally
derived from fees charged on a per subscriber basis, and the
increase in the current year was due to contractual rate
increases and subscriber growth at espn and the disney channels.
increased advertising revenue was due to higher rates at espn
and higher ratings at abc family.
-37-
the companys contractual arrangements with
cable and satellite operators are renewed or renegotiated from
time to time in the ordinary course of business. a number of
these arrangements are currently in negotiation. consolidation
in the cable and satellite distribution industry and other
factors may adversely affect the companys ability to
obtain and maintain contractual terms for the distribution of
its various cable and satellite programming services that are as
favorable as those currently in place. if this were to occur,
revenues from cable networks could increase at slower rates than
in the past or could stabilize or decline. certain of the
companys existing contracts with cable and satellite
operators as well as contracts in negotiation include annual
live programming commitments. in these cases, revenues subject
to the commitment, which are collected ratably over the year,
are deferred until the annual commitments are satisfied which
generally results in higher revenue recognition in the second
half of the year.
increased broadcasting revenues were due to
growth at the abc television network and television production
and distribution. abc television network revenues increased
primarily due to higher primetime advertising revenue resulting
from higher ratings and advertising rates. the growth at
television production and distribution was driven by higher
license fee revenues from domestic markets as a result of the
syndication of my wife and kids and higher revenue in
international markets from sales of desperate housewives
and lost.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses, which consist primarily of
programming rights costs, production costs, participation costs,
distribution and marketing expenses, labor costs and general and
administrative costs, increased 9%, or $849million, to
$10.5billion consisting of an 11% increase, or
$491million, at the cable networks, and a 7% increase, or
$358million, at broadcasting. the increase at cable
networks was driven by increases at espn from higher general and
administrative expenses, increased production costs and
investments in new business initiatives, including espn branded
mobile phone service. higher general and administrative
expenses, programming expenses and marketing costs at the disney
channels also contributed to the increase at cable networks. the
increase at broadcasting was driven by higher production and
participation costs at tv production and distribution. the
adoption of sfas123r increased expenses in fiscal year
2005 at cable networks and at broadcasting by $36million
and $64million, respectively.
sports programming costs
the company has various contractual commitments
for the purchase of television rights for sports and other
programming, including the nba, nfl, mlb, and various college
football and basketball conferences and football bowl games. the
costs of these contracts have increased significantly in recent
years. we enter into these contractual commitments with the
expectation that, over the life of the contracts, revenue from
advertising during the programming and affiliate fees will
exceed the costs of the programming. while contract costs may
initially exceed incremental revenues and negatively impact
operating income, it is our expectation that the combined value
to our networks from all of these contracts will result in
long-term benefits. the actual impact of these contracts on the
companys results over the term of the contracts is
dependent upon a number of factors, including the strength of
advertising markets, effectiveness of marketing efforts and the
size of viewer audiences.
the initial five-year period of the
companys contract to televise nfl games was non-cancelable
and ended with the telecast of the 2003 pro bowl. in february
2003, the nfl did not exercise its renegotiation option and as a
result, the companys nfl contract was extended for an
additional three years ending with the telecast of the 2006 pro
bowl. the aggregate fee for the three-year period is
$3.7billion. espn recognized its portion of the costs of
the initial five-year term of the contract at levels that
increased each year commensurate with expected increases in nfl
revenues. as a result, espn experienced its highest level of nfl
programming costs during fiscal 2003. the implementation
-38-
of the contract extension resulted in a
$180million reduction in nfl programming costs at espn in
fiscal 2004 as compared to fiscal 2003. the majority of this
decrease was in the first quarter of fiscal 2004. these costs
were relatively level in fiscal 2005 and will remain relatively
level in fiscal 2006. cash payments under the contract were
$1.2billion for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004.
the company entered into a new agreement with the
nfl for the right to broadcast nfl monday night football games
on espn. the contract provides for total payments of
approximately $8.87billion over an eight-year period,
commencing with the 2006-2007 season. the payment terms of the
new contract provide for average increases in the annual
payments of approximately 4%per year. we expect that our
expense recognition of the costs of the new contract will
reflect this payment schedule. the company has rights to
21games in the 2006-2007 season, which begins in the
fourth quarter of the companys fiscal year 2006.
additionally, subsequent to the end of the fiscal year, the
company entered into an eight-year agreement with nascar
pursuant to which abc and espn will have the right to televise
certain nascar races and related programming beginning in 2007.
the agreement is subject to termination by the espn and nascar
boards of directors through december10, 2005.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 27%, or
$580million, to $2.7billion for the year due to an
increase of $361million at the cable networks and an
increase of $219million at broadcasting. the increase at
cable networks was due to growth at espn from higher affiliate
revenues and advertising revenues, partially offset by higher
costs and expenses at espn. the increase at broadcasting was
driven by higher primetime advertising revenues at the abc
television network and higher license fee revenues from
syndication of my wife and kids and international sales
of lost and desperate housewives at television
production and distribution.
moviebeam
the company launched moviebeam, an on-demand
electronic movie rental service in three domestic cities in
october 2003. the company suspended service in april 2005 while
evaluating its go-forward business model and negotiating a
refinancing of the business with strategic and financial
investors. if successful, a refinancing transaction may result
in the company making a further investment in the business while
retaining only a minority interest in moviebeam. based on
continuing negotiations with investors, the company has
concluded that any such refinancing will not be sufficient to
recover all of its investment related to the moviebeam venture
and has recognized $56million ($35million after-tax
or $0.02per share) of impairment charges during the year
ended october1, 2005.
parks and resorts
revenues
revenues at parks and resorts increased 16%, or
$1.3billion, to $9.0billion. the company began
consolidating the results of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland at the beginning of the third quarter of fiscal 2004,
which resulted in fiscal 2004 segment results including only six
months of operations of these businesses while fiscal 2005
includes a full year of operations. the impact of fiscal 2005
including an additional six months of operations as compared to
fiscal 2004 accounted for an 8% or $672million increase in
parks and resorts revenue for the year, which represents the
revenues of euro disney and hong kong disneyland for the first
half of fiscal 2005. excluding the impact of including the
additional six months of euro disney and hong kong disneyland
operations, fiscal 2005 revenues grew 8%, or $601million,
primarily due to growth of $364million at the walt disney
world resort and $213million at the disneyland resort.
at the walt disney world resort, increased
revenues were due to higher occupied room nights, theme park
attendance and guest spending, and increased sales at
disneys vacation club. increased
-39-
occupied room nights reflected increased
visitation to the resort reflecting the ongoing recovery in
travel and tourism, the popularity of disney as a travel
destination and the availability of additional rooms in both the
first and second quarters of the prior year. during the third
quarter, the company launched two programs, disneys
magical express and extra magic hours, which are
designed to increase occupancy at the walt disney world hotels.
increased theme park attendance reflected increased
international and domestic guest visitation, driven by the
happiest celebration on earth promotion which celebrates
the 50thanniversary of disneyland. higher guest spending
was primarily due to higher food and beverage purchases, ticket
price increases and fewer promotional offers compared to the
prior year.
at the disneyland resort, increased revenues were
driven by higher guest spending and attendance at the theme
parks due to increased ticket prices and the
50thanniversary celebration, respectively.
across our domestic theme parks, both attendance
and per capita theme park guest spending increased by 5%.
attendance at the walt disney world resort increased 5% while
per capita theme park guest spending increased 2%. attendance at
the disneyland resort increased 4% while per capita theme park
guest spending increased 14%. operating statistics for our
domestic hotel properties are as follows:
east coast
west coast
total domestic
resorts
resorts
resorts
year ended
year ended
year ended
oct.1,
sept.30,
oct.1,
sept.30,
oct.1,
sept.30,
occupancy
%
%
%
%
%
%
available room nights (inthousands)
8,777
8,540
9,587
9,356
per roomguest spending
$
$
$
$
$
$
the increase in available room nights was
primarily due to the opening of disneys pop century
resort, which has approximately 2,900 rooms, late in the first
quarter of fiscal 2004 and the re-opening of approximately 1,000
rooms in the french quarter portion of the port orleans hotel in
the second quarter of fiscal 2004. per room guest spending
consists of the average daily hotel room rate as well as guest
spending on food, beverages, and merchandise at the hotels.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses increased 18%, or
$1.2billion, to $7.8billion. as noted above, fiscal
2005 included an additional six months of euro disney and hong
kong disneyland operations, which accounted for an 11% or
$722million increase in costs and expenses for the year.
in addition, the adoption of sfas123r increased expenses
by $42million in fiscal year 2005. the remaining increase
of $454million was primarily due to higher costs at walt
disney world and disneyland and increased pre-opening costs at
hong kong disneyland. walt disney world incurred higher
volume-related expenses, increased costs associated with new
attractions and service programs, information technology and
higher fixed costs. disneyland incurred higher volume-related
expenses and marketing and sales costs associated with the
50thanniversary celebration and higher fixed costs.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 5%, or
$55million, to $1.2billion primarily due to growth
at walt disney world and disneyland. these increases were
partially offset by a decrease of $50million due to the
impact of fiscal 2005 including an additional six months of euro
disney and hong kong disneyland operations as compared to fiscal
2004 (which represents the results of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland for the first half of fiscal 2005), higher
pre-opening expenses at hong kong
-40-
disneyland in the second half of the year, and
stock option expense associated with the adoption of
sfas123r in fiscal year 2005.
studio entertainment
revenues
revenues decreased 13%, or $1.1billion, to
$7.6billion, primarily due to a decrease of
$1.1billion in worldwide home entertainment. the decline
in revenues at worldwide home entertainment was due to an
overall decline in dvd unit sales resulting from a lower
performing slate of current year titles, including a decline in
the ratio of home video unit sales to the related total domestic
box-office results for feature films. successful current year
titles included disney/ pixars the incredibles,
national treasure, bambi platinum release and aladdin
platinum release, while the prior year included disney/
pixars finding nemo, pirates of the caribbean and
the lion king platinum release.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses, which consist primarily of
production cost amortization, distribution and selling expenses,
product costs and participation costs, decreased 8%, or
$671million, due to lower costs in worldwide theatrical
motion picture distribution and in worldwide home entertainment.
the decline in costs and expenses at worldwide theatrical
distribution was primarily due to lower distribution costs and
lower production cost amortization. distribution costs were
lower as the prior year included higher profile films that had
extensive marketing campaigns to launch the films. the decrease
in production cost amortization was driven by lower film cost
write-offs. these cost decreases were partially offset by
increased production cost amortization and distribution costs at
miramax due to an increased number of releases and higher
write-offs. lower costs in worldwide home entertainment were
primarily due to lower distribution costs, production cost
amortization and participation costs. distribution costs and
production cost amortization were lower as a result of decreased
unit sales. participation costs were down as the prior year
included finding nemo and pirates of the
caribbean, which had higher participation costs due to
better performance than current year titles. pixar receives an
equal share of profits (after distribution fees) as co-producer
of finding nemo and the incredibles. the adoption
of sfas123r increased expenses by $41million in
fiscal year 2005.
segment operating income
segment operating income decreased 69%, or
$455million, to $207million, primarily due to lower
overall unit sales in worldwide home entertainment and a decline
at miramax, partially offset by better performance in worldwide
theatrical motion picture distribution.
miramax
in march 2005, the company entered into
agreements with miramax co-chairmen, bob and harvey weinstein,
and their new production company. pursuant to those agreements,
the company, among other things, substantially resolved all
economic issues relating to the weinsteins existing
employment agreements; terminated the weinsteins existing
employment agreements and entered into new employment agreements
with them through september30, 2005; sold interests in
certain films in various stages of production to the
weinsteins new company; and provided it with the
opportunity to acquire certain development projects, as well as
sequel rights to certain library product. the company retains
certain co-financing, distribution and participation rights in
several of these properties. the company also retains the
miramax and dimension film libraries and the name miramax
films, while the weinsteins have taken the dimension name
to their new company. no material charges were recorded as a
result of the execution of the agreements and the company does
not currently anticipate that it will incur material charges in
connection with the remaining miramax projects.
-41-
film financing
in august 2005, the company entered into a film
financing arrangement with a group of investors whereby the
investors will fund up to approximately $500million for
40% of the production and marketing costs of a slate of up to
thirty-two live-action films, excluding certain titles such as
the chronicles of narnia and, in general, sequels to
previous films, in return for approximately 40% of the future
net cash flows generated by these films. by entering into this
transaction, the company is able to share the risks and rewards
of the performance of its live-action film production and
distribution activity with outside investors.
consumer products
revenues
revenues decreased 15%, or $384million, to
$2.1billion, primarily due to a decrease of
$543million as a result of the sale of the disney store
north america in the first quarter of fiscal 2005. this decrease
was partially offset by increases at merchandise licensing and
buena vista games of $118million and $53million,
respectively.
the increase in merchandise licensing was due to
higher revenues across all lines of business and recognition of
contractual minimum guarantee revenues which increased by
$49million in fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004. the
increase at buena vista games was due to the performance of
the incredibles licensed products, recognition of
contractual minimum guarantee revenue, which increased by
$17million in fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004, and
higher sales of game boy advance games.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses decreased 19%, or
$370million, to $1.6billion, due to a decrease of
$528million related to the sale of the disney store north
america chain, partially offset by higher product development
spending at buena vista games, increased operating expenses at
merchandise licensing and $20million of stock option
expense associated with the adoption of sfas123r in fiscal
year 2005.
segment operating income
segment operating income decreased 3%, or
$14million, to $520million, primarily due to lower
operating income at the disney store, partially offset by growth
in merchandise licensing.
disney stores
effective november21, 2004, the company
sold substantially all of the disney store chain in north
america under a long-term licensing arrangement to a
wholly-owned subsidiary of the childrens place (tcp). the
company received $100million for the working capital
transferred to the buyer at the closing of the transaction.
during fiscal 2005, the company recorded a loss on the working
capital that was transferred to the buyer and additional
restructuring and impairment charges related to the sale
(primarily for employee retention and severance and lease
termination costs) totaling $32million. pursuant to the
terms of sale, the disney store north america retained its lease
obligations related to the stores transferred to the buyer and
became a wholly owned subsidiary of tcp. tcp is required to pay
the company a royalty on substantially all of the physical
retail store sales beginning on the second anniversary of the
closing date of the sale.
during the years ended september30, 2004
and 2003, the company recorded $64million and
$16million, respectively, of restructuring and impairment
charges related to the disney stores. the bulk of these charges
were impairments of the carrying value of fixed assets related
to the stores to be sold.
-42-
the following table provides revenue and
operating (loss) income for the disney store north america:
(in millions)
revenues
$
$
$
operating (loss) income
$
(9
)
$
$
(101
)
corporate and other non-segment
items 2005 vs. 2004
corporate and unallocated shared
expenses
change
vs.
(in millions)
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
$
(536
)
$
(428
)
%
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
increased 25%, or $108million, for the year primarily due
to the favorable resolution of certain legal matters that
reduced expenses in the prior year and stock option expense
associated with the adoption of sfas123r. the adoption of
sfas123r in fiscal 2005 increased expenses by
$50million.
net interest expense
net interest expense is detailed below:
change
vs.
(in millions)
interest expense
$
(605
)
$
(629
)
(4
)%
aircraft leveraged lease investment write-down
(101
)
(16
)
nm
interest and investment income
%
gain on restructuring of euro disney debt
nm
net interest expense
$
(597
)
$
(617
)
(3
)%
excluding an increase of $36million due to
the consolidation of euro disney and hong kong disneyland for a
full twelve months in fiscal 2005 compared to six months in
fiscal 2004, interest expense decreased 10%, or $60million
for the year primarily due to lower average debt balances,
partially offset by higher effective interest rates.
aircraft leveraged lease charges increased as a
result of the write-off of our leveraged lease investment with
delta air lines, inc. (delta) after deltas bankruptcy
filing in september 2005. in fiscal 2004, we took a partial
write-down of our investment with delta consistent with our
agreement with delta to reduce lease payments. in the event of a
material modification to the delta aircraft leases or
foreclosure of the delta aircraft by the debt holders, certain
tax payments of up to $100million could be accelerated.
the expected tax payments are currently reflected on our balance
sheet as a deferred tax liability and are not expected to result
in a further charge to earnings. as of october1, 2005, our
remaining aircraft leverage lease investment totaled
approximately $52million with fedex corp.
the current year interest and investment income
included $19million in gains from the sale of investments.
-43-
net interest expense was also impacted by a
$61million gain (primarily non-cash) that was recorded by
euro disney as a result of the restructuring of euro
disneys borrowings. see note4 to the consolidated
financial statements.
equity in the income of
investees
change
vs.
(in millions)
equity in the income of investees
$
$
%
equity in the income of investees increased 30%,
or $111million, for fiscal 2005 due to the absence of
equity losses from euro disney which was accounted for under the
equity method through the second quarter of fiscal year 2004,
and higher affiliate revenue at lifetime television.
effective income tax rate
change
vs.
effective income tax rate
31.1
%
32.0
%
(0.9)ppt
the effective tax rates reflect the release of
reserves as a result of the favorable resolution of certain tax
matters in both fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004. in addition, fiscal
2005 reflects the favorable impact of a one-time deduction under
the american jobs creation act of 2004 related to the
repatriation of foreign earnings. excluding these benefits, the
effective income tax rates were 35.1% and 35.2% for fiscal years
2005 and 2004, respectively. as more fully discussed in
note7 to the consolidated financial statements, the 2005
effective income tax rate reflects the first year of a
three-year phase-out of an exclusion for certain
extraterritorial income attributable to foreign trading gross
receipts.
pension and benefit costs
pension and post-retirement medical benefit plan
costs affect results in all of our segments, with the majority
of these costs being borne by the parks and resorts segment.
these costs decreased from $374million in fiscal 2004 to
$314million in fiscal 2005. the decrease in fiscal 2005
was due primarily to an increase in the discount rate used to
measure the present value of plan obligations. the discount rate
assumption increased from 5.85% to 6.30% reflecting trends in
prevailing market interest rates at our june30, 2004
valuation date.
we expect pension and post-retirement medical
costs to increase to $462million in fiscal 2006. the
increase is primarily due to a decrease in the discount rate
assumption from 6.30% to 5.25%, reflecting decreases in
prevailing market interest rates on our june30, 2005
valuation date. the assumed discount rate for pension plans
reflects the market rates for high-quality corporate bonds
currently available. the companys discount rate was
determined by considering the average of pension yield curves
constructed of a large population of high quality corporate
bonds. the resulting discount rate reflects the matching of plan
liability cash flows to the yield curves.
during fiscal 2005, the company contributed
$303million to its pension and postretirement medical
plans which included voluntary contributions above the minimum
requirements for the pension plans. the company currently
expects to contribute, at a minimum, $61million to its
pension and postretirement medical plans during fiscal 2006. the
company may make additional contributions into its pension plans
in fiscal 2006 depending on how the funded status of those plans
change
-44-
and also depending on the outcome of proposed
changes to the funding regulations currently being considered by
the united states congress.
due to an increase in the present value of
pension obligations, pension obligations exceed plan assets for
a number of our pension plans. in this situation, the accounting
rules require that we record an additional minimum pension
liability. the additional minimum pension liability adjustment
at year end fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004 is as follows:
minimum liability
at fiscal year end
increase
in 2005
pretax
$
1,124
$
$
aftertax
$
$
$
the increase in the additional minimum pension
liability in fiscal 2005 was primarily due to the decrease in
the discount rate from 6.30% to 5.25%. the accounting rules do
not require that changes in the additional minimum pension
liability adjustment be recorded in current period earnings, but
rather they are recorded directly to equity through accumulated
other comprehensive income. expense recognition under the
pension accounting rules is based upon long-term trends over the
expected life of the companys workforce. see note8
to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
business segment results 2004 vs.
media networks
revenues
media networks revenues increased 8%, or
$837million, to $11.8billion reflecting a 16%
increase, or $887million at the cable networks, and a
decrease of 1%, or $50million, at broadcasting.
increased cable networks revenues were driven by
increases of $696million in revenues from cable and
satellite operators and $236million in advertising
revenues. increased advertising revenue was primarily at espn
due to higher advertising rates and at abc family due to higher
ratings. the increase in revenues from cable and satellite
operators in fiscal 2004 reflected both contractual rate
adjustments and to a lesser extent subscriber growth.
decreased broadcasting revenues were driven by a
decrease of $147million at the television production and
distribution businesses partially offset by an increase of
$63million at the abc television network. the decrease in
television production and distribution revenues was primarily
due to lower syndication revenue and license fees. the increase
at the abc television network was driven by higher advertising
revenues reflecting higher rates due to an improved advertising
marketplace, partially offset by lower ratings and a decrease
due to airing the super bowl in fiscal 2003.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses decreased 1%, or
$119million, to $9.6billion. the decrease reflected
lower costs at broadcasting, partially offset by higher costs at
cable. the decrease at broadcasting was due to lower programming
costs partially offset by higher pension and other
administrative costs as well as higher moviebeam operating
costs. higher costs at cable reflected increased programming,
pension and administrative costs, partially offset by lower bad
debt expense.
lower programming costs at broadcasting were
driven by lower sports programming costs primarily due to the
airing of the super bowl in fiscal 2003, lower license fees for
primetime series and fewer primetime movies. additionally,
fiscal 2003 included higher news production costs due to the
coverage of the military conflict in iraq.
-45-
higher programming costs at cable networks were
primarily due to higher rights and production costs at espn,
partially offset by lower nfl amortization due to commencing the
three year option period as described under sports
programming costs above. the decrease in bad debt expense
at the cable networks reflected the favorable impact of a
bankruptcy settlement with a cable operator in latin america in
the second quarter of fiscal 2004.
cost recognition for nfl programming at the abc
television network in fiscal 2004 decreased by $300million
as compared to fiscal 2003. the decrease at the abc television
network is primarily due to the absence of the super bowl, which
was aired in fiscal 2003, as well as fewer games in fiscal 2004.
the absence of the super bowl and the lower number of games at
the abc television network also resulted in lower revenue from
nfl broadcasts in fiscal 2004. cash payments under the contract
in fiscal 2004 totaled $1.2billion as compared to
$1.3billion in fiscal 2003.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 79%, or
$956million, to $2.2billion reflecting increases of
$748million at the cable networks and $208million at
broadcasting. growth at the cable networks reflected higher
affiliate revenues, higher advertising revenue and lower nfl
programming costs, partially offset by higher rights and
production costs and higher administrative expenses. increased
segment operating income at broadcasting reflected higher
advertising revenues at the abc television network and lower
programming and production costs, partially offset by higher
administrative expenses.
parks and resorts
revenues
revenues at parks and resorts increased 21%, or
$1.3billion, to $7.8billion. the increase was driven
by increases of $715million due to the consolidation of
euro disney and hong kong disneyland (primarily euro disney),
$609million from the walt disney world resort, and
$95million from the disneyland resort. these increases
were partially offset by a decrease of $61million
resulting from the sale of the anaheim angels baseball team
during the third quarter of fiscal 2003.
at the walt disney world resort, increased
revenues were primarily driven by higher theme park attendance,
occupied room nights, and per capita spending at the theme
parks, partially offset by lower per room guest spending at the
hotels. higher theme park attendance was driven by increased
resident, domestic, and international guest visitation,
reflecting the continued success of mission: space,
mickeys philharmagic and disneys pop century resort,
and improvements in travel and tourism. guest spending decreases
at the hotels reflected a higher mix of hotel guest visitation
at the lower priced value resorts.
at the disneyland resort, increased revenues were
primarily due to higher guest spending at the theme parks and
hotel properties.
-46-
across our domestic theme parks, attendance
increased 7% and per capita guest spending increased 6% compared
to fiscal 2003. attendance and per capita guest spending at the
walt disney world resort increased 10% and 4%, respectively.
attendance at the disneyland resort remained flat while per
capita guest spending increased 7%. operating statistics for our
hotel properties are as follows (unaudited):
east coast
west coast
total domestic
resorts
resorts
resorts
year ended
year ended
year ended
september30,
september30,
september30,
occupancy
%
%
%
%
%
%
available room nights (inthousands)
8,540
7,550
9,356
8,366
per room guest spending
$
$
$
$
$
$
the increase in available room nights reflected
the opening of the value priced disneys pop century resort
in the first quarter of fiscal 2004. per room guest spending
consists of the average daily hotel room rate as well as guest
spending on food, beverages, and merchandise at the hotels. the
decline in per room guest spending reflects a higher mix of
hotel guest visitation at the lower priced value resorts.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses increased 21%, or
$1.2billion, compared to fiscal 2003. the increase in
costs and expenses was primarily due to the consolidation of
euro disney and hong kong disneyland, which increased costs and
expenses by $651million, as well as higher operating costs
at both domestic resorts. higher operating costs were driven by
volume increases as well as higher employee benefits, marketing
and sales costs, depreciation expense, and information
technology costs. higher employee benefits costs reflected
increased pension and post-retirement medical costs, which grew
$137million at the domestic resorts. higher marketing
costs were driven by the opening of mission: space
at epcot and disneys pop century resort at walt disney
world, and by the twilight zonetm tower of terror and
the 50thanniversary celebration at disneyland. higher
depreciation reflects new resort properties and theme park
attractions as well as new information technology systems. these
increases were partially offset by cost decreases due to the
sale of the anaheim angels during the third quarter of fiscal
2003.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 17%, or
$166million, to $1.1billion, primarily due to growth
at the walt disney world resort and the consolidation of euro
disney which contributed $75million of the increase in
operating income.
studio entertainment
revenues
revenues increased 18%, or $1.3billion, to
$8.7billion, due to increases of $1.4billion in
worldwide home entertainment and $151million in television
distribution, partially offset by a decrease of
$215million in worldwide theatrical motion picture
distribution.
worldwide home entertainment revenues increased
due to higher dvd unit sales in fiscal 2004, which included
disney/ pixars finding nemo, pirates of the caribbean,
the lion king platinum release and brother bear
compared to fiscal 2003, which included lilo&
stitch and beauty and the beast. revenues in
television distribution increased due to higher pay television
sales due to better performances of live-action titles.
worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution revenue
decreased
-47-
due to the performance of fiscal 2004 titles,
which included home on the range, the alamo and king
arthur, which faced difficult comparisons to the strong
performances of fiscal 2003 titles, which included finding
nemo (domestically)and pirates of the
caribbean. partially offsetting the decrease was the
successful performance of finding nemo internationally in
fiscal 2004.
costs and expenses
costs and expenses increased 19%, or
$1.3billion, compared to fiscal 2003. higher costs and
expenses were due to increases in worldwide home entertainment
and worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution. higher
costs and expenses in worldwide home entertainment reflected
higher distribution costs and production cost amortization for
fiscal 2004 titles, primarily due to the increased unit sales
volume for finding nemo and pirates of the
caribbean. in addition, participation expense was higher in
fiscal 2004 because of participation arrangements with
finding nemo and pirates of the caribbean. higher
costs in worldwide theatrical motion picture distribution were
due to increased distribution costs for fiscal 2004 titles,
which included king arthur, brother bear and the
village, and increased production cost amortization,
including higher film cost write-downs, for fiscal 2004 titles
which included home on the range and the alamo.
these increases were partially offset by lower production and
development write-offs and lower participation expense as fiscal
2003 included participation payments for the domestic theatrical
release of finding nemo and the worldwide theatrical
release of pirates of the caribbean. cost and expenses
for television distribution were comparable year over year.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 7%, or
$42million, to $662million, due to improvements in
worldwide home entertainment and television distribution,
partially offset by declines in worldwide theatrical motion
picture distribution.
consumer products
revenues
revenues increased 7%, or $167million, to
$2.5billion, reflecting increases of $73million in
merchandise licensing, $72million in publishing and
$28million at the disney store.
higher merchandise licensing revenues were due to
higher sales of hardlines, softlines and toys which were driven
by the strong performance of disney princess and certain
film properties. the increase at publishing primarily reflected
the strong performance of finding nemo and other
childrens books and w.i.t.c.h. magazine and book titles
across all regions.
costs and expenses
overall costs and expenses were essentially flat
at $2.0billion. costs and expenses reflected decreases at
the disney store due primarily to overhead savings and the
closure of underperforming stores, offset by volume related
increases at publishing and higher operating expenses related to
merchandise licensing.
segment operating income
segment operating income increased 39%, or
$150million, to $534million, primarily driven by an
increase of $117million at the disney store due primarily
to overhead savings and the closure of underperforming stores as
well as margin improvements. improvements in merchandise
licensing and publishing also contributed to operating income
growth.
-48-
corporate and other non-segment
items 2004 vs. 2003
corporate and unallocated shared
expenses
change
vs.
(in millions)
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
$
(428
)
$
(443
)
(3
)%
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
decreased 3% in fiscal 2004 to $428million. fiscal 2004
corporate and unallocated shared expenses reflected the
favorable resolution of certain legal matters, partially offset
by higher legal and other administrative costs.
net interest expense
change
vs.
(in millions)
interest expense
$
(629
)
$
(666
)
(6
)%
aircraft leveraged lease investment write-down
(16
)
(114
)
(86
)%
interest and investment income (loss)
(13
)
nm
net interest expense
$
(617
)
$
(793
)
(22
)%
excluding an increase of $51million due to
the consolidation of euro disney and hong kong disneyland in
fiscal 2004, interest expense decreased 13%, or
$88million, in fiscal 2004. lower interest expense for
fiscal 2004 was primarily due to lower average debt balances.
interest and investment income (loss) was income
of $28million in fiscal 2004 compared to a loss of
$13million in fiscal 2003. fiscal 2004 reflected higher
interest income while fiscal 2003 included a loss on the early
repayment of certain borrowings.
in fiscal 2004, we took a partial write-down of
our investment with delta due to our agreement with delta to
reduce lease payments. in fiscal 2003, we wrote off our
investment in aircraft leveraged lease with united airlines as a
result of their bankruptcy filing.
equity in the income of
investees
change
vs.
(in millions)
equity in the income of investees
$
$
%
the increase in equity in the income of our
investees in fiscal 2004 reflected increases at lifetime
television, due to lower programming and marketing expenses, as
well as increases at a&e and e! entertainment due to higher
advertising revenues.
-49-
effective income tax rate
change
vs.
effective income tax rate
32.0%
35.0%
(3.0)ppt
the effective income tax rate decreased from
35.0% in fiscal 2003 to 32.0% in fiscal 2004. the decrease in
the fiscal 2004 effective income tax rate is primarily due to
tax reserve adjustments including a $120million reserve
release as a result of the favorable resolution of certain
federal income tax issues.
liquidity and capital resources
cash and cash equivalents decreased by
$319million during the year ended october1, 2005.
the change in cash and cash equivalents is as follows:
(in millions)
cash provided by operating activities
$
4,269
$
4,370
$
2,901
cash used by investing activities
(1,691
)
(1,484
)
(1,034
)
cash used by financing activities
(2,897
)
(2,701
)
(1,523
)
(decrease)/ increase in cash and cash equivalents
$
(319
)
$
$
operating activities
cash provided by operations decreased 2% or
$101million, to $4.3billion, driven by the timing of
payments for accounts payable and accrued expenses as well as
higher income tax payments and pension contributions. these
decreases were partially offset by higher pre-tax income
adjusted for non-cash items.
the companys studio and media networks
segments incur costs to acquire and produce television and
feature film programming. film and television production costs
include all internally produced content such as live action and
animated feature films, animated direct-to-video programming,
television series, television specials, theatrical stage plays
or other similar product. programming costs include film or
television product licensed for a specific period from third
parties for airing on the companys broadcast, cable
networks and television stations. programming assets are
generally recorded when the programming becomes available to us
with a corresponding increase in programming liabilities.
accordingly, we analyze our programming assets net of the
related liability.
-50-
the companys film and television production
and programming activity for the fiscal years ended 2005, 2004
and 2003 are as follows:
(in millions)
beginning balances:
production and programming assets
$
6,422
$
6,773
$
6,620
programming liabilities
(939
)
(1,029
)
(1,179
)
5,483
5,744
5,441
spending:
film and television production
2,631
2,610
3,099
broadcast programming
3,712
3,693
4,071
6,343
6,303
7,170
amortization:
film and television production
(3,243
)
(3,018
)
(2,753
)
broadcast programming
(3,668
)
(3,610
)
(4,077
)
(6,911
)
(6,628
)
(6,830
)
change in film and television production and
programming costs
(568
)
(325
)
other non-cash activity
(61
)
(37
)
ending balances:
production and programming assets
5,937
6,422
6,773
programming liabilities
(1,083
)
(939
)
(1,029
)
$
4,854
$
5,483
$
5,744
investing activities
investing activities consist principally of
investments in parks, resorts and other property and mergers,
acquisition and divestiture activity. the companys
investments in parks, resorts and other property for the last
three years are as follows:
(in millions)
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts:
domestic
international(1)
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate and unallocated
$
1,823
$
1,427
$
1,049
(1)
represents 100% of euro disney and hong kong
disneylands capital expenditures for all periods since the
company began consolidating the results of operations and cash
flows of these two businesses effective with the beginning of
the third quarter of fiscal 2004.
capital expenditures for the parks and resorts
segment are principally for theme park and resort expansion, new
rides and attractions and recurring capital and capital
improvements. the international park spending in 2005 primarily
reflects hong kong disneyland construction costs where capital
expenditures totaled $591million compared to the prior
year amount of $251million which
-51-
includes only six months of activity. our equity
partner contributed $147million in fiscal 2005 and
$66million in the second half of fiscal 2004, which are
included as sources of cash in financing activities. capital
spending at hong kong disneyland is expected to decrease in
fiscal 2006 as the theme park opened in september 2005.
capital expenditures at media networks primarily
reflect investments in facilities and equipment for expanding
and upgrading broadcast centers, production facilities and
television station facilities.
corporate and unallocated shared capital
expenditures were primarily for information technology software
and hardware.
other investing activities
during fiscal 2005, the company received
$100million for working capital transferred to the buyer
of the disney store north america and $29million from the
sale of the mighty ducks of anaheim.
during fiscal 2004, the company purchased certain
financial investments totaling $67million, made equity
contributions to hong kong disneyland totaling $46million
in the first six months of the year prior to consolidation, and
acquired the film library and intellectual property rights for
the muppets and bear in the big blue house for
$68million ($45million in cash).
during fiscal 2003, the company invested
$130million primarily for the acquisition of a radio
station. the company also made equity contributions to hong kong
disneyland totaling $47million and received proceeds of
$166million collectively from the sale of the anaheim
angels and certain utility infrastructure at walt disney world.
financing activities
cash used in financing activities during fiscal
2005 of $2.9billion reflected share repurchases, net
repayments of borrowings and payment of dividends to
shareholders, partially offset by proceeds from stock option
exercises.
during the year ended october1, 2005, the
companys borrowing activity was as follows:
september30,
other
october1,
(in millions)
additions
payments
activity
commercial paper
$
$
$
$
$
u.s.medium-term notes and other
u.s.dollar denominated debt(1)
7,573
(778
)
(167
)
6,628
convertible senior notes
1,323
1,323
privately placed debt
(96
)
european medium-term notes
1,099
(886
)
preferred stock
(10
)
film financing arrangement
euro disney borrowings(2)
2,221
(15
)
(170
)
2,036
hong kong disneyland borrowings
total
$
13,488
$
1,076
$
(1,775
)
$
(322
)
$
12,467
-52-
(1)
other activity primarily includes adjustments
related to interest rate hedging activity.
(2)
other activity included a $130million
reduction of euro disney senior debt using cash security
deposits and a $33million decrease due to foreign currency
translation as a result of the appreciation of the
u.s.dollar against the euro.
the companys bank facilities are as follows:
committed
capacity
unused
(in millions)
capacity
used
capacity
bank facilities expiring 2009
$
2,250
$
$
2,040
bank facilities expiring 2010
2,250
2,250
total
$
4,500
$
$
4,290
these bank facilities allow for borrowings at
libor-based rates plus a spread, which depends on the
companys public debt rating and can range from 0.175% to
0.575%. as of october1, 2005, the company had not borrowed
under these bank facilities. the company also has the ability to
issue up to $500million of letters of credit under the
facility expiring in 2009, which if utilized, reduces available
borrowing. as of october1, 2005, letters of credit in an
aggregate amount of $210million had been issued under this
facility.
the company expects to use commercial paper
borrowings up to the amount of its unused bank facilities, in
conjunction with term-debt issuance and operating cash flow, to
retire or refinance other borrowings before or as they come due.
on january18, 2005, the company filed a
shelf registration statement which allows the company to borrow
up to $5billion using various types of debt instruments
such as fixed or floating rate notes, u.s.dollar or
foreign currency denominated notes, redeemable notes, global
notes and dual currency or other indexed notes. the company
subsequently established a domestic medium-term note program
under this shelf registration, which permits issuance of
$5billion of debt instruments, of which none have been
issued at october1, 2005. in addition to the shelf, the
company also has a european medium-term note program, which
permits issuance of approximately $4billion of additional
debt instruments, of which $0.2billion has been utilized
at october1, 2005.
the company declared an annual dividend of
$0.27per share on december1, 2005 related to fiscal
2005. the dividend is payable on january6, 2006 to
shareholders of record on december12, 2005. the company
paid a $490million dividend ($0.24per share) during
the second quarter of fiscal 2005 applicable to fiscal 2004;
paid a $430million dividend ($0.21per share) during
the second quarter of fiscal 2004 applicable to fiscal 2003; and
paid a $429million dividend ($0.21per share) during
the first quarter of fiscal 2003 applicable to fiscal 2002.
during fiscal 2005, the company repurchased
91million shares of disney common stock for
$2.4billion. during fiscal 2004, the company repurchased
15million shares of disney common stock for approximately
$335million. no shares of disney common stock were
repurchased during fiscal 2003. as of october1, 2005, the
company had authorization to repurchase approximately
225million additional shares, of which the company has
repurchased 47million shares for $1.1billion
subsequent to year-end through december2, 2005.
we believe that the companys financial
condition is strong and that its cash balances, other liquid
assets, operating cash flows, access to debt and equity capital
markets and borrowing capacity, taken together, provide adequate
resources to fund ongoing operating requirements and future
capital expenditures related to the expansion of existing
businesses and development of new projects. however, the
companys operating cash flow and access to the capital
markets can be impacted by macroeconomic factors outside of its
control. in addition to macroeconomic factors, the
companys borrowing costs can be impacted by short and
long-term debt ratings assigned by independent rating
-53-
agencies, which are based, in significant part,
on the companys performance as measured by certain credit
metrics such as interest coverage and leverage ratios. as of
october1, 2005, moodys investors services long
and short-term debt ratings for the company were baal and p-2,
respectively, with positive outlook for the long-term rating;
and standard& poors long and short-term debt
ratings for the company were a- and a-2, respectively, with
stable outlook. the companys bank facilities contain only
one financial covenant, relating to interest coverage, which the
company met on october1, 2005, by a significant margin.
the companys bank facilities also specifically exclude
certain entities, including euro disney and hong kong
disneyland, from any representations, covenants or events of
default.
hong kong disneyland is subject to financial
covenants under its loan agreements beginning in fiscal year
2006. euro disney has covenants under its debt agreements that
limit its investing and financing activities. beginning with
fiscal year 2006, euro disney must meet financial performance
covenants that will necessitate earnings growth. management
currently expects operating results to be sufficient to meet
these covenants. there can be no assurance that the foregoing
financial covenants will be met at any given time in the future.
contractual obligations, commitments and off
balance sheet arrangements
the company has various contractual obligations
which are recorded as liabilities in our consolidated financial
statements. other items, such as certain purchase commitments
and other executory contracts are not recognized as liabilities
in our consolidated financial statements but are required to be
disclosed. for example, the company is contractually committed
to acquire broadcast programming and make certain minimum lease
payments for the use of property under operating lease
agreements.
the following table summarizes our significant
contractual obligations and commercial commitments on an
undiscounted basis at october1, 2005 and the future
periods in which such obligations are expected to be settled in
cash. in addition, the table reflects the timing of principal
and interest payments on outstanding borrowings. additional
details regarding these obligations are provided in footnotes to
the financial statements, as referenced in the table:
payments due by period
less than
1-3
4-5
more than
(in millions)
total
1year
years
years
5years
borrowings (note6)(1)
$
18,916
$
2,855
$
3,110
$
1,214
$
11,737
operating lease commitments (note13)
1,636
capital lease obligations (note13)
sports programming commitments (note13)
15,837
2,524
4,275
3,418
5,620
broadcast programming commitments (note13)
3,720
1,650
1,006
total sports and other broadcast programming
commitments
19,557
4,174
5,281
4,037
6,065
other(2)
2,079
total contractual obligations(3)
$
43,122
$
8,239
$
9,785
$
5,947
$
19,151
(1)
amounts exclude market value adjustments totaling
$213million, which are recorded on the balance sheet.
amounts include interest payments based on contractual terms and
current interest rates for variable rate debt.
-54-
(2)
other commitments primarily comprise creative
talent and employment agreements including obligations to
actors, producers, sports personnel, television and radio
personalities and executives.
(3)
comprised of the following:
liabilities recorded on the balance sheet
$
13,635
commitments not recorded on the balance sheet
29,487
$
43,122
the company also has obligations with respect to
its pension and post retirement medical benefit plans. see
note8 to the consolidated financial statements.
contingent commitments and
contingencies
the company also has certain contractual
arrangements that would require the company to make payments or
provide funding if certain circumstances occur (contingent
commitments). the company does not currently expect that
these contingent commitments will result in any amounts being
paid by the company.
contractual guarantees
see note13 to the consolidated financial
statements for information regarding the companys
contractual guarantees.
information technology outsourcing
during the year, the company entered into
agreements with two suppliers to outsource certain information
technology functions and support services. the transition of
services to the new suppliers began in late july 2005. the terms
of these agreements extend five to seven years with an option
for the company to extend for an additional two to three years.
the company will retain all responsibility and authority for
systems architecture, technology strategy, and product standards
under the agreements. payments under these agreements are
excluded from the table above because the payments vary
depending on usage, but the company anticipates spending
approximately $1.3billion for these services over the next
seven years, which is less than what we estimate we would have
spent had we not outsourced these functions.
dvd manufacturing arrangement
the company has a sole-source arrangement in the
united states and a number of international markets with a
third-party manufacturer to meet the companys dvd
manufacturing and warehousing requirements which expires
december31, 2006. payments under this arrangement are
excluded from the table above since there are neither fixed nor
minimum quantities under the arrangement. total payments for
fiscal 2005 were approximately $0.7billion.
legal and tax matters
as disclosed in notes7 and 13 to the
consolidated financial statements, the company has exposure for
certain legal and tax matters.
accounting policies and estimates
we believe that the application of the following
accounting policies, which are important to our financial
position and results of operations, requires significant
judgments and estimates on the part of management. for a summary
of our significant accounting policies, including the accounting
policies discussed below, see note2 to the consolidated
financial statements.
-55-
film and television revenues and
costs
we expense the cost of film and television
production and participations as well as certain multi-year
sports rights over the applicable product life cycle based upon
the ratio of the current periods gross revenues to the
estimated remaining total gross revenues or on a straight-line
basis, as appropriate. these estimates are calculated on an
individual production basis for film and television and on an
individual contract basis for sports rights. estimates of total
gross revenues can change significantly due to a variety of
factors, including advertising rates, the level of market
acceptance of the production and trends in consumer behavior.
for film productions, estimated remaining gross
revenue from all sources includes revenue that will be earned
within ten years of the date of the initial theatrical release.
for television series, we include revenues that will be earned
within ten years of the delivery of the first episode, or if
still in production, five years from the date of delivery of the
most recent episode, if later. for acquired film libraries,
remaining revenues include amounts to be earned for up to twenty
years from the date of acquisition.
television network and station rights for
theatrical movies, series and other programs are charged to
expense based on the number of times the program is expected to
be shown. estimates of usage of television network and station
programming can change based on competition and audience
acceptance. accordingly, revenue estimates and planned usage are
reviewed periodically and are revised if necessary. a change in
revenue projections or planned usage could have an impact on our
results of operations.
costs of film and television productions and
programming costs for our television and cable networks are
subject to valuation adjustments pursuant to applicable
accounting rules. the net realizable value of the television
broadcast program licenses and rights are reviewed using a
daypart methodology. a daypart is defined as an aggregation of
programs broadcast during a particular time of day or programs
of a similar type. the companys dayparts are: early
morning, daytime, late night, primetime, news, children and
sports (includes network and cable). the net realizable values
of other cable programming assets are reviewed on an aggregated
basis for each cable channel. estimated values are based upon
assumptions about future demand and market conditions. if actual
demand or market conditions are less favorable than our
projections, film, television and programming cost write-downs
may be required.
revenue recognition
the company has revenue recognition policies for
its various operating segments, which are appropriate to the
circumstances of each business. see note2 to the
consolidated financial statements for a summary of these revenue
recognition policies.
we record reductions to revenues for estimated
future returns of merchandise, primarily home video, dvd and
software products, and for customer programs and sales
incentives. these estimates are based upon historical return
experience, current economic trends and projections of customer
demand for and acceptance of our products. if we underestimate
the level of returns in a particular period, we may record less
revenue in later periods when returns exceed the predicted
amount. conversely, if we overestimate the level of returns for
a period, we may have additional revenue in later periods when
returns are less than predicted.
revenues from advance theme park ticket sales are
recognized when the tickets are used. for non-expiring,
multi-day tickets and tickets sold through bulk distribution
channels, we recognize revenue based on estimated usage patterns
which are derived from historical usage patterns. a change in
these estimated usage patterns could have an impact on the
timing of revenue recognition.
-56-
pension and postretirement benefit plan
actuarial assumptions
the companys pension and postretirement
medical benefit obligations and related costs are calculated
using actuarial concepts, within the framework of statement of
financial accounting standards no.87 employers
accounting for pensions and statement of financial
accounting standards no.106, employers accounting
for postretirement benefits other than pensions,
respectively. two critical assumptions, the discount rate and
the expected return on plan assets, are important elements of
expense and/or liability measurement. we evaluate these critical
assumptions annually. other assumptions include the healthcare
cost trend rate and employee demographic factors such as
retirement patterns, mortality, turnover and rate of
compensation increase.
the discount rate enables us to state expected
future cash payments for benefits as a present value on the
measurement date. the guideline for setting this rate is a
high-quality long-term corporate bond rate. a lower discount
rate increases the present value of benefit obligations and
increases pension expense. we decreased our discount rate to
5.25% in 2005 from 6.30% in 2004 to reflect market interest rate
conditions at our june30, 2005 measurement date. the
assumed discount rate for pension plans reflects the market
rates for high-quality corporate bonds currently available. the
companys discount rate was determined by considering the
average of pension yield curves constructed of a large
population of high quality corporate bonds. the resulting
discount rate reflects the matching of plan liability cash flows
to the yield curves. a one percent decrease in the assumed
discount rate would increase total net periodic pension and
postretirement medical expense for fiscal 2006 by
$167million and would increase the projected benefit
obligation at october1, 2005 by $1.1billion,
respectively. a one percent increase in the assumed discount
rate would decrease these amounts by $139million and
$919million, respectively.
to determine the expected long-term rate of
return on the plan assets, we consider the current and expected
asset allocation, as well as historical and expected returns on
each plan asset class. a lower expected rate of return on
pension plan assets will increase pension expense. our long-term
expected return on plan assets was 7.50% in both 2005 and 2004,
respectively. a one percent change in the long-term return on
pension plan asset assumption would impact fiscal 2006 annual
pension and postretirement medical expense by approximately
$36million. see note8 to the consolidated financial
statements.
goodwill, intangible assets, long-lived assets
and investments
statement of financial accounting standards
no.142, goodwill and other intangible assets
(sfas142) requires that goodwill and other intangible
assets be tested for impairment on an annual basis. we completed
our impairment testing as of october1, 2005 and determined
that there were no impairment losses related to goodwill and
other intangible assets prior to the implementation of emerging
issues task force topic d-108, use of the residual method to
value acquired assets other than goodwill (eitf d-108), as
described under accounting changes below. in
assessing the recoverability of goodwill and other intangible
assets, market values and projections regarding estimated future
cash flows and other factors are used to determine the fair
value of the respective assets. if these estimates or related
projections change in the future, we may be required to record
impairment charges for these assets.
sfas142 requires the company to compare the
fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying amount on an
annual basis to determine if there is potential goodwill
impairment. if the fair value of a reporting unit is less than
its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent
that the fair value of the goodwill within the reporting unit is
less than the carrying value of its goodwill. for purposes of
performing the impairment test for goodwill as required by
sfas142 we established the following reporting units:
cable networks, television broadcasting, radio, studio
entertainment, consumer products and parks and resorts.
to determine the fair value of our reporting
units, we generally use a present value technique (discounted
cash flow) corroborated by market multiples when available and
as appropriate, except
-57-
for the television network, a business within the
television broadcasting reporting unit. the television
broadcasting reporting unit includes the television network and
the owned and operated television stations. these businesses
have been grouped together because their respective cash flows
are dependent on one another. for purposes of our impairment
test, we used a revenue multiple to value the television
network. we did not use a present value technique or a market
multiple approach to value the television network as a present
value technique would not capture the full fair value of the
television network and there is little comparable market data
available due to the scarcity of television networks. we applied
what we believe to be the most appropriate valuation methodology
for each of the reporting units. if we had established different
reporting units or utilized different valuation methodologies,
the impairment test results could differ.
sfas142 requires the company to compare the
fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset to its
carrying amount. if the carrying amount of an indefinite-lived
intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is
recognized. fair values for goodwill and other indefinite-lived
intangible assets are determined based on discounted cash flows,
market multiples or appraised values as appropriate.
the company has cost and equity investments. the
fair value of these investments is dependent on the performance
of the investee companies, as well as volatility inherent in the
external markets for these investments. in assessing potential
impairment for these investments, we consider these factors as
well as forecasted financial performance of our investees. if
these forecasts are not met, impairment charges may be required.
contingencies and litigation
we are currently involved in certain legal
proceedings and, as required, have accrued estimates of the
probable and estimable losses for the resolution of these
claims. these estimates have been developed in consultation with
outside counsel and are based upon an analysis of potential
results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement
strategies. it is possible, however, that future results of
operations for any particular quarterly or annual period could
be materially affected by changes in our assumptions or the
effectiveness of our strategies related to these proceedings.
see note13 to the consolidated financial statements for
more detailed information on litigation exposure.
income tax audits
as a matter of course, the company is regularly
audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. from time
to time, these audits result in proposed assessments. during the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, the company reached settlements
with the internal revenue service regarding all assessments
proposed with respect to its federal income tax returns for 1996
through 2000, and a settlement with the california franchise tax
board regarding assessments proposed with respect to its state
tax returns for 1994 through 2003. these favorable settlements
resulted in the company releasing $102million in tax
reserves which are no longer required with respect to these
matters. during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004, the company
reached a settlement with the internal revenue service regarding
all assessments proposed with respect to its federal income tax
returns for 1993 through 1995. the favorable settlement resulted
in the company releasing $120million in tax reserves that
are no longer required with respect to these matters. during the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2003, the company favorably resolved
certain state income tax audit issues and released
$56million of related tax reserves.
stock option compensation expense
compensation expense for stock options is
estimated on the grant date using a black-scholes option-pricing
model. the weighted average assumptions used in the
black-scholes model were 4.75, 6.0 and 6.0years for the
expected term and 27%, 40% and 40% for the expected volatility
for fiscal years 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. future
expense amounts for any particular quarterly or annual period
could be affected by changes in our assumptions or changes in
market conditions.
-58-
in connection with the adoption of sfas123r
(see note2 to the consolidated financial statements), the
company reviewed and updated, among other things, its
forfeiture, expected term and volatility assumptions. the
weighted average expected option term for 2005 reflects the
application of the simplified method set out in sec staff
accounting bulletinno.107 (sab107), which was
issued in march 2005. the simplified method defines the life as
the average of the contractual term of the options and the
weighted average vesting period for all option tranches.
estimated volatility for fiscal 2005 also
reflects the application of sab107 interpretive guidance
and, accordingly, incorporates historical and implied
share-price volatility, with implied volatility derived from
exchange traded options on the companys common stock and
other traded financial instruments, such as the companys
convertible debt. volatility for 2004 and 2003 was estimated
based upon historical share-price volatility. see note10
to the consolidated financial statements for more detailed
information.
accounting changes
sfas123r
in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, the company
adopted statement of financial accounting standards
no.123r, share-based payment (sfas123r),
which revises sfas123, accounting for stock-based
compensation and supersedes accounting principles board
opinion no.25, accounting for stock issued to employees
(apb25). sfas123r requires that new, modified
and unvested share-based payment transactions with employees,
such as stock options and restricted stock, be recognized in the
financial statements based on their fair value and recognized as
compensation expense over the vesting period. the company
adopted sfas123r effective october1, 2004, using the
modified retrospective method. this method allows the
restatement of interim financial statements in the year of
adoption based on the amounts previously calculated and reported
in the pro forma footnote disclosures required by sfas123.
however, fiscal years prior to 2005 have not been restated. the
adoption of sfas123r in fiscal 2005 resulted in the
recognition of stock option expense of $253million and
$53million of net capitalized compensation costs, a
reduction in net income of $160million (net of tax
benefits of $93million), a reduction in basic and diluted
earnings per share of $0.08, a reduction of $24million in
cash flows from operating activities and an increase of
$24million in cash flows from financing activities.
the following table shows the fiscal 2005
quarterly after-tax effect of the adoption of the new accounting
standard.
three months
three months
three months
three months
ended jan.1,
ended april2,
ended july2,
ended oct.1,
year ended
oct.1, 2005
(inmillions,except
persharedata)
income
eps
income
eps
income
eps
income
eps(2)
income
eps
results prior to sfas123r
adoption(1)
$
$
0.35
$
$
0.33
$
$
0.41
$
$
0.23
$
2,729
$
1.32
impact of accounting change
(37
)
(0.02
)
(41
)
(0.02
)
(40
)
(0.02
)
(42
)
(0.02
)
(160
)
(0.08
)
results subsequent to sfas123r
adoption(1)
$
$
0.33
$
$
0.31
$
$
0.39
$
$
0.20
$
2,569
$
1.24
(1)
amounts represent income before the cumulative
effect of accounting change related to eitf d-108 discussed
below.
(2)
eps does not equal the sum of the column due to
rounding.
(3)
eps for the year does not equal the sum of the
quarters due to rounding.
-59-
prior to fiscal 2005, employee stock options were
accounted for under the intrinsic value method in accordance
with apb25 and its related interpretations, and were
generally granted at market value. accordingly, compensation
expense for stock option awards was generally not recognized in
the consolidated statements of income. the following table
reflects pro forma net income and earnings per share for the
years ended september30, 2004 and 2003, had the company
elected to adopt the fair value approach of sfas123 as
reported in the footnotes to the companys financial
statement for those years. the pro forma amounts may not be
representative of future disclosures since the estimated fair
value of stock options is amortized to expense over the vesting
period, and additional options may be granted or options may be
cancelled in future years.
(in millions, except per share data)
net income
as reported
$
2,345
$
1,267
less stock option expense, net of
tax(1)
(255
)
(294
)
pro forma after option expense
$
2,090
$
diluted earnings per share
as reported
$
1.12
$
0.62
pro forma after option expense
1.00
0.48
basic earnings per share
as reported
$
1.14
$
0.62
pro forma after option expense
1.02
0.48
(1)
does not include restricted stock unit
(rsu)expense which is reported in net income. see
note10 to the consolidated financial statements.
the impact of stock options and rsus for fiscal
2005, and on a pro forma basis for fiscal 2004 and 2003 as if
the company had been expensing stock options as disclosed in our
footnotes pursuant to sfas123, on income and earnings per
share was as follows (in millions, except per share amounts):
pro forma
as reported
stock option compensation expense
$
$
$
rsu compensation expense
total equity based compensation expense
$
$
$
reduction in net income, net of tax
$
$
$
reduction in diluted earnings per share
$
0.11
$
0.14
$
0.15
eitf d-108
in september 2004, the emerging issues task force
(eitf)issued topic no. d-108, use of the residual
method to value acquired assets other than goodwill(eitf
d-108). eitf d-108 requires that a direct value method be used
to value intangible assets acquired in business combinations
completed after september29, 2004. eitf d-108 also
requires the company to perform an impairment test using a
direct value method on all intangible assets that were
previously valued using the residual method. any impairments
arising from the initial application of a direct value method
are reported as a cumulative effect of accounting change. for
radio station acquisitions subsequent to the acquisition of
capital cities/ abc, inc. in 1996, the company applied the
residual value method to value the acquired fcc licenses. we
adopted eitf d-108 for the fiscal year ended october1,
2005 and recorded
-60-
a non-cash, $57million pre-tax charge
($36million after-tax) as a cumulative effect of
accounting change.
sfas152 and sop 04-2
in december 2004, the financial accounting
standards board (fasb)issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.152, accounting for real estate
time-sharing transactions (sfas152). the fasb issued
this statement as a result of guidance provided in american
institute of certified public accountants statement of position
04-2, accounting for real estate time-sharing transactions
(sop 04-2), which applies to all real estate time-sharing
transactions. sfas152 is effective for fiscal years
beginning after june15, 2005. we expect that the impact of
adoption will not be material to our financial statements.
fin46r
in january 2003, the fasb issued interpretation
no.46r, consolidation of variable interest entities
(fin46r). variable interest entities (vies) are
generally entities that lack sufficient equity to finance their
activities without additional financial support from other
parties or whose equity holders lack adequate decision making
ability. all vies with which the company is involved must be
evaluated to determine the primary beneficiary of the risks and
rewards of the vie. the primary beneficiary is required to
consolidate the vie for financial reporting purposes.
in connection with the adoption of fin46r,
the company concluded that euro disney and hong kong disneyland
are vies and that we are the primary beneficiary. as a result,
the company began consolidating euro disney and hong kong
disneylands balance sheets on march31, 2004, the end
of the companys second quarter of fiscal 2004, and the
income and cash flow statements beginning april1, 2004,
the beginning of the third quarter of fiscal 2004. under
fin46r transition rules, the operating results of euro
disney and hong kong disneyland continued to be accounted for on
the equity method for the six months ended march31, 2004.
see note4 to the consolidated financial statements.
we have concluded that the rest of our equity
investments do not require consolidation as either they are not
vies, or in the event that they are vies, we are not the primary
beneficiary. the company also has variable interests in certain
other vies that have not been consolidated because the company
is not the primary beneficiary. these vies do not involve any
material exposure to the company.
eitf00-21
the company adopted eitf no.00-21,
revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables
(eitf00-21), effective at the beginning of fiscal
2003. eitf00-21 addresses revenue recognition for revenues
derived from a single contractual arrangement that contains
multiple products or services. the rule provides additional
requirements to determine when such revenues may be recorded
separately for accounting purposes. previously, the company had
recognized the nfl broadcast portion of espns affiliate
revenue when the nfl games were aired, as espns affiliate
contracts provided a basis for allocating such revenue between
nfl and non-nfl programming. since the cost of the nfl rights
had also been recognized as the games were aired, the company
recognized both the nfl revenues and nfl costs in the quarters
the games were aired.
under eitf00-21s requirements for
separating the revenue elements of a single contract, beginning
in fiscal 2003 the company no longer allocates espns
affiliate revenue between nfl and non-nfl programming for
accounting purposes. as a consequence, the company no longer
matches all nfl revenue with nfl costs, as espn affiliate
revenue (including the nfl portion) is generally recognized
ratably throughout the year, while nfl contract costs continue
to be recognized in the quarters the games are aired. this
accounting change impacts only the timing of revenue recognition
and has no impact on cash flow. as a result of this change, the
media networks segment reports
-61-
significantly reduced revenue and profitability
in the first fiscal quarter when the majority of the nfl games
are aired, with commensurately increased revenues and profits in
the second and third fiscal quarters.
the company elected to adopt this new accounting
rule using the cumulative effect approach and recorded an
after-tax charge of $71million for the cumulative effect
of a change in accounting as of the beginning of fiscal year
2003. this amount represented the revenue recorded for nfl games
in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2002, which has been
recorded ratably over fiscal 2003 under the new accounting
method.
potential dilution from employee stock
options
fully diluted shares outstanding and diluted
earnings per share include the effect of in-the-money stock
options calculated based on the average share price for the
period and assumes conversion of the convertible senior notes
(see note6 to the consolidated financial statements). the
dilution from outstanding employee options would increase if the
companys share price increases, as shown below:
average
total
percentage of
hypothetical
disney
in-the-money
incremental
average shares
fy 2005 eps
share price
options
diluted shares(1)
outstanding
impact(3)
$
26.76
132million
(2)
$
0.00
30.00
161million
7million
0.34
%
(0.00
)
40.00
219million
34million
1.63
%
(0.02
)
50.00
226million
53million
2.54
%
(0.03
)
(1)
represents the incremental impact on fully
diluted shares outstanding assuming the average share prices
indicated, using the treasury stock method. under the treasury
stock method, the assumed proceeds that would be received from
the exercise of all in-the-money options are assumed to be used
to repurchase shares.
(2)
fully diluted shares outstanding for the year
ended october1, 2005 total 2,089million and include
the dilutive impact of in-the-money options at the average share
price for the period of $26.76 and the assumed conversion of the
convertible senior notes. at the average share price of $26.76,
the dilutive impact of in-the-money options was 16million
shares for the year.
(3)
based upon fiscal 2005 income before the
cumulative effect of accounting change of $2.6billion or
$1.24 diluted earnings per share before the cumulative effect of
accounting change.
forward-looking statements
the private securities litigation reform act of
1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements made
by or on behalf of the company. we may from time to time make
written or oral statements that are forward-looking,
including statements contained in this report and other filings
with the securities and exchange commission and in reports to
our shareholders. such statements may, for example, express
expectations or projections about future actions that we may
take, including restructuring or strategic initiatives, or about
developments beyond our control including changes in domestic or
global economic conditions. these statements are made on the
basis of managements views and assumptions as of the time
the statements are made and we undertake no obligation to update
these statements. there can be no assurance, however, that our
expectations will necessarily come to pass. significant factors
affecting these expectations are set forth under
item1a risk factors of this report on
form10-k.
-62-
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
the company is exposed to the impact of interest
rate changes, foreign currency fluctuations and changes in the
market values of its investments.
policies and procedures
in the normal course of business, we employ
established policies and procedures to manage the companys
exposure to changes in interest rates, foreign currencies and
the fair market value of certain investments in debt and equity
securities using a variety of financial instruments.
our objectives in managing exposure to interest
rate changes are to limit the impact of interest rate volatility
on earnings and cash flows and to lower overall borrowing costs.
to achieve these objectives, we primarily use interest rate
swaps to manage net exposure to interest rate changes related to
the companys portfolio of borrowings. by policy, the
company maintains fixed-rate debt as a percentage of its net
debt between minimum and maximum percentages.
our objective in managing exposure to foreign
currency fluctuations is to reduce volatility of earnings and
cash flow in order to allow management to focus on core business
issues and challenges. accordingly, the company enters into
various contracts that change in value as foreign exchange rates
change to protect the u.s.dollar equivalent value of its
existing foreign currency assets, liabilities, commitments and
forecasted foreign currency revenues. the company utilizes
option strategies and forward contracts that provide for the
sale of foreign currencies to hedge probable, but not firmly
committed, transactions. the company also uses forward contracts
to hedge foreign currency assets and liabilities. the principal
foreign currencies hedged are the euro, british pound, japanese
yen and canadian dollar. cross-currency swaps are used to
effectively convert foreign currency denominated borrowings to
u.s.dollar denominated borrowings. by policy, the company
maintains hedge coverage between minimum and maximum percentages
of its forecasted foreign exchange exposures generally for
periods not to exceed five years. the gains and losses on these
contracts offset changes in the u.s.dollar equivalent
value of the related exposures.
it is the companys policy to enter into
foreign currency and interest rate derivative transactions and
other financial instruments only to the extent considered
necessary to meet its objectives as stated above. the company
does not enter into these transactions or any other hedging
transactions for speculative purposes.
value at risk (var)
the company utilizes a var model to estimate the
maximum potential one-day loss in the fair value of its interest
rate, foreign exchange and market sensitive equity financial
instruments. the var model estimates were made assuming normal
market conditions and a 95% confidence level. various modeling
techniques can be used in a var computation. the companys
computations are based on the interrelationships between
movements in various interest rates, currencies and equity
prices (a variance/co-variance technique). these
interrelationships were determined by observing interest rate,
foreign currency and equity market changes over the preceding
quarter for the calculation of var amounts at year end fiscal
2005. the model includes all of the companys debt as well
as all interest rate and foreign exchange derivative contracts
and market sensitive equity investments. forecasted
transactions, firm commitments and receivables and accounts
payable denominated in foreign currencies, which certain of
these instruments are intended to hedge, were excluded from the
model.
the var model is a risk analysis tool and does
not purport to represent actual losses in fair value that will
be incurred by the company, nor does it consider the potential
effect of favorable changes in market factors.
-63-
var on a combined basis decreased from
$31million at september30, 2004 to $21million
at october1, 2005. the majority of the decrease is due to
lower volatility and a lower market value of interest rate
sensitive instruments.
the estimated maximum potential one-day loss in
fair value, calculated using the var model, is as follows
(unaudited, in millions):
interest rate
currency
sensitive
sensitive
equity sensitive
financial
financial
financial
combined
fiscal year 2005
instruments
instruments
instruments
portfolio
year end var
$
$
$
$
average var
$
$
$
$
highest var
$
$
$
$
lowest var
$
$
$
$
beginning of year var (year end fiscal 2004)
$
$
$
$
the var for euro disney and hong kong disneyland
is immaterial as of october1, 2005. in calculating the var
it was determined that credit risks are the primary driver for
changes in the value of euro disneys debt rather than
interest rate risks. accordingly, we have excluded euro
disneys borrowings from the var calculation.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary
data
see index to financial statements and
supplemental data on page73.
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants
on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
item9a.
controls and procedures
evaluation of disclosure controls and
procedures we have
established disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that
material information relating to the company, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to the officers who
certify the companys financial reports and to other
members of senior management and the board of directors.
based on their evaluation as of october1,
2005, the principal executive officer and principal financial
officer of the company have concluded that the companys
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the securities exchange
act of 1934) are effective to ensure that the information
required to be disclosed by the company in the reports that it
files or submits under the securities exchange act of 1934 is
recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time
periods specified in sec rules and forms.
managements report on internal control
over financial reporting
our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term
is defined in exchange act rules13a-15(f). under the
supervision and with the participation of our management,
including our principal executive officer and principal
financial officer, we conducted an evaluation of the
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
based on the framework in internal control
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission. based on our
evaluation under the framework in internal
control integrated framework, our management
concluded that our internal control
-64-
over financial reporting was effective as of
october1, 2005. our managements assessment of the
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
as of october1, 2005 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included
herein.
changes in internal
controls in july 2005, the
company outsourced certain information technology functions and
support services to two suppliers. the outsourced services
primarily include management of applications, mainframes and
servers. the company retains all responsibility and authority
for systems architecture, technology strategy and product
standards. in connection with this outsourcing arrangement,
management has implemented controls and monitoring over supplier
processes that management believes are adequate to meet the
companys control objectives over processes that could have
a significant impact on the companys internal control over
financial reporting. there have been no other significant
changes in our internal control over financial reporting or in
factors affecting internal control over financial reporting
during the fiscal year ended october1, 2005, that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially
affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
item 9b.other information
none.
-65-
partiii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the
company
information regarding section16(a)
compliance, the audit committee, the companys code of
ethics and background of the directors appearing under the
captions section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance, committees, corporate
governance guidelines and code of ethics and
election of directors in the companys proxy
statement for the 2006 annual meeting of shareholders is hereby
incorporated by reference.
information regarding executive officers is
included in parti of this form10-k as permitted by
general instructiong(3).
item11.
executive compensation
information appearing under the captions
director compensation and executive
compensation (other than the report of the compensation
committee) in the 2006 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by
reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder matters
information setting forth the security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management appearing under the
caption stock ownership and information appearing
under the caption stock options in the 2006 proxy
statement is hereby incorporated by reference.
item13.
certain relationships and related
transactions
information regarding certain related
transactions appearing under the captions certain
relationships and related party transactions and
executive compensation in the 2006 proxy statement
is hereby incorporated by reference.
item14.
principal accountant fees and
services
information appearing under the captions
auditor fees and services and policy for
approval of audit and permitted non-audit services in the
2006 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by reference.
-66-
partiv
item15.
exhibits and financial statement
schedules
(a)
exhibits and financial statements and schedules
(1)financial statements and schedules
see index to financial statements and
supplemental data at page73.
(2)exhibits
the documents set forth below are filed herewith
or incorporated herein by reference to the location indicated.
exhibit
location
3(a)
amended and restated certificate of incorporation
of the company
annexc to the joint proxy statement/
prospectus included in the registration statement on
forms-4 (no. 333-88105) of the company, filed
sept.30, 1999
3(b)
bylaws of the company
exhibit3.1 to the report on form8-k
of the company dated august18, 2005
4(a)
five-year credit agreement, dated as of
february25, 2004
exhibit10(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended march31, 2004
4(b)
letter amendment dated as of february23,
2005, to five-year credit agreement dated as of
february25, 2004
exhibit10(b) to the current report on
form8-k of the company dated february25, 2005
4(c)
five-year credit agreement dated as of
february23, 2005
exhibit10(a) to the current report on
form8-k of the company dated february25, 2005
4(d)
364-day credit agreement dated as of
february25, 2004
exhibit10(b) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended march31, 2004
4(e)
indenture, dated as of nov.30, 1990,
between dei and bankers trust company, as trustee
exhibit2 to the current report on
form8-k of dei, dated jan.14, 1991
4(f)
indenture, dated as of mar.7, 1996, between
the company and citibank, n.a., as trustee
exhibit4.1(a) to the current report on
form8-k of the company, dated march7, 1996
4(g)
senior debt securities indenture, dated as of
september24, 2001, between the company and wells fargo
bank, n.a., as trustee
exhibit4.1 to the current report on
form8-k of the company, dated september24, 2001
4(h)
other long-term borrowing instruments are omitted
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of regulations-k. the
company undertakes to furnish copies of such instruments to the
commission upon request
10(a)
(i)agreement on the creation and the
operation of euro disneyland en france, dated mar.25,
1987, and (ii)letter relating thereto of the chairman of
disney enterprises, inc., dated mar.24, 1987
exhibits10(b) and 10(a), respectively, to
the current report on form8-k of dei, dated apr.4,
-67-
exhibit
location
10(b)
memorandum of agreement dated june8, 2004,
among euro disney, s.c.a. and certain of its affiliates, the
company, caisse des dpts et consignations, the
lenders (as defined therein), bnp paribas and calyon
exhibit3 to the companys report on
schedule 13d filed june29, 2004, with respect to euro
disney sca
10(c)
amendments to the june8, 2004 memorandum of
agreement
exhibit10.2 to the current report on
form8-k of the company filed october6, 2004
10(d)
composite limited recourse financing facility
agreement, dated as of apr.27, 1988, between dei and tdl
funding company, as amended
exhibit10(b) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(e)
amended and restated employment agreement, dated
june29, 2000, between the company and michael d. eisner
exhibit10(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended june30, 2000
10(f)
first amendment to amended and restated
employment agreement dated june29, 2004 between the
company and michael d. eisner
exhibit10(c) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended march31, 2004
10(g)
employment agreement, dated as of oct.2,
2005, between the company and robert a. iger
exhibit10(a) to the current report on
form8-k of the company dated october6, 2005
10(h)
employment agreement, dated september26,
2003 between the company and alan n. braverman
exhibit10(g) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2003
10(i)
employment agreement, dated september26,
2003 between the company and thomas o. staggs
exhibit10(h) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2003
10(j)
employment agreement dated as of april17,
2005 between the company and peter e. murphy
exhibit10(b) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended april2, 2005
10(k)
description of employment arrangement with
christine m. mccarthy
filed herewith
10(l)
description of employment arrangement with kevin
a. mayer
filed herewith
10(m)
description of directors compensation
incorporated by reference to report on
form8-k of the company filed july2, 2004
10(n)
directors retirement policy
exhibit10(a) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended december31, 2002
10(o)
form of indemnification agreement for certain
officers and directors
annexc to the proxy statement for the 1987
annual meeting of dei
10(p)
1995 stock option plan for non-employee directors
exhibit20 to the forms-8 registration
statement (no. 33-57811) of dei, dated feb.23, 1995
10(q)
amended and restated 1990 stock incentive plan
and rules
appendix b-2 to the joint proxy statement/
prospectus included in the forms-4 registration statement
(no. 33-64141) of dei, dated nov.13, 1995
10(r)
amended and restated 1995 stock incentive plan
and rules
exhibit4.3 to the forms-8
registration statement (no. 333-74624) of the company, dated
december6, 2001
-68-
exhibit
location
(s)
amendment to amended and restated 1995 stock
incentive plan
incorporated by reference to item1.01(a) of
report on form8-k of the company filed september23,
10(t)
(i)1987 stock incentive plan and rules and
(ii)1984 stock incentive plan and rules
exhibits1(a), 1(b), 2(a) and 2(b),
respectively, to the prospectus contained in the forms-8
registration statement (no. 33-26106) of dei, dated
dec.20, 1988
10(u)
amendment, dated june26, 2000, to the
companys stock incentive plans
exhibit10(b) to the form10-q of the
company for the period ended june30, 2000
10(v)
2002 executive performance plan
annex 1 to the proxy statement for the 2002
annual meeting of the company
10(w)
management incentive bonus program approved
september19, 2004
incorporated by reference to report on
form8-k of the company filed september23, 2004
10(x)
amended and restated 1997 non-employee directors
stock and deferred compensation plan
annexii to the proxy statement for the 2003
annual meeting of the company
10(y)
2005 incentive plan
annexii to the proxy statement for the 2005
annual meeting of the company
10(z)
key employees deferred compensation and
retirement plan
exhibit10(u) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(aa)
group personal excess liability insurance plan
exhibit10(o) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(bb)
family income assurance plan (summary description)
exhibit10(p) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 1997
10(cc)
form of restricted stock unit award agreement
(time-based vesting)
exhibit10(aa) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2004
10(dd)
form of restricted stock unit award agreement
(bonus related)
exhibit10(bb) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2004
10(ee)
form of performance-based stock unit award
exhibit10(cc) to the form10-k of the
company for the period ended september30, 2004
10(ff)
form of performance-based stock unit award
agreement (dual performance goals)
filed herewith
10(gg)
form of non-qualified stock option award
agreement (seven-year form)
exhibit10(b) to the current report on
form8-k of the company dated december23, 2004
10(hh)
settlement agreement dated july8, 2005
among shamrock holdings of california inc., roye. disney,
stanleyp. gold and the registrant
filed herewith
subsidiaries of the company
filed herewith
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
filed herewith
31(a)
rule13a-14(a) certification of chief
executive officer of the company in accordance with
section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
filed herewith
-69-
exhibit
location
31(b)
rule13a-14(a) certification of chief
financial officer of the company in accordance with
section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
filed herewith
32(a)
section1350 certification of chief
executive officer of the company in accordance with
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002*
furnished herewith
32(b)
section1350 certification of chief
financial officer of the company in accordance with
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002*
furnished herewith
*
a signed original of this written statement
required by section906 has been provided to the company
and will be retained by the company and furnished to the
securities and exchange commission or its staff upon request.
-70-
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13
or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the walt disney company
(registrant)
date: december7, 2005
by: robert a. iger
(robert a. iger,
president and chief executive officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
principal executive officer
robert a. iger
(robert a. iger)
president and chief
executive officer
december7, 2005
principal financial and accounting
officers
thomas o. staggs
(thomas o. staggs)
senior executive vice president and chief
financial officer
december7, 2005
brent a. woodford
(brent a. woodford)
senior vice president-planning and control
december7, 2005
directors
john e. bryson
(john e. bryson)
director
december7, 2005
john s. chen
(john s. chen)
director
december7, 2005
judith l. estrin
(judith l. estrin)
director
december7, 2005
robert a. iger
(robert a. iger)
director
december7, 2005
fred h. langhammer
(fred h. langhammer)
director
december7, 2005
aylwin b. lewis
(aylwin b. lewis)
director
december7, 2005
monica c. lozano
(monica c. lozano)
director
december7, 2005
-71-
signature
title
date
robert w. matschullat
(robert w. matschullat)
director
december7, 2005
george j. mitchell
(george j. mitchell)
chairman of the board and director
december7, 2005
leo j. odonovan, s.j.
(leo j. odonovan, s.j.)
director
december7, 2005
gary l. wilson
(gary l. wilson)
director
december7, 2005
-72-
the walt disney company and
subsidiaries
index to financial statements and supplemental
data
page
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
consolidated financial statements of the walt
disney company and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of income for the years
ended october1, 2005, september30, 2004 and 2003
consolidated balance sheets as of october1,
2005 and september30, 2004
consolidated statements of cash flows for the
years ended october1, 2005, september30, 2004 and
consolidated statements of shareholders
equity for the years ended october1, 2005,
september30, 2004 and 2003
notes to consolidated financial statements
quarterly financial summary (unaudited)
all schedules are omitted for the reason that
they are not applicable or the required information is included
in the financial statements or notes.
-73-
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
to the board of directors and shareholders of the
walt disney company
we have completed integrated audits of the walt
disney companys 2005 and 2004 consolidated financial
statements and of its internal control over financial reporting
as of october1, 2005 and an audit of its 2003 consolidated
financial statements in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states). our
opinions on the walt disney companys 2005, 2004 and 2003
consolidated financial statements and on its internal control
over financial reporting as of october1, 2005, based on
our audits, are presented below.
consolidated financial statements
in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated
balance sheets and the related consolidated statements of
income, shareholders equity and cash flows present fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of the walt
disney company and its subsidiaries (the company) at
october1, 2005 and september30, 2004, and the
results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the
three years in the period ended october1, 2005 in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
united states of america. these financial statements are the
responsibility of the companys management. our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements based on our audits. we conducted our audits of these
statements in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states). those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
free of material misstatement. an audit of financial statements
includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing
the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
during the year ended october1, 2005, the
company adopted sfasno.123r share-based payment
and began expensing share-based awards as of october1,
2004. the company also adopted eitf topic d-108 use of the
residual method to value acquired assets other than
goodwill, changing to the direct method of
valuing all fcc licenses. during the year ended
september30, 2004, the company adopted fasb interpretation
46r, consolidation of variable interest entities and,
accordingly, began consolidating euro disney and hong kong
disneyland as of march31, 2004. during the year ended
september30, 2003, the company adopted eitf
no.00-21, revenue arrangements with multiple
elements, changing the timing of revenue from certain
contracts. these accounting changes are discussed in note2
to the consolidated financial statements.
internal control over financial
reporting
also, in our opinion, managements
assessment, included in the accompanying managements
report on internal control over financial reporting appearing
under item9a, that the company maintained effective
internal control over financial reporting as of october1,
2005 based on criteria established in internal
control integrated framework issued by the
committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission
(coso), is fairly stated, in all material respects, based on
those criteria. furthermore, in our opinion, the company
maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control
over financial reporting as of october1, 2005, based on
criteria established in internal control
integrated framework issued by the coso. the companys
management is responsible for maintaining effective internal
control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. our
responsibility is to express opinions on managements
assessment and on the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. we
conducted our audit of internal control over financial reporting
in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about
-74-
whether effective internal control over financial
reporting was maintained in all material respects. an audit of
internal control over financial reporting includes obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting,
evaluating managements assessment, testing and evaluating
the design and operating effectiveness of internal control, and
performing such other procedures as we consider necessary in the
circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable
basis for our opinions.
a companys internal control over financial
reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a
companys internal control over financial reporting
includes those policies and procedures that (i)pertain to
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions
of the assets of the company; (ii)provide reasonable
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance
with authorizations of management and directors of the company;
and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention
or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the companys assets that could have a
material effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal
control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect
misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures
may deteriorate.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
los angeles, california
december5, 2005
-75-
consolidated statements of income
(in millions, except per share data)
revenues
$
31,944
$
30,752
$
27,061
costs and expenses
(27,837
)
(26,704
)
(24,348
)
gain on sale of businesses and restructuring and
impairment charges
(6
)
(64
)
net interest expense
(597
)
(617
)
(793
)
equity in the income of investees
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
3,987
3,739
2,254
income taxes
(1,241
)
(1,197
)
(789
)
minority interests
(177
)
(197
)
(127
)
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes
2,569
2,345
1,338
cumulative effect of accounting changes
(36
)
(71
)
net income
$
2,533
$
2,345
$
1,267
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting changes:
diluted
$
1.24
$
1.12
$
0.65
basic
$
1.27
$
1.14
$
0.65
cumulative effect of accounting changes per share
$
(0.02
)
$
$
(0.03
)
earnings per share:
diluted
$
1.22
$
1.12
$
0.62
basic
$
1.25
$
1.14
$
0.62
average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding:
diluted
2,089
2,106
2,067
basic
2,028
2,049
2,043
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-76-
consolidated balance sheets
(in millions, except per share data)
october1,
september30,
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,723
$
2,042
receivables
4,585
4,558
inventories
television costs
deferred income taxes
other current assets
total current assets
8,845
9,369
film and television costs
5,427
5,938
investments
1,226
1,292
parks, resorts and other property, at cost
attractions, buildings and equipment
27,570
25,168
accumulated depreciation
(12,605
)
(11,665
)
14,965
13,503
projects in progress
1,852
land
1,129
1,127
16,968
16,482
intangible assets, net
2,731
2,815
goodwill
16,974
16,966
other assets
1,040
$
53,158
$
53,902
liabilities and shareholders
equity
current liabilities
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
$
5,339
$
5,623
current portion of borrowings
2,310
4,093
unearned royalties and other advances
1,519
1,343
total current liabilities
9,168
11,059
borrowings
10,157
9,395
deferred income taxes
2,430
2,950
other long-term liabilities
3,945
3,619
minority interests
1,248
commitments and contingencies (note13)
shareholders equity
preferred stock, $.01par value
authorized 100million shares,
issued none
common stock, $.01par value
authorized 3.6billion shares,
issued 2.2billion shares at october1,
2005 and 2.1billion at september30, 2004
13,288
12,447
retained earnings
17,775
15,732
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(572
)
(236
)
30,491
27,943
treasury stock, at cost, 192.8million
shares at october1, 2005 and 101.6million shares at
september30, 2004
(4,281
)
(1,862
)
26,210
26,081
$
53,158
$
53,902
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-77-
consolidated statements of cash
flows
(in millions)
operating activities
net income
$
2,533
$
2,345
$
1,267
depreciation and amortization
1,339
1,210
1,077
deferred income taxes
(262
)
(98
)
equity in the income of investees
(483
)
(372
)
(334
)
cash distributions received from equity investees
restructuring and impairment charges
write-off of aircraft leveraged lease
cumulative effect of accounting changes
minority interests
net change in film and television costs
(340
)
equity based compensation
other
(167
)
(43
)
(56
)
changes in operating assets and liabilities
receivables
(157
)
(16
)
(194
)
inventories
(40
)
(6
)
other assets
(85
)
(147
)
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
(257
)
income taxes
(93
)
cash provided by operations
4,269
4,370
2,901
investing activities
investments in parks, resorts and other property
(1,823
)
(1,427
)
(1,049
)
working capital proceeds from the disney store
north america sale
acquisitions
(9
)
(48
)
(130
)
dispositions
other
(9
)
(21
)
cash used by investing activities
(1,691
)
(1,484
)
(1,034
)
financing activities
commercial paper borrowings, net
(721
)
borrowings
1,635
reduction of borrowings
(1,775
)
(2,479
)
(2,059
)
repurchases of common stock
(2,420
)
(335
)
dividends
(490
)
(430
)
(429
)
equity partner contribution
euro disney equity offering
exercise of stock options
cash used by financing activities
(2,897
)
(2,701
)
(1,523
)
(decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents
(319
)
cash and cash equivalents due to the initial
consolidation of euro disney and hong kong disneyland
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
2,042
1,583
1,239
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
1,723
$
2,042
$
1,583
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
interest paid
$
$
$
income taxes paid
$
1,572
$
1,349
$
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-78-
consolidated statements of shareholders
equity
(in millions, except per share data)
accumulated
twdc
other
stock
total
common
retained
comprehensive
compensation
shareholders
shares
stock
earnings
income (loss)
treasury stock
fund
equity
balance at september30, 2002
2,041
$
12,107
$
12,979
$
(85
)
$
(1,395
)
$
(161
)
$
23,445
exercise of stock options and issuance of
restricted stock
dividends ($0.21per share)
(429
)
(429
)
expiration of the twdc stock compensation fund
(161
)
other comprehensive loss (net of tax of
$334million)
(568
)
(568
)
net income
1,267
1,267
balance at september30, 2003
2,044
12,154
13,817
(653
)
(1,527
)
23,791
exercise of stock options and issuance of
restricted stock
common stock repurchases
(15
)
(335
)
(335
)
dividends ($0.21per share)
(430
)
(430
)
other comprehensive income (net of tax of
$245million)
net income
2,345
2,345
balance at september30, 2004
2,040
12,447
15,732
(236
)
(1,862
)
26,081
exercise of stock options and issuance of
restricted stock and stock options
common stock repurchases
(91
)
(2,420
)
(2,420
)
dividends ($0.24per share)
(490
)
(490
)
other comprehensive loss (net of tax of
$197million)
(336
)
(336
)
net income
2,533
2,533
balance at october1, 2005
1,969
$
13,288
$
17,775
$
(572
)
$
(4,281
)
$
$
26,210
accumulated other comprehensive loss is as
follows:
october,1,
september30,
market value adjustments for investments and
hedges
$
$
(61
)
foreign currency translation and other
additional minimum pension liability adjustment
(709
)
(261
)
$
(572
)
$
(236
)
comprehensive income is as follows:
net income
$
2,533
$
2,345
$
1,267
market value adjustments for investments and
hedges
(77
)
foreign currency translation and other
additional minimum pension liability adjustment,
(increase) decrease (see note8)
(448
)
(564
)
comprehensive income
$
2,197
$
2,762
$
see notes to consolidated financial
statements
-79-
notes to consolidated financial
statements
(tabular dollars in millions, except per share
amounts)
1 description of the business and
segment information
the walt disney company, together with the
subsidiaries through which the companys businesses are
conducted (the company), is a diversified worldwide
entertainment company with operations in the following business
segments: media networks, parks and resorts, studio
entertainment and consumer products.
description of the business
media networks
the company operates the abc television network
and ten owned television stations and the abc radio networks and
71 owned radio stations. both the television and radio networks
have affiliated stations providing coverage to households
throughout the united states. most of the owned television and
radio stations are affiliated with either the abc television
network or the abc radio networks. the company has
cable/satellite and international broadcast operations which are
principally involved in the production and distribution of cable
television programming, the licensing of programming to domestic
and international markets and investing in foreign television
broadcasting, production and distribution entities. primary
cable/satellite programming services, which operate through
consolidated subsidiary companies, are the espn-branded
networks, disney channel, international disney channel, soapnet,
toon disney, abc family channel and jetix channels in europe and
latin america. other programming services that operate through
joint ventures, and are accounted for under the equity method,
include a&e television networks, lifetime entertainment
services and e! entertainment television. the company also
produces original television programming for network, first-run
syndication, pay and international syndication markets along
with original animated television programming for network, pay
and international syndication markets. additionally, the company
operates abc-, espn-, and disney-branded internet web site
businesses.
parks and resorts
the company owns and operates the walt disney
world resort in florida and the disneyland resort in california.
the walt disney world resort includes four theme parks (the
magic kingdom, epcot, disney-mgm studios and disneys
animal kingdom), seventeen resort hotels, a retail, dining and
entertainment complex, a sports complex, conference centers,
campgrounds, golf courses, water parks and other recreational
facilities. in addition, disney cruise line is operated out of
port canaveral, florida. the disneyland resort includes two
theme parks (disneyland and disneys california adventure),
three resort hotels and downtown disney. the company earns
royalties on revenues generated by the tokyo disneyland resort,
which includes two theme parks and two disney-branded hotels,
near tokyo, japan, and is owned and operated by an unrelated
japanese corporation. the company manages and has a 40% equity
interest in euro disney s.c.a. (euro disney), a publicly-held
french entity that is a holding company for euro disney
associs s.c.a. (disney s.c.a.), in which the company has a
direct 18% interest. consequently, the company has a 51%
effective ownership interest in disney s.c.a., the primary
operating company of disneyland resort paris, which includes the
disneyland park, the walt disney studios park, seven themed
hotels, two convention centers, the disney village, a shopping,
dining and entertainment center and a 27-hole golf facility. the
company also manages and has a 43% equity interest in hong kong
disneyland, which opened september 2005. during fiscal 2004, the
company began consolidating the results of euro disney and hong
kong disneyland (see notes2 and 4). the companys
walt disney imagineering unit designs and develops new theme
park concepts and attractions, as well as resort properties. the
company also manages and markets vacation ownership interests
through the disney
-80-
vacation club. included in parks and resorts is
the espn zone which operates sports-themed dining and
entertainment facilities.
studio entertainment
the company produces and acquires live-action and
animated motion pictures for worldwide distribution to the
theatrical, home entertainment and television markets. the
company distributes these products through its own distribution
and marketing companies in the united states and most foreign
markets primarily under the walt disney pictures, touchstone
pictures, miramax and dimension (for titles released prior to
september30, 2005) banners. the company also produces
stage plays and musical recordings.
consumer products
the company licenses the name walt
disney, as well as the companys characters and
visual and literary properties, to various manufacturers,
retailers, show promoters and publishers throughout the world.
the company also engages in retail distribution, principally
through the disney store. the company publishes books and
magazines for children and families, computer software products
for the entertainment market, as well as film, video and
computer software products for the educational marketplace. the
companys direct marketing business operates the disney
catalog, which markets disney-themed merchandise through the
direct mail channel. catalog offerings include merchandise
developed exclusively for the disney catalog and
disneydirect.com, which is an internet shopping site, as well as
other internal disney businesses and disney licensees.
segment information
the operating segments reported below are the
segments of the company for which separate financial information
is available and for which operating results are evaluated
regularly by the chief executive officer in deciding how to
allocate resources and in assessing performance.
segment operating results evaluated include
earnings before corporate and unallocated shared expenses,
amortization of intangible assets, gain on sale of businesses,
restructuring and impairment charges, net interest expense,
equity in the income of investees, income taxes, minority
interests and the cumulative effect of accounting changes.
corporate and unallocated shared expenses principally consist of
corporate functions, executive management and certain
unallocated administrative support functions.
the following segment results include allocations
of certain costs, including certain information technology,
pension, legal and other shared services costs, which are
allocated based on various metrics designed to correlate with
consumption. in addition, while all significant intersegment
transactions have been eliminated, studio entertainment revenues
and operating income include an allocation of consumer products
revenues, which is meant to reflect royalties on consumer
products sales of merchandise based on certain studio film
properties. these allocations are agreed-upon
-81-
amounts between the businesses and may differ
from amounts that would be negotiated in an arms-length
transaction.
revenues
media networks
$
13,207
$
11,778
$
10,941
parks and resorts
9,023
7,750
6,412
studio entertainment
third parties
7,499
8,637
7,312
intersegment
7,587
8,713
7,364
consumer products
third parties
2,215
2,587
2,396
intersegment
(88
)
(76
)
(52
)
2,127
2,511
2,344
total consolidated revenues
$
31,944
$
30,752
$
27,061
segment operating income
media networks
$
2,749
$
2,169
$
1,213
parks and resorts
1,178
1,123
studio entertainment
consumer products
total segment operating income
$
4,654
$
4,488
$
3,174
reconciliation of segment operating income to
income
before income taxes, minority interests and the
cumulative effect of accounting changes
segment operating income
$
4,654
$
4,488
$
3,174
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
(536
)
(428
)
(443
)
amortization of intangible assets
(11
)
(12
)
(18
)
gain on sale of businesses and restructuring and
impairment charges
(6
)
(64
)
net interest expense
(597
)
(617
)
(793
)
equity in the income of investees
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
$
3,987
$
3,739
$
2,254
capital expenditures
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
domestic
international(1)
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate
total consolidated capital expenditures
$
1,823
$
1,427
$
1,049
-82-
depreciation expense
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
domestic
international(1)
studio entertainment
consumer products
corporate
total consolidated depreciation expense
$
1,328
$
1,198
$
1,059
identifiable assets
media networks(2)(3)
$
26,926
$
26,193
parks and resorts
15,807
15,221
studio entertainment
5,965
6,954
consumer products
1,037
corporate(4)
3,583
4,497
total consolidated assets
$
53,158
$
53,902
supplemental revenue data
media networks
advertising
$
7,721
$
6,611
$
6,319
affiliate fees
5,098
4,408
3,682
parks and resorts
merchandise, food and beverage
2,879
2,429
1,987
admissions
2,771
2,547
1,887
revenues
united states and canada
$
24,806
$
24,012
$
22,124
europe
5,207
4,721
3,171
asia pacific
1,451
1,547
1,331
latin america and other
$
31,944
$
30,752
$
27,061
segment operating income
united states and canada
$
3,512
$
2,934
$
2,113
europe
asia pacific
latin america and other
(48
)
$
4,654
$
4,488
$
3,174
identifiable assets
united states and canada
$
45,809
$
46,788
europe
5,120
5,370
asia pacific
2,110
1,622
latin america and other
$
53,158
$
53,902
(1)
represents 100% of euro disney and hong kong
disneylands capital expenditures and depreciation expense
for all periods beginning april1, 2004. for fiscal 2005,
hong kong disneylands
-83-
capital expenditures totaled $591million
compared to the prior year amount of $251million, which
included only six months of activity. our equity partner
contributed $147million in fiscal 2005 and
$66million in the second half of fiscal 2004, which are
included as sources of cash in financing activities.
(2)
identifiable assets include amounts associated
with equity method investments, including notes and other
receivables of $1,039 and $951 in 2005 and 2004, respectively.
(3)
includes goodwill and other intangible assets
totaling $19,284 and $19,341 in 2005 and 2004, respectively.
(4)
primarily deferred tax assets, investments, fixed
and other assets.
2summary of significant accounting
policies
principles of consolidation
the consolidated financial statements of the
company include the accounts of the walt disney company and its
subsidiaries after elimination of intercompany accounts and
transactions. in december 1999, dvd financing, inc. (dfi), a
subsidiary of disney vacation development, inc. and an indirect
subsidiary of the company, completed a receivable sale
transaction which established a facility that permits dfi to
sell receivables arising from the sale of vacation club
memberships on a periodic basis. in connection with this
facility, dfi prepares separate financial statements, although
its separate assets and liabilities are also consolidated in
these financial statements.
accounting changes
sfas123r
in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, the company
adopted statement of financial accounting standards
no.123r, share-based payment (sfas123r),
which revises sfas123, accounting for stock-based
compensation and supersedes accounting principles board
opinion no.25, accounting for stock issued to employees
(apb25). sfas123r requires that new, modified
and unvested share-based payment transactions with employees,
such as stock options and restricted stock, be recognized in the
financial statements based on their fair value and recognized as
compensation expense over the vesting period. the company
adopted sfas123r effective october1, 2004, using the
modified retrospective method. this method allows the
restatement of interim financial statements in the year of
adoption based on the amounts previously calculated and reported
in the pro forma footnote disclosures required by sfas123.
however, fiscal years prior to 2005 have not been restated. the
adoption of sfas123r in fiscal 2005 resulted in the
recognition of stock option expense of $253million and
$53million of net capitalized compensation costs, a
reduction in net income of $160million (net of tax
benefits of $93million), a reduction in basic and diluted
earnings per share of $0.08, a reduction of $24million in
cash flows from operating activities and an increase of
$24million in cash flows from financing activities.
-84-
the following table shows the fiscal 2005
quarterly after-tax effect of the adoption of the new accounting
standard.
unaudited
three months
three months
three months
three months
ended
ended
ended
ended
year ended
jan.1, 2005
april2, 2005
july2, 2005
oct.1, 2005
oct.1, 2005
income
eps
income
eps
income
eps
income
eps(2)
income
eps(3)
results prior to sfas123r
adoption(1)
$
$
0.35
$
$
0.33
$
$
0.41
$
$
0.23
$
2,729
$
1.32
impact of accounting change
(37
)
(0.02
)
(41
)
(0.02
)
(40
)
(0.02
)
(42
)
(0.02
)
(160
)
(0.08
)
results subsequent to sfas123r
adoption(1)
$
$
0.33
$
$
0.31
$
$
0.39
$
$
0.20
$
2,569
$
1.24
(1)
amounts represent income before the cumulative
effect of accounting change related to eitf d-108 discussed
below.
(2)
eps does not equal the sum of the column due to
rounding.
(3)
eps for the year does not equal the sum of the
quarters due to rounding.
prior to fiscal 2005, employee stock options were
accounted for under the intrinsic value method in accordance
with apb25 and its related interpretations and were
generally granted at market value. accordingly, compensation
expense for stock option awards was generally not recognized in
the consolidated statements of income. the following table
reflects pro forma net income and earnings per share for the
years ended september30, 2004 and 2003, had the company
elected to adopt the fair value approach of sfas123, as
reported in the footnotes to the companys financial
statements for those years. the pro forma amounts may not be
representative of future disclosures since the estimated fair
value of stock options is amortized to expense over the vesting
period, and additional options may be granted or options may be
cancelled in future years.
net income
as reported
$
2,345
$
1,267
less stock option expense, net of
tax(1)
(255
)
(294
)
pro forma after option expense
$
2,090
$
diluted earnings per share
as reported
$
1.12
$
0.62
pro forma after option expense
1.00
0.48
basic earnings per share
as reported
$
1.14
$
0.62
pro forma after option expense
1.02
0.48
(1)
does not include restricted stock unit
(rsu)expense which is reported in net income. see
note10.
-85-
the impact of stock options and rsus for fiscal
2005, and on a pro forma basis for fiscal 2004 and 2003, as if
the company had been expensing stock options as disclosed in our
footnotes pursuant to sfas123, on income and earnings per
share was as follows:
pro forma
as reported
stock option compensation expense
$
$
$
rsu compensation expense
total equity based compensation expense
$
$
$
reduction in net income, net of tax
$
$
$
reduction in diluted earnings per share
$
0.11
$
0.14
$
0.15
eitf d-108
in september 2004, the emerging issues task force
(eitf) issued topic no.d-108 use of the residual method
to value acquired assets other than goodwill
(eitfd-108). eitf d-108 requires that a direct value
method be used to value intangible assets acquired in business
combinations completed after september29, 2004.
eitfd-108 also requires the company to perform an
impairment test using a direct value method on all intangible
assets that were previously valued using the residual method.
any impairments arising from the initial application of a direct
value method are reported as a cumulative effect of accounting
change. for radio station acquisitions subsequent to the
acquisition of capital cities/abc, inc. in 1996, the company
applied the residual value method to value the acquired fcc
licenses. we adopted eitf d-108 for the fiscal year ended
october1, 2005 and recorded a non-cash, $57million
pre-tax charge ($36million after-tax) as a cumulative
effect of accounting change.
sfas152 and sop04-2
in december 2004, the financial accounting
standards board (fasb)issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.152, accounting for real estate
time-sharing transactions (sfas152). the fasb issued
this statement as a result of guidance provided in american
institute of certified public accountants statement of
position04-2, accounting for real estate time-sharing
transactions (sop04-2), which applies to all real
estate time-sharing transactions. sfas152 is effective for
fiscal years beginning after june15, 2005. we expect that
the impact of adoption will not be material to our financial
statements.
fin46r
in january 2003, the fasb issued interpretation
no.46r, consolidation of variable interest entities
(fin46r). variable interest entities (vies) are
generally entities that lack sufficient equity to finance their
activities without additional financial support from other
parties or whose equity holders lack adequate decision making
ability. all vies with which the company is involved must be
evaluated to determine the primary beneficiary of the risks and
rewards of the vie. the primary beneficiary is required to
consolidate the vie for financial reporting purposes.
in connection with the adoption of fin46r,
the company concluded that euro disney and hong kong disneyland
are vies and that we are the primary beneficiary. as a result,
the company began consolidating euro disney and hong kong
disneylands balance sheets on march31, 2004, the end
of the companys second quarter of fiscal 2004, and the
income and cash flow statements beginning april1, 2004,
the beginning of the third quarter of fiscal 2004. under
fin46r transition rules, the operating results of euro
disney and hong kong disneyland continued to be accounted for on
the equity method for the six months ended march31, 2004
(see note4).
-86-
we have concluded that the rest of our equity
investments do not require consolidation as either they are not
vies, or in the event that they are vies, we are not the primary
beneficiary. the company also has variable interests in certain
other vies that have not been consolidated because the company
is not the primary beneficiary. these vies do not involve any
material exposure to the company.
eitf00-21
the company adopted eitf no.00-21,
revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables
(eitf00-21), effective at the beginning of fiscal
2003. eitf00-21 addresses revenue recognition for revenues
derived from a single contractual arrangement that contains
multiple products or services. the rule provides additional
requirements to determine when such revenues may be recorded
separately for accounting purposes. previously, the company had
recognized the nfl broadcast portion of espns affiliate
revenue when the nfl games were aired, as espns affiliate
contracts provided a basis for allocating such revenue between
nfl and non-nfl programming. since the cost of the nfl rights
had also been recognized as the games were aired, the company
recognized both the nfl revenues and nfl costs in the quarters
the games were aired.
under eitf00-21s requirements for
separating the revenue elements of a single contract, beginning
in fiscal 2003 the company no longer allocates espns
affiliate revenue between nfl and non-nfl programming for
accounting purposes. as a consequence, the company no longer
matches all nfl revenue with nfl costs, as espn affiliate
revenue (including the nfl portion) is generally recognized
ratably throughout the year, while nfl contract costs continue
to be recognized in the quarters the games are aired. this
accounting change impacts only the timing of revenue recognition
and has no impact on cash flow. as a result of this change, the
media networks segment reports significantly reduced revenue and
profitability in the first fiscal quarter when the majority of
the nfl games are aired, with commensurately increased revenues
and profits in the second and third fiscal quarters.
the company elected to adopt this new accounting
rule using the cumulative effect approach and recorded an
after-tax charge of $71million for the cumulative effect
of a change in accounting as of the beginning of fiscal year
2003. this amount represented the revenue recorded for nfl games
in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2002, which has been
recorded ratably over fiscal 2003 under the new accounting
method.
reporting period
effective with the beginning of fiscal 2005 and
in connection with the completion of the companys
implementation of new company-wide accounting systems in late
fiscal 2004, the company changed its reporting period from a
calendar period end to a period end that coincides with the
cut-off of the companys accounting systems. the accounting
systems cut off on the saturday closest to the calendar quarter
end. accordingly, fiscal 2005 began on october1, 2004 and
ended on october1, 2005. this resulted in the same number
of reporting days in each year, since fiscal 2004 included the
additional day associated with the leap year. the change did not
have a material impact on year-over-year earnings comparisons.
fiscal 2009 will be the first fifty-three week fiscal year
following this change.
reclassification
certain reclassifications have been made in the
fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003 financial statements to conform to
the fiscal 2005 presentation.
use of estimates
the preparation of financial statements in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and
footnotes thereto. actual results may differ from those
estimates.
-87-
revenue recognition
broadcast advertising revenues are recognized
when commercials are aired. revenues from television
subscription services related to the companys primary
cable programming services are recognized as services are
provided. certain of the companys contracts with cable
service providers include annual programming commitments. in
these cases, revenue subject to the commitment, which is
generally collected ratably over the year, is deferred until the
annual commitments are satisfied which generally results in
higher revenue recognition in the second half of the year.
revenues from advance theme park ticket sales are
recognized when the tickets are used. for non-expiring,
multi-day tickets and tickets sold through bulk distribution
channels, we recognize revenue based on estimated usage patterns
which are derived from historical usage patterns. revenues from
corporate sponsors at the theme parks are generally recognized
over the period of the applicable agreements commencing with the
opening of the related attraction.
revenues from the theatrical distribution of
motion pictures are recognized when motion pictures are
exhibited. revenues from video sales, net of anticipated
returns, are recognized on the date that video units are made
available for sale by retailers. revenues from the licensing of
feature films and television programming are recorded when the
material is available for telecasting by the licensee and when
certain other conditions are met.
merchandise licensing advance and guarantee
royalty payments are recognized when the underlying royalties
are earned.
advertising expense
advertising costs are expensed as incurred.
advertising expense incurred for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003
totaled $2.9billion, $3.0billion and
$2.5billion, respectively.
cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on hand
and marketable securities with original maturities of three
months or less.
investments
debt securities that the company has the positive
intent and ability to hold to maturity are classified as
held-to-maturity and reported at amortized cost.
debt securities not classified as held-to-maturity and
marketable equity securities are classified as either
trading or available-for-sale, and are
recorded at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included
in earnings or shareholders equity, respectively. all
other equity securities are accounted for using either the cost
method or the equity method.
the company regularly reviews its investments to
determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost basis
is other than temporary. if the decline in fair value is judged
to be other than temporary, the cost basis of the security is
written down to fair value and the amount of the write-down is
included in the consolidated statements of income.
translation policy
the u.s.dollar is the functional currency
for the majority of our international operations. the local
currency is the functional currency for euro disney, hong kong
disneyland and international locations of the disney stores.
for u.s.dollar functional currency
locations, foreign currency assets and liabilities are
remeasured into u.s.dollars at end-of-period exchange
rates, except for nonmonetary balance sheet accounts, which are
remeasured at historical exchange rates. revenue and expenses
are remeasured at average exchange rates in effect during each
period, except for those expenses related to the
-88-
previously noted balance sheet amounts, which are
remeasured at historical exchange rates. gains or losses from
foreign currency remeasurement are included in net earnings.
for the local currency functional locations,
assets and liabilities are translated at end-of-period rates
while revenues and expenses are translated at average rates in
effect during the period. equity is translated at historical
rates and the resulting cumulative translation adjustments are
included as a component of accumulated other comprehensive
income (aoci).
inventories
carrying amounts of merchandise, materials and
supplies inventories are generally determined on a moving
average cost basis and are stated at the lower of cost or market.
film and television costs
film and television costs include capitalizable
direct negative costs, production overhead, interest,
development costs and acquired production costs and are stated
at the lower of cost, less accumulated amortization, or fair
value. acquired programming costs for the companys
television and cable/satellite networks are stated at the lower
of cost, less accumulated amortization, or net realizable value.
acquired television broadcast program licenses and rights are
recorded when the license period begins and the program is
available for use. marketing, distribution, and general and
administrative costs are expensed as incurred.
film and television production and participation
costs are expensed based on the ratio of the current
periods gross revenues to estimated remaining total gross
revenues from all sources on an individual production basis.
television network series costs and multi-year sports rights are
charged to expense based on the ratio of the current
periods gross revenues to estimated remaining total gross
revenues from such programs or on a straight-line basis, as
appropriate. estimated remaining gross revenue for film
productions includes revenue that will be earned within ten
years of the date of the initial theatrical release. for
television network series, we include revenues that will be
earned within ten years of the delivery of the first episode, or
if still in production, five years from the date of delivery of
the most recent episode, if later. for acquired film libraries,
remaining revenues include amounts to be earned for up to twenty
years from the date of acquisition. television network and
station rights for theatrical movies and other long-form
programming are charged to expense primarily on an accelerated
basis related to the projected usage of the programs.
development costs for projects that have been determined will
not go into production or have not been set for production
within three years are written off.
estimates of total gross revenues can change
significantly due to a variety of factors, including advertising
rates and the level of market acceptance of the production.
accordingly, revenue estimates are reviewed periodically and
amortization is adjusted, if necessary. such adjustments could
have a material effect on results of operations in future
periods. the net realizable value of network television
broadcast program licenses and rights is reviewed using a
daypart methodology. a daypart is defined as an aggregation of
programs broadcast during a particular time of day or programs
of a similar type. the companys dayparts are early
morning, daytime, late night, primetime, news, children and
sports (includes network and cable). the net realizable values
of other cable programming are reviewed on an aggregated basis
for each cable channel.
capitalized software costs
the company expenses costs incurred in the
preliminary project stage of developing or acquiring internal
use software, such as research and feasibility studies, as well
as costs incurred in the post-implementation/operational stage,
such as maintenance and training. capitalization of software
development costs occurs only after the preliminary project
stage is complete, management authorizes the project, and it is
probable that the project will be completed and the software
will be used for the function intended. as of october1,
2005 and september30, 2004, capitalized software costs
-89-
totaled $483million and $433million,
respectively. the capitalized costs are amortized on a
straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the
software, which ranges from 3-10years.
parks, resorts and other property
parks, resorts and other property are carried at
historical cost. depreciation is computed on the straight-line
method over estimated useful lives as follows:
attractions
2540years
buildings and improvements
40years
leasehold improvements
life of lease or asset life if less
land improvements
2040years
furniture, fixtures and equipment
325years
goodwill and other intangible assets
the company performs an annual impairment test at
fiscal year end for goodwill and other indefinite-lived
intangible assets, which include fcc licenses and trademarks. as
required by statement of financial accounting standards
no.142, goodwill and other intangible assets
(sfas142), goodwill is allocated to various reporting
units, which are either the operating segment or one reporting
level below the operating segment. for purposes of performing
the impairment test for goodwill as required by sfas142,
we established the following reporting units: cable networks,
television broadcasting, radio, studio entertainment, consumer
products and parks and resorts.
sfas142 requires the company to compare the
fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount on an
annual basis to determine if there is potential goodwill
impairment. if the fair value of the reporting unit is less than
its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent
that the fair value of the goodwill within the reporting unit is
less than the carrying value of its goodwill.
sfas142 requires the company to compare the
fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset to its
carrying amount. if the carrying amount of an indefinite-lived
intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is
recognized. fair values for goodwill and other indefinite-lived
intangible assets are determined based on discounted cash flows,
market multiples or appraised values as appropriate.
to determine the fair value of our reporting
units, we generally use a present value technique (discounted
cash flow) corroborated by market multiples when available and
as appropriate, except for the television network, a business
within the television broadcasting reporting unit. the
television broadcasting reporting unit includes the television
network and the owned and operated television stations. these
businesses have been grouped together because their respective
cash flows are dependent on one another. for purposes of our
impairment test, we used a revenue multiple to value the
television network. we did not use a present value technique or
a market multiple approach to value the television network as a
present value technique would not capture the full fair value of
the television network and there is little comparable market
data available due to the scarcity of television networks. we
applied what we believe to be the most appropriate valuation
methodology for each of the reporting units. if we had
established different reporting units or utilized different
valuation methodologies, the impairment test results could
differ.
amortizable intangible assets, principally
copyrights, are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods
ranging from 1031years.
risk management contracts
in the normal course of business, the company
employs a variety of financial instruments to manage its
exposure to fluctuations in interest rates, foreign currency
exchange rates and investments in equity and debt securities,
including interest rate and cross-currency swap agreements;
forward, option and swaption contracts and interest
rate caps.
-90-
the company formally documents all relationships
between hedging instruments and hedged items, as well as its
risk management objectives and strategies for undertaking
various hedge transactions. there are two types of derivatives
into which the company enters: hedges of fair value exposure and
hedges of cash flow exposure. hedges of fair value exposure are
entered into in order to hedge the fair value of a recognized
asset, liability, or a firm commitment. hedges of cash flow
exposure are entered into in order to hedge a forecasted
transaction (e.g. forecasted revenue) or the variability of cash
flows to be paid or received, related to a recognized liability
or asset (e.g. floating rate debt).
the company designates and assigns the financial
instruments as hedges of forecasted transactions, specific
assets, or specific liabilities. when hedged assets or
liabilities are sold or extinguished or the forecasted
transactions being hedged are no longer expected to occur, the
company recognizes the gain or loss on the designated hedging
financial instruments.
option premiums and unrealized losses on forward
contracts and the accrued differential for interest rate and
cross-currency swaps to be received under the agreements are
recorded on the balance sheet as other assets. unrealized gains
on forward contracts and the accrued differential for interest
rate and cross-currency swaps to be paid under the agreements
are included in liabilities. realized gains and losses from
hedges are classified in the income statement consistent with
the accounting treatment of the items being hedged. the company
accrues the differential for interest rate and cross-currency
swaps to be paid or received under the agreements as interest
rates and exchange rates change as adjustments to interest
expense over the lives of the swaps. gains and losses on the
termination of effective swap agreements, prior to their
original maturity, are deferred and amortized to interest
expense over the remaining term of the underlying hedged
transactions.
from time to time, the company may enter into
risk management contracts that are not designated as hedges and
do not qualify for hedge accounting. these contracts are
intended to offset certain economic exposures of the company and
are carried at market value with any changes in value recorded
in earnings. cash flows from hedges are classified in the
consolidated statements of cash flows under the same category as
the cash flows from the related assets, liabilities or
forecasted transactions (see notes6 and 12).
earnings per share
the company presents both basic and diluted
earnings per share (eps)amounts. basic eps is calculated
by dividing net income by the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding during the year. diluted eps is based upon
the weighted average number of common and common equivalent
shares outstanding during the year which is calculated using the
treasury stock method for stock options and assumes conversion
of the companys convertible senior notes (see
note6). common equivalent shares are excluded from the
computation in periods in which they have an anti-dilutive
effect. stock options for which the exercise price exceeds the
average market price over the period are anti-dilutive and,
accordingly, are excluded from the calculation.
-91-
a reconciliation of net income and the weighted
average number of common and common equivalent shares
outstanding for calculating diluted earnings per share is as
follows:
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
changes
$
2,569
$
2,345
$
1,338
interest expense on convertible senior notes (net
of tax)
$
2,590
$
2,366
$
1,348
weighted average number of common shares
outstanding (basic)
2,028
2,049
2,043
weighted average dilutive stock options and
restricted stock
weighted average assumed conversion of
convertible senior notes
weighted average number of common and common
equivalent shares outstanding (diluted)
2,089
2,106
2,067
for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, options for
96million, 124million and 184million shares,
respectively, were excluded from the diluted eps calculation for
common stock because they were anti-dilutive.
significant acquisitions and dispositions and restructuring and
impairment charges
on june20, 2005, the company sold the
mighty ducks of anaheim, which resulted in a pre-tax gain of
$26million that was reported in gain on sale of businesses
and restructuring and impairment charges in the consolidated
statements of income.
effective november21, 2004, the company
sold substantially all of the disney store chain in north
america under a long-term licensing arrangement to a
wholly-owned subsidiary of the childrens place (tcp). the
company received $100million for the working capital
transferred to the buyer at the closing of the transaction.
during fiscal 2005, the company recorded a loss on the working
capital that was transferred to the buyer and additional
restructuring and impairment charges related to the sale
(primarily for employee retention and severance and lease
termination costs) totaling $32million. pursuant to the
terms of sale, the disney store north america retained its lease
obligations related to the stores transferred to the buyer and
became a wholly owned subsidiary of tcp. tcp is required to pay
the company a royalty on substantially all of the physical
retail store sales beginning on the second anniversary of the
closing date of the sale.
during the years ended september30, 2004
and 2003, the company recorded $64million and
$16million, respectively, of restructuring and impairment
charges related to the disney store. the bulk of these charges
were impairments of the carrying value of fixed assets related
to the stores to be sold.
on february17, 2004, the company acquired
the film library and intellectual property rights for the
muppets and bear in the big blue house for
$68million. substantially all of the purchase price was
allocated to definite-lived identifiable intangible assets.
in fiscal 2003, the company sold the anaheim
angels baseball team, which resulted in a pre-tax gain of
$16million. this gain is reported in gain on sale of
businesses and restructuring and impairment charges in the
consolidated statements of income.
-92-
4investments
investments consist of the following:
october1,
september30,
investments, at equity(1)
$
1,062
$
investments, at cost(2)
investment in aircraft leveraged leases
$
1,226
$
1,292
(1)
equity investments consist of investments in
affiliated companies over which the company has significant
influence but not the majority of the equity or risks and
rewards.
(2)
cost investments consist of marketable securities
classified as available-for-sale and investments in companies
over which the company does not have significant influence nor
ownership of more than 20%.
euro disney and hong kong disneyland
the company manages and has a 40% equity interest
in euro disney, a publicly held french entity that is a holding
company for disney s.c.a., in which the company has a direct 18%
interest. consequently, the company has a 51% effective
ownership interest in disney s.c.a., the primary operating
company of disneyland resort paris. additionally, the company
has a 43% interest in hongkong international theme parks
limited, which operates hong kong disneyland. pursuant to
fin46r (see note2), the company began consolidating
the balance sheets of euro disney and hong kong disneyland as of
march31, 2004, and the income and cash flow statements
beginning april1, 2004.
-93-
the following table presents a condensed
consolidating balance sheet for the company as of
october1, 2005, reflecting the impact of consolidating the
balance sheets of euro disney and hong kong disneyland.
before euro disney
and hong kong
euro disney, hong
disneyland
kong disneyland
consolidation
and adjustments
total
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,188
$
$
1,723
other current assets
6,820
7,122
total current assets
8,008
8,845
investments
2,080
(854
)
1,226
fixed assets
12,533
4,435
16,968
intangible assets
2,731
2,731
goodwill
16,974
16,974
other assets
6,407
6,414
total assets
$
48,733
$
4,425
$
53,158
current portion of borrowings
$
2,309
$
$
2,310
other current liabilities
6,184
6,858
total current liabilities
8,493
9,168
borrowings
7,205
2,952
10,157
deferred income taxes
2,438
(8
)
2,430
other long term liabilities
3,832
3,945
minority interests
1,248
shareholders equity
26,210
26,210
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
48,733
$
4,425
$
53,158
-94-
the following table presents a condensed
consolidating income statement of the company for the year ended
october1, 2005, reflecting the impact of consolidating the
income statements of euro disney and hong kong disneyland.
before euro disney
and hong kong
euro disney, hong
disneyland
kong disneyland
consolidation(1)
and adjustments
total
revenues
$
30,557
$
1,387
$
31,944
cost and expenses
(26,349
)
(1,488
)
(27,837
)
gain on sale of businesses and restructuring and
impairment charges
(6
)
(6
)
net interest expense
(587
)
(10
)
(597
)
equity in the income of investees
income before income taxes and minority interests
4,056
(69
)
3,987
income taxes
(1,249
)
(1,241
)
minority interests
(238
)
(177
)
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
change
2,569
2,569
cumulative effect of accounting change
(36
)
(36
)
net income
$
2,533
$
$
2,533
(1)
these amounts include euro disney and hong kong
disneyland under the equity method of accounting. as such, any
royalty and management fee income from these operations is
included in revenues and our share of their net income is
included in equity in the income of investees.
the following table presents a condensed
consolidating cash flow statement of the company for the year
ended october1, 2005, reflecting the impact of
consolidating the cash flow statements of euro disney and hong
kong disneyland.
before euro disney
and hong kong
euro disney, hong
disneyland
kong disneyland
consolidation
and adjustments
total
cash provided by operations
$
4,152
$
$
4,269
investments in parks, resorts and other property
(1,112
)
(711
)
(1,823
)
other investing activities
(38
)
cash provided (used)by financing activities
(3,544
)
(2,897
)
(decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents
(542
)
(319
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
1,730
2,042
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
1,188
$
$
1,723
euro disney financial restructuring
effective october1, 2004, euro disney, the
company and euro disneys lenders finalized a memorandum of
agreement (moa)relating to the financial restructuring of
euro disney. the moa provides for new financing as well as the
restructuring of euro disneys existing financing. the
-95-
transactions contemplated by the moa were fully
implemented on february23, 2005 with the completion of a
253million
equity rights offering. the key provisions of the moa are as
follows:
royalties and management fees
royalties and management fees totaling
58million
for fiscal 2004 were paid to the company following completion of
the rights offering discussed below
royalties and management fees for fiscal 2005
through fiscal 2009, totaling
25million
per year, payable to the company are to be converted into
subordinated long-term borrowings
royalties and management fees for fiscal 2007
through fiscal 2014, of up to
25million
per year, payable to the company will be converted into
subordinated long-term borrowings if operating results do not
achieve specified levels
debt covenants
certain covenant violations for fiscal 2003 and
fiscal 2004 were waived
euro disney received authorization for up to
240million
of capital expenditures for fiscal 2005 through fiscal 2009 for
new attractions. approximately
39million
has been incurred through the end of fiscal 2005
existing borrowings
approximately
110million
of amounts outstanding on the existing line of credit from the
company and
60million
of deferred interest payable to caisse des dpts et
consignations (cdc), a french state financial institution, were
converted into long-term subordinated borrowings
the interest rate on approximately
450million
of euro disneys senior borrowings was increased by
approximately 2%
approximately
300million
of principal payments on senior borrowings were deferred for
three and one half years
principal payments on certain cdc borrowings were
deferred for three and one half years
euro disneys security deposit requirement
was eliminated and the existing deposit balance totaling
100million
was paid to senior lenders as a principal payment
interest payments for fiscal 2005 through fiscal
2012, up to
20million
per year, payable to the cdc will be converted to long-term
subordinated borrowings if operating results do not achieve
specified levels. there were no interest payments converted to
long-term subordinated borrowings in fiscal 2005
interest payments for fiscal 2013 through fiscal
2014, up to
23million
per year, payable to the cdc will be converted to long-term
subordinated borrowings if operating results do not achieve
specified levels
new financing
253million
equity rights offering, of which the companys share was
100million
new ten-year
150million
line of credit from the company for liquidity needs, which
reduces to
100million
after five years. there were no borrowings under the new line of
credit as of october1, 2005
any subordinated long-term borrowings due to the
company and cdc cannot be paid until all senior borrowings have
been paid.
-96-
the moa additionally provided for the
contribution by euro disney of substantially all of its assets
and liabilities (including most of the proceeds of the equity
rights offerings referred to above) into disney sca, which
became an 82% owned subsidiary of euro disney. other
wholly-owned subsidiaries of the company retained the remaining
18% ownership interest. this enabled euro disney to avoid having
to make
292million
of payments to disney sca that would have been due if euro
disney exercised the options under certain leases from disney
sca. in connection with the restructuring, the company increased
its overall effective ownership interest in disneyland resort
paris operations from 41% to 51%. pursuant to the moa, the
company must maintain at least a direct 39% ownership investment
in euro disney through december31, 2016.
the moa resulted in the elimination of certain
sublease arrangements between the companys then
wholly-owned subsidiary, disney sca and euro disney. these
subleases arose in connection with a financial restructuring of
euro disney in 1994 whereby disney sca (which was then in the
form of a snc) entered into a lease agreement with a financing
company with a non-cancelable term of 12years related to
substantially all of the disneyland park assets, and then
entered into a 12-year sublease agreement with euro disney on
substantially the same payment terms. these lease transactions
were eliminated for financial reporting purposes upon
consolidation of euro disney by the company as a result of the
implementation of fin46r.
as discussed above, the moa provided for a 2%
interest rate increase for certain tranches of euro
disneys debt, which resulted in a substantial modification
of a portion of this debt. relevant accounting rules required
that the substantially modified portion be accounted for as
though it had been extinguished and replaced with new borrowings
recorded at fair value, which resulted in a $61million
gain recorded in net interest expense in the
consolidated statement of income during the year ended
october1, 2005.
certain indirect, wholly owned subsidiaries of
the walt disney company have liability as current or former
general partners of the operating subsidiary of euro disney to
which substantially all of euro disneys assets and
liabilities were transferred in the restructuring. in addition
to their interest in this operating subsidiary of euro disney,
certain of these subsidiaries of the company have been
capitalized with interest-bearing demand notes with an aggregate
face value of
200million.
see note6 for the terms of euro
disneys borrowings.
euro disney had revenues and net loss of
$575million and $122million, respectively, for the
six months ended march31, 2004 while the company still
accounted for its investment on the equity method. euro disney
had revenues and net loss of $1,077million and
$56million, respectively, for the year ended
september30, 2003.
other equity investments
in addition to the companys investments in
euro disney and hong kong disneyland, the company has other
equity investments, primarily comprised of cable investments
such as a&etelevision networks (37.5% owned), lifetime
entertainment services (50.0% owned) and e! entertainment
television (39.6% owned).
-97-
a summary of combined financial information for
the other equity investments is as follows:
results of operations:
revenues
$
4,317
$
3,893
$
3,453
net income
$
1,275
$
1,017
$
october1,
september30,
balance sheet:
current assets
$
2,323
$
2,025
non-current assets
1,399
1,167
$
3,722
$
3,192
current liabilities
$
$
non-current liabilities
shareholders equity
1,878
1,563
$
3,722
$
3,192
cost investments
as of october1, 2005 and september30,
2004, the company held $62million and $60million,
respectively, of securities classified as available-for-sale. as
of october1, 2005 and september30, 2004, the company
also held $50million and $105million, respectively,
of non-publicly traded cost method investments. realized gains
and losses are determined principally on an average cost basis.
in 2005, 2004 and 2003, the company recognized $14million,
$2million and $8million, respectively, in net gains
on sales of securities.
in 2005, 2004 and 2003, the company recorded
non-cash charges of $42million, $23million and
$23million, respectively, to reflect other-than-temporary
losses in value of certain investments.
investment in aircraft leveraged
leases
during the fourth quarter of 2005, the company
recorded a $101million pre-tax charge, or $0.03per
share, to write-off its investment in the aircraft leveraged
leases with delta air lines, inc. (delta) resulting from
deltas bankruptcy filing in september 2005. during the
fourth quarter of 2004, the company recorded a $16million
pre-tax charge to write down its leveraged lease investment in
delta consistent with our agreement with delta to reduce lease
payments. during the first quarter of fiscal 2003, the company
wrote off its investment in aircraft leveraged leases with
united airlines, inc., which filed for bankruptcy protection,
resulting in a pre-tax charge of $114million, or
$0.04per share. based on the bankruptcy filings, we
believe it is unlikely that the company will recover these
investments. the pre-tax charges for these write-offs were
reported in net interest expense in the consolidated
statements of income. in the event of a material modification to
the delta aircraft leases or foreclosure of the delta aircraft
by the debt holders, certain tax payments of up to
$100million could be accelerated. the expected tax
payments are currently reflected on our balance sheet as a
deferred tax liability and are not expected to result in a
further charge to earnings. as of october1, 2005, our
remaining aircraft leveraged lease investment totaled
approximately $52million with fedex corp.
-98-
5film and television costs
film and television costs are as follows:
october1,
september30,
theatrical film costs
released, less amortization
$
2,048
$
2,319
completed, not released
in-process
1,000
in development or pre-production
3,405
4,082
television costs
released, less amortization
completed, not released
in-process
in development or pre-production
1,388
1,384
television broadcast rights
1,144
5,937
6,422
less current portion
non-current portion
$
5,427
$
5,938
based on managements total gross revenue
estimates as of october1, 2005, approximately 39% of
completed and unamortized film and television costs (excluding
amounts allocated to acquired film and television libraries) are
expected to be amortized during fiscal 2006. approximately 74%
of unamortized film and television costs for released
productions (excluding acquired film libraries) are expected to
be amortized during the next three years. by october3,
2009, approximately 84% of the total released and unamortized
film and television costs are expected to be amortized. as of
october1, 2005, the company estimated that approximately
$554million of accrued participation and residual
liabilities will be payable in fiscal year 2006.
at october1, 2005, acquired film and
television libraries have remaining unamortized film costs of
$427million which are generally amortized straight-line
over a remaining period of approximately 5-15years.
-99-
6borrowings
the companys borrowings at october1,
2005 and september30, 2004, including the impact of
interest rate swaps designated as hedges at october1, 2005
are summarized below:
interest rate and
stated
cross-currency swaps(2)
effective
interest
interest
swap
rate(1)
pay variable
pay fixed
rate(3)
maturities
commercial paper
$
$
3.84
%
$
$
3.84
%
u.s.medium-term notes
5,849
6,624
6.25
%
5.41
%
2007-2022
convertible senior notes
1,323
1,323
2.13
%
2.13
%
other u.s.dollar denominated debt
7.00
%
7.00
%
privately placed debt
7.02
%
5.45
%
european medium-term notes
1,099
5.74
%
3.79
%
2006-2007
preferred stock
9.00
%
9.00
%
capital cities/ abc debt
9.07
%
8.83
%
film financing arrangement
other(4)
9,514
10,722
5.43
%
1,056
4.84
%
euro disney (ed)and hong kong
disneyland (hkdl):
ed cdc loans
1,160
1,119
5.30
%
5.30
%
ed credit facilities& other
5.19
%
5.19
%
ed other advances
3.09
%
3.09
%
hkdl senior and subordinated loans
3.68
%
3.12
%
2,953
2,766
4.47
%
4.29
%
total borrowings
12,467
13,488
5.20
%
1,056
4.71
%
less current portion(5)
2,310
4,093
total long-term borrowings
$
10,157
$
9,395
$
$
(1)
the stated interest rate represents the
weighted-average coupon rate for each category of borrowings.
for floating rate borrowings, interest rates are based upon the
rates at october1, 2005; these rates are not necessarily
an indication of future interest rates.
(2)
amounts represent notional values of interest
rate and cross-currency swaps.
(3)
the effective interest rate includes only the
impact of interest rate and cross-currency swaps on the stated
rate of interest. other adjustments to the stated interest rate
such as purchase accounting adjustments and debt issuance costs
did not have a material impact on the overall effective interest
rate.
(4)
includes market value adjustments for current and
non-current debt with qualifying hedges totaling
$213million and $369million at october1, 2005
and september30, 2004, respectively.
(5)
in the second quarter of 2005, approximately
$2.2billion of euro disneys borrowings were
reclassified to long-term as the debt is no longer subject to
acceleration by the lenders due to the euro disney financial
restructuring.
commercial paper
the company currently maintains u.s. and european
commercial paper programs with a combined program size of
$4.5billion. as of october1, 2005, the company had
established bank facilities totaling $4.5billion to
support commercial paper borrowings, with half of the facilities
scheduled to expire in 2009 and the other half in 2010. under
the bank facilities, the company has the option to borrow at
libor-based rates plus a spread depending on the companys
senior unsecured debt rating. the companys bank facilities
contain only one financial covenant, relating to interest
-100-
coverage, which the company met on
october1, 2005 by a significant margin. the companys
bank facilities also specifically exclude certain entities,
including euro disney and hong kong disneyland, from any
representations, covenants or events of default. as of
october1, 2005, the company had not borrowed against the
facilities. the company also has the ability to issue up to
$500million of letters of credit under the facility
expiring in 2009, which if utilized, reduces available borrowing
under this facility. as of october1, 2005,
$210million of letters of credit had been issued under
this facility and $2.04billion was available for
borrowing. at october1, 2005, $754million of
commercial paper debt was outstanding.
$5billion shelf registration
statement
on january18, 2005, the company filed a
shelf registration statement which allows the company to borrow
up to $5billion using various types of debt instruments,
such as fixed or floating rate notes, u.s.dollar or
foreign currency denominated notes, redeemable notes, global
notes and dual currency or other indexed notes. the company
subsequently established a domestic medium-term note program
under this shelf registration, which permits the issuance of
$5billion of debt instruments, of which none have been
issued at october1, 2005. our ability to issue debt is
subject to market conditions and other factors impacting our
borrowing capacity. as of october1, 2005, the entire
amount of the $5billion shelf registration was available
for utilization.
u.s.medium-term
noteprogram
at october1, 2005, the total debt
outstanding under prior u.s.medium-term note programs was
$5.8billion. the maturities of current outstanding
borrowings range from 1 to 88years and stated interest
rates range from 2.31% to 7.76%. previously existing medium-term
note programs were replaced by the $5billion
u.s.medium-term note program described above.
other u.s.dollar denominated
debt
at october1, 2005, other u.s.dollar
denominated debt consisted of $305million of quarterly
interest bonds (quibs) that bear interest of 7% and mature in
2031.
convertible senior notes
in april 2003, the company issued
$1.3billion of convertible senior notes due on
april15, 2023. the notes bear interest at a fixed annual
rate of 2.13% and are redeemable at the companys option
any time after april15, 2008 at par. the notes are
redeemable at the investors option at par on
april15, 2008, april15, 2013 and april15,
2018, and upon the occurrence of certain fundamental changes,
such as a change in control. the notes are convertible into
common stock, under certain circumstances, at a conversion rate
of 33.9443shares of common stock per $1,000 principal
amount of notes. this is equivalent to a conversion price of
$29.46. the conversion rate is subject to adjustment if certain
events occur, such as the payment of a common stock dividend,
the issuance of rights or warrants to all holders of the
companys common stock that allow the holders to purchase
shares of the companys common stock during a specified
period of time, and subdivision, combinations or certain
reclassifications of the companys common stock.
privately placed debt
in 1996, the company raised $850million of
privately placed financing. the notes pay 7.02% interest per
annum and amortize semi-annually to maturity in 2007. the
outstanding principal as of october1, 2005 was
$158million.
european medium-term
noteprogram
in july 2002, the company renewed its european
medium-term note program for the issuance of various types of
debt instruments such as fixed or floating rate notes,
u.s.dollar or foreign currency denominated notes,
redeemable notes, index linked or dual currency notes. at such
time, the program size was increased from $3.0billion to
$4.0billion. in 2005, no new debt was issued under the
-101-
program. the remaining capacity under the program
is $3.8billion, subject to market conditions and other
factors impacting our borrowing capacity. the remaining capacity
under the program replenishes as outstanding debt under the
program matures. at october1, 2005, the total debt
outstanding under the program was $213million. the
maturities of current outstanding borrowings range from 1 to
2years and stated interest rates range from 5.25% to
6.26%. the company has outstanding borrowings under the program
denominated in u.s.dollars and hong kong dollars.
preferred stock
in connection with the abc family acquisition in
october 2001, the company assumed seriesa preferred stock
with a 9% coupon and quarterly dividend payments valued at
approximately $400million with an effective cost of
capital of 5.25%. the seriesa preferred stock is callable
commencing august1, 2007 and matures august1, 2027.
the seriesa preferred stock is classified as borrowings
given its substantive similarity to a debt instrument. at
october1, 2005, the total balance outstanding was
$363million.
capital cities/ abc debt
in connection with the capital cities/ abc, inc.
acquisition in 1996, the company assumed various debt previously
issued by capital cities/ abc, inc. at october1, 2005, the
outstanding balance was $186million with maturities
ranging from 4 to 16years and stated interest rates
ranging from 8.75% to 9.65%.
film financing
in august 2005, the company entered into a film
financing arrangement with a group of investors whereby the
investors will fund up to approximately $500million for
40% of the production and marketing costs of a slate of up to
thirty-two live-action films, excluding certain titles such as
the chronicles of narnia and, in general, sequels to
previous films, in return for approximately 40% of the future
net cash flows generated by those films. as part of the
transaction, the company will earn fees from production and
distribution services that the company will provide for the
slate. the cumulative investment in the slate by the investors,
net of the cash flows generated by the slate that are returned
to the investors, will be classified as borrowings. interest
expense recognized from these borrowings is variable and will be
determined by the profitability of the slate.
the last film of the slate is anticipated to be
completed in fiscal 2009. the company has the option at5,
10 and 15years from inception of the film financing
arrangement to buy the investors remaining interest in the
slate at a price that is based on the then remaining projected
future cash flows that the investors would receive from the
slate. as of october1, 2005, three films in the slate had
been completed and the related borrowings totaled
$75million.
euro disney and hong kong disneyland
borrowings
euro disney cdc
loans. pursuant to euro disneys
original financing and the terms of a 1994 financial
restructuring, euro disney borrowed funds from the cdc. as of
october1, 2005, these borrowings consisted of
approximately
243million
($293million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) of
senior debt and
278million
($335million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) of
subordinated debt. the senior debt is secured by certain fixed
assets of disneyland resort paris and/or the underlying land,
whereas the subordinated debt is unsecured. interest on the
senior debt is payable semiannually, and interest on the
subordinated debt is payable annually. the loans bore interest
at a fixed rate of 5.15% and mature from fiscal year 2015 to
fiscal year 2024. in accordance with the terms of the euro
disney restructuring (see note4), principal payments
falling between 2004 and 2016 will be deferred by
3.5years. in return, the interest rate on principal of
48million
($58million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) was
increased to 7.15%, the interest rate on principal of
43million
($52million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) was
increased to 6.15%, and
10million
($12million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) of
principal was prepaid effective february23, 2005. also,
pursuant to the terms
-102-
of the restructuring,
125million
($151million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) of
subordinated loans were converted into senior loans during
fiscal year 2005.
euro disney also executed a credit agreement with
cdc to finance a portion of the construction costs of walt
disney studios park. as of october1, 2005, approximately
441million
($532million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) of
subordinated loans were outstanding under this agreement. the
loans bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.15%per annum,
unless interest or principal payments are deferred under the
provisions of the loans, during which time the interest rate on
the deferred amounts is the greater of 5.15% or euribor plus
2.0%. the loans mature between fiscal years 2015 and 2028. also,
pursuant to the restructuring, the cdc agreed to forgive
2.5million
($3million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) of
interest on these loans per year starting december31, 2004
and continuing through 2011 and to conditionally defer and
convert to subordinated long-term debt, interest payments up to
a maximum amount of
20million
($24million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) per
year for each of the fiscal years 2005 through 2012 and
23million
($27million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) for
each of the fiscal years 2013 and 2014.
euro disney credit facilities and
other. pursuant to euro disneys
original financing with a syndicate of international banks and
the terms of a 1994 financial restructuring, euro disney
borrowed funds which are secured by certain fixed assets of
disneyland resort paris and the underlying land. the majority of
the loans bear interest at euribor plus 3% (5.18% at
october1, 2005). the loans mature between fiscal years
2008 and 2013. the impact of the restructuring effective
february23, 2005 on the credit facilities included the
deferral of certain principal payments for 3.5years, with
the final maturity of the loans remaining unchanged. in return
for these concessions, the interest rate was increased to
euribor plus 3% (from euribor plus amounts ranging from 0.84% to
1.00%) and
96million
($116million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) of
principal was prepaid effective february23, 2005 using
debt security deposits (see note4).
euro disney other
advances. advances of
331million
($400million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) bear
interest at a fixed rate of 3.0%. the remaining advances of
15million
($18million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) bear
interest at euribor plus 3% (5.18% at october1, 2005). the
advances are scheduled to mature between fiscal years 2013 and
2017. $18million of the advances are secured by certain
theme parks assets. the impact of the restructuring effective
february23, 2005 on the other advances includes the
deferral either directly or indirectly of principal payments for
3.5years.
in the second quarter of 2005, euro disneys
borrowings were reclassified to long-term consistent with the
terms of the euro disney financial restructuring as the debt is
no longer subject to acceleration by the lenders.
hong kong disneyland senior
loans. hong kong disneylands
senior loans are borrowings pursuant to a term loan facility of
hk$2.3billion ($296million at october1, 2005
exchange rates) and a revolving credit facility of
hk$1.0billion ($129million at october1, 2005
exchange rates). the balance of the senior loans as of
october1, 2005 was hk$1.9billion ($241million
at october1, 2005 exchange rates). the term loan facility
can be drawn down until march12, 2006 with repayments to
begin in april 2009. as of october1, 2005, 100% of the
revolving credit facility is available to be drawn down for
project financing and working capital requirements. both
facilities are secured by the assets of the hong kong disneyland
theme park, currently carry a rate of 3month hibor
+1.0% and are scheduled to mature in fiscal 2016. the
spread above hibor is 1.0% through november15, 2005, 1.25%
for the next five years and 1.375% for the last five years of
the facilities. as of october1, 2005, the rate on the
senior loans was 4.78%.
hong kong disneyland subordinated
loans. hong kong disneyland has a
subordinated unsecured loan facility of hk$5.6billion
($724million at october1, 2005 exchange rates) that
is scheduled to mature on september12, 2030. the balance
drawn on the subordinated unsecured loan facility as of
october1, 2005 was hk$5.2billion ($676million
at october1, 2005 exchange rates).
-103-
interest rates under this loan are subject to
biannual revisions (up or down) under certain conditions, but
are capped at an annual rate of 6.75% (until march12,
2014), 7.625% (until march12, 2022) and 8.50% (until
september12, 2030). as of october1, 2005 the rate on
the subordinated loans was 3.29%.
total borrowings excluding market value
adjustments, have the following scheduled maturities:
before euro disney and
euro disney and
hong kong disneyland
hong kong
consolidation
disneyland
total
$
2,273
$
$
2,274
2,148
2,149
thereafter
4,584
2,628
7,212
$
9,301
$
2,953
$
12,254
the company capitalizes interest on assets
constructed for its parks, resorts and other property and on
theatrical and television productions. in 2005, 2004 and 2003,
total interest capitalized was $77million,
$47million and $33million, respectively.
hong kong disneyland is subject to financial
covenants under its loan agreements beginning in fiscal year
2006. euro disney has covenants under its debt agreements that
limit its investing and financing activities. beginning with
fiscal year 2006, euro disney must meet financial performance
covenants that will necessitate earnings growth.
7income taxes
income before income taxes, minority interests
and the cumulative effect of accounting changes
domestic (including u.s.exports)
$
3,676
$
3,279
$
1,802
foreign subsidiaries
$
3,987
$
3,739
$
2,254
income tax (benefit) provision
current
federal
$
1,141
$
$
(55
)
state
foreign (including withholding)
1,528
1,275
deferred
federal
(252
)
(103
)
state
(35
)
(287
)
(78
)
$
1,241
$
1,197
$
-104-
october1,
september30,
components of deferred tax assets and
liabilities
deferred tax assets
accrued liabilities
$
(1,398
)
$
(1,412
)
foreign subsidiaries
(721
)
(842
)
retirement benefits
(380
)
(22
)
equity based compensation
(165
)
(31
)
loss and credit carryforwards
(30
)
total deferred tax assets
(2,664
)
(2,337
)
deferred tax liabilities
depreciable, amortizable and other property
3,520
3,818
licensing revenues
leveraged leases
other, net
total deferred tax liabilities
4,271
4,441
net deferred tax liability before valuation
allowance
1,607
2,104
valuation allowance
net deferred tax liability
$
1,681
$
2,178
reconciliation of effective income tax
rate
federal income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
state taxes, net of federal benefit
2.1
2.0
2.3
impact of audit settlements
(3.2
)
(3.2
)
(2.5
)
foreign sales corporation and extraterritorial
income
(2.2
)
(2.6
)
(3.1
)
repatriation of earnings of foreign subsidiaries
(0.8
)
other, including tax reserves and related interest
0.2
0.8
3.3
31.1
%
32.0
%
35.0
%
in 2005 the company derived tax benefits of
$88million from an exclusion provided under
u.s.income tax laws with respect to certain
extraterritorial income attributable to foreign trading gross
receipts (ftgrs). this exclusion was repealed as
part of the american jobs creation act of 2004 (the
act), which was enacted on october22, 2004.
the act provides for a phase-out such that the exclusion for the
companys otherwise qualifying ftgrs generated in fiscal
2005, 2006 and 2007 will be limited to approximately 85%, 65%
and 15%, respectively. no exclusion will be available in fiscal
years 2008 and thereafter.
the act also provides for a one-time tax
deduction of 85% of certain foreign earnings that are
repatriated in fiscal 2005. during the fourth quarter of fiscal
2005, the company repatriated foreign earnings eligible for this
deduction and recorded a tax benefit of $32million as a
result of the reversal of deferred taxes previously provided on
these earnings.
the act makes a number of other changes to the
income tax laws which will affect the company in future years,
the most significant of which is a new deduction relating to
qualifying domestic production activities. the deduction equals
three percent of qualifying income for fiscal 2006 and 2007, six
percent for fiscal 2008 through 2010 and, by fiscal 2011, nine
percent of such income. the u.s.department of the treasury
and the internal revenue service (irs) issued proposed
regulations on october19, 2005 which provide comprehensive
rules, definitions, and examples to assist in the implementation
of this new deduction. the proposed regulations are subject to
further changes prior
-105-
to finalization. the company is analyzing the
proposed regulations and cannot estimate the anticipated benefit
with reasonable accuracy, but expects to derive benefits in
fiscal 2006 that are substantially lower than those derived
under the extraterritorial income exclusion discussed above.
as a matter of course, the company is regularly
audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. from time
to time, these audits result in proposed assessments. during the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, the company reached a settlement
with the irs regarding all assessments proposed with respect to
its federal income tax returns for 1996 through 2000, and a
settlement with the california franchise tax board regarding
assessments proposed with respect to its state tax returns for
1994 through 2003. these favorable settlements resulted in the
company releasing $102million in tax reserves which are no
longer required with respect to these matters. during the first
quarter of fiscal 2005, the favorable resolution of a tax matter
resulted in the release of $24million in tax reserves.
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004, the company reached a
settlement with the internal revenue service regarding all
assessments proposed with respect to its federal income tax
returns for 1993 through 1995. the favorable settlement resulted
in the company releasing $120million in tax reserves that
are no longer required with respect to these matters. during the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2003, the company favorably resolved
certain state income tax audit issues and released
$56million of related tax reserves.
in fiscal years 2005, 2004 and 2003, income tax
benefits attributable to equity based compensation transactions
that were allocated to shareholders equity amounted to
$64million, $25million and $5million,
respectively.
deferred tax assets at october1, 2005 and
september30, 2004 were reduced by a valuation allowance,
of which $24million is attributable to certain acquired
net operating losses. since the valuation allowances associated
with these acquisitions relate to acquired deferred tax assets,
the subsequent realization of these tax benefits would result in
adjustments to the allowance amount being applied as reductions
to goodwill.
-106-
8pension and other benefit programs
the company maintains pension plans and
postretirement medical benefit plans covering most of its
domestic employees not covered by union or industry-wide plans.
employees hired after january1, 1994 and abc employees
generally hired after january1, 1987 are not eligible for
postretirement medical benefits. with respect to its qualified
defined benefit pension plans, the companys policy is to
fund, at a minimum, the amount necessary on an actuarial basis
to provide for benefits in accordance with the requirements of
the employee retirement income security act of 1974. pension
benefits are generally based on years of service and/or
compensation. the following chart summarizes the balance sheet
impact, as well as the benefit obligations, assets, funded
status and rate assumptions associated with the pension and
postretirement medical benefit plans based upon the actuarial
valuations prepared as of june30, 2005 and 2004 (the plan
measurement date).
postretirement
pension plans
medical plans
october1,
september30,
october1,
september30,
(in millions)
reconciliation of funded status of the plans
and the amounts included in the companys consolidated
balance sheets:
projected benefit obligations
beginning obligations
$
(3,769
)
$
(3,747
)
$
(954
)
$
(1,035
)
service cost
(138
)
(150
)
(34
)
(35
)
interest cost
(233
)
(216
)
(59
)
(60
)
actuarial gain/ (loss)
(937
)
(150
)
benefits paid
ending obligations
$
(4,951
)
$
(3,769
)
$
(1,172
)
$
(954
)
fair value of plans assets
beginning fair value
$
3,139
$
2,655
$
$
actual return on plan assets
contributions
benefits paid
(126
)
(120
)
(25
)
(24
)
expenses
(23
)
(16
)
ending fair value
$
3,410
$
3,139
$
$
funded status of the plans
$
(1,541
)
$
(630
)
$
(912
)
$
(739
)
unrecognized net loss
1,516
unrecognized prior service cost (benefit)
(17
)
(18
)
contributions after plan measurement date
net balance sheet impact
$
$
$
(545
)
$
(450
)
amounts recognized in the balance sheet consist of
prepaid benefit cost
$
$
$
$
accrued benefit liability
(985
)
(394
)
(545
)
(450
)
additional minimum pension liability adjustment
1,124
$
$
$
(545
)
$
(450
)
-107-
the components of net periodic benefit cost are
as follows:
postretirement medical
pension plans
plans
(in millions)
service costs
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest costs
expected return on plan assets
(223
)
(215
)
(262
)
(14
)
(15
)
(19
)
amortization of prior year service costs
(1
)
(1
)
(1
)
recognized net actuarial loss
(1
)
net periodic benefit cost
$
$
$
$
$
$
assumptions:
discount rate
5.25
%
6.30
%
5.85
%
5.25
%
6.30
%
5.85
%
rate of return on plan assets
7.50
%
7.50
%
7.50
%
7.50
%
7.50
%
7.50
%
salary increases
3.75
%
4.00
%
3.75
%
n/a
n/a
n/a
year1 increase in cost of benefits
n/a
n/a
n/a
10.00
%
10.00
%
10.00
%
rate of increase to which the cost of benefits is
assumed to decline (the ultimate trend rate)
n/a
n/a
n/a
5.00
%
5.00
%
5.00
%
year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate
n/a
n/a
n/a
net periodic benefit cost for the current year is
based on assumptions determined at the june30 valuation
date of the prior year.
plan funded status
due to an increase in the present value of
pension obligations, a number of the companys pension
plans were underfunded at october1, 2005, having
accumulated benefit obligations exceeding the fair value of plan
assets. for these plans, the fair value of plan assets
aggregated $3.4billion, the accumulated benefit
obligations aggregated $4.5billion and the projected
benefit obligations aggregated $4.9billion. as a result,
the company has recorded an additional minimum pension liability
adjustment of $1.1billion as of october1, 2005. the
additional minimum pension liability adjustment at
september30, 2004 was $415million. the increase in
the additional minimum pension liability adjustment of
$709million in the current year was primarily due to a
decrease in the discount rate from 6.30% at september30,
2004 to 5.25% at october1, 2005. this increase resulted in
an after-tax adjustment of $448million that was recorded
as a decrease of shareholders equity through accumulated
other comprehensive income in fiscal 2005.
the companys total accumulated pension
benefit obligations at october1, 2005 and
september30, 2004 were $4.6billion and
$3.5billion, respectively, of which 97.3% and 95.2%,
respectively, were vested.
the accumulated postretirement medical benefit
obligations and fair value of plan assets for postretirement
medical plans with accumulated postretirement medical benefit
obligations in excess of plan assets were $1.2billion and
$260million, respectively, at year end 2005 and
$954million and $215million, respectively at year
end 2004.
plan assets
the assets of the companys defined benefit
plans are managed on a commingled basis in a third party master
trust. the investment policy and allocation of the assets in the
master trust were approved by the companys investment and
administrative committee, which has oversight
-108-
responsibility for the companys retirement
plans. the investment policy ranges for the major asset classes
are as follows:
asset class
minimum
maximum
equity securities
%
%
debt securities
%
%
alternative investments
%
%
cash
%
%
alternative investments include venture capital
funds, private equity funds and real estate, among other
investments.
the companys pension plan asset mix at the
plan measurement dates, by asset class, is as follows:
june30,
june30,
asset class
equity securities
%
%
debt securities
alternative investments
cash
total
%
%
equity securities include $71million (2% of
total plan assets) and $63million (2% of total plan
assets) of company common stock at october1, 2005 and
september30, 2004, respectively.
plan contributions
during fiscal 2005, the company contributed
$291million and $12million to its pension and
postretirement medical plans, respectively, which included
voluntary contributions above the minimum requirements for the
pension plans. the company currently expects to contribute, at a
minimum, $61million to its pension and postretirement
medical plans during fiscal 2006. the company may make
additional contributions into its pension plans in fiscal 2006
depending on how the funded status of those plans change and
also depending on the outcome of proposed changes to the funding
regulations currently being considered by the united states
congress.
estimated future benefit payments
the following table presents estimated future
benefit payments for the next ten years:
postretirement
pension plans
medical plans
$
$
2011-2015
1,221
assumptions
certain actuarial assumptions, such as the
discount rate, long-term rate of return on plan assets and the
healthcare cost trend rate have a significant effect on the
amounts reported for net periodic benefit cost as well as the
related benefit obligation amounts.
-109-
discount
rate the assumed discount
rate for pension plans reflects the market rates for
high-quality corporate bonds currently available. the
companys discount rate was determined by considering the
average of pension yield curves constructed of a large
population of high quality corporate bonds. the resulting
discount rate reflects the matching of plan liability cash flows
to the yield curves.
long-term return on
assets the long-term rate
of return on plan assets represents an estimate of long-term
returns on an investment portfolio consisting of a mixture of
equities, fixed income, and alternative investments. when
determining the long-term return on plan assets, the company
considers long-term rates of return on the asset classes (both
historical and forecasted) in which the company expects the
pension funds to be invested. the following rates of return by
asset class were considered in setting the long-term return on
assets assumption:
equity securities
8% 10%
debt securities
4% 7%
alternative investments
8% 20%
healthcare cost trend
rate the company reviews
external data and its own historical trends for healthcare costs
to determine the healthcare cost trend rates for the
postretirement medical benefit plans. for 2005, we assumed a
10.0% annual rate of increase in the per capita cost of covered
healthcare claims with the rate decreasing in even increments
over seven years until reaching 5.0%.
a one percent change in the key assumptions would
have the following effects on the projected benefit obligations
as of october1, 2005 and on cost for fiscal 2006:
pension and postretirement medical plans
expected long-
term rate of
assumed healthcare cost
discount rate
return on assets
trend rate
net periodic
net periodic
pension and
projected
pension and
net periodic
projected
postretirement
benefit
postretirement
postretirement
benefit
increase/(decrease)
medical cost
obligations
cost
medical cost
obligations
1% decrease
$
$
1,106
$
$
(36
)
$
(170
)
1% increase
(139
)
(919
)
(36
)
multi-employer plans
the company participates in various
multi-employer pension plans under union and industry-wide
agreements. in 2005, 2004, and 2003, the contributions to these
plans which are generally expensed as incurred were
$37million, $38million, and $37million,
respectively.
defined contribution plans
the company has savings and investment plans that
allow eligible employees to allocate up to 20% of their salary
through payroll deductions depending on the plan in which the
employee participates. the company matches 50% of the
employees pre-tax contributions, up to plan limits. in
2005, 2004 and 2003, the costs of these plans were
$35million, $33million and $32million,
respectively.
medicare modernization act
in may 2004, the fasb issued fasb staff position
no.106-2, accounting and disclosure requirements
related to the medicare prescription drug, improvement and
modernization act of 2003 (fsp106-2) in response to a
new law regarding prescription drug benefits under medicare as
well as a federal subsidy to sponsors of retiree healthcare
benefit plans.
-110-
the medicare prescription drug, improvement and
modernization act of 2003 was reflected in accumulated
postretirement medical benefit obligations beginning
september30, 2004 assuming that the company will continue
to provide a prescription drug benefit to retirees that is at
least actuarially equivalent to medicare partd and the
company will receive the federal subsidy.
the accumulated postretirement medical benefit
obligations at september30, 2004 decreased by
approximately $110million due to the effect of the federal
subsidy, and the net periodic postretirement medical benefit
cost for fiscal 2005 was reduced by approximately
$28million.
9shareholders equity
the company declared an annual dividend of
$0.27per share on december1, 2005 related to fiscal
2005. the dividend is payable on january6, 2006 to
shareholders of record on december12, 2005. the company
paid a $490million dividend ($0.24per share) during
the second quarter of fiscal 2005 applicable to fiscal 2004;
paid a $430million dividend ($0.21per share) during
the second quarter of fiscal 2004 applicable to fiscal 2003; and
paid a $429million dividend ($0.21per share) during
the second quarter of fiscal 2003 applicable to fiscal 2002.
during fiscal 2005, the company repurchased
91million shares of disney common stock for approximately
$2.4billion. during fiscal 2004, the company repurchased
15million shares of disney common stock for approximately
$335million. no shares of disney common stock were
repurchased during fiscal 2003. as of october1, 2005, the
company had authorization to repurchase approximately
225million additional shares, of which the company has
repurchased 47million shares for $1.1billion
subsequent to year-end through december2, 2005.
the par value of the companys outstanding
common stock totaled approximately $22million.
in december 1999, pursuant to the companys
repurchase program, the company established the twdc stock
compensation fundii to acquire shares of company common
stock for the purpose of funding certain future stock-based
compensation. the fund expired on december12, 2002. on
that date, the 5.4million shares of the companys
common stock still owned by the fund were transferred back to
the company and classified as treasury stock.
10equity based compensation
under various plans, the company may grant stock
options and other equity based awards to executive, management
and creative personnel. in december 2004, the company adopted a
new approach to long-term incentive compensation, pursuant to
which it increased the proportion of rsus and decreased the
proportion of stock options used in long-term incentive awards.
stock options are generally granted at exercise
prices equal to or exceeding the market price at the date of
grant. effective in january 2003, options became exercisable
ratably over a four-year period from the grant date, while
options granted prior to january 2003 generally vest ratably
over five years. effective in the second quarter of 2005,
options granted generally expire seven years after the grant
date, while options granted prior to the second quarter of 2005
expire ten years after the date of grant. at the discretion of
the compensation committee of the companys board of
directors, options can occasionally extend up to 15years
after date of grant. restricted stock units generally vest 50%
on each of the second and fourth anniversaries of the grant
date. certain rsus awarded to senior executives vest based upon
the achievement of performance conditions. stock options and
rsus are forfeited by employees who terminate prior to vesting.
shares available for future option and rsu grants at
october1, 2005 totaled 67million. the company
satisfies stock option exercises and vesting of rsus with newly
issued shares.
compensation expense for rsus and stock options
is recognized ratably over the vesting period. compensation
expense for rsus is based upon the market price of the shares
underlying the awards
-111-
on the grant date; however, compensation expense
for performance-based awards is adjusted to reflect the
estimated probability of vesting. under the provisions of
sfas123, compensation expense for stock options has been
estimated on the grant date using a black-scholes option-pricing
model. the weighted average assumptions used in the
black-scholes model were as follows:
risk-free interest rate
3.7
%
3.5
%
3.4
%
expected term (years)
4.75
6.0
6.0
expected volatility
%
%
%
dividend yield
0.79
%
0.85
%
1.21
%
in connection with the adoption of sfas123r
(see note2), the company reviewed and updated, among other
things, its forfeiture, expected term and volatility
assumptions. the weighted average expected option term for 2005
reflects the application of the simplified method set out in sec
staff accounting bulletinno.107 (sab107),
which was issued in march 2005. the simplified method defines
the life as the average of the contractual term of the options
and the weighted average vesting period for all option tranches.
estimated volatility for fiscal 2005 also
reflects the application of sab107 interpretive guidance
and, accordingly, incorporates historical and implied
share-price volatility, with implied volatility derived from
exchange traded options on the companys common stock and
other traded financial instruments, such as the companys
convertible debt. volatility for 2004 and 2003 was estimated
based upon historical share-price volatility.
the following table summarizes information about
stock option transactions (shares in millions):
weighted
weighted
weighted
average
average
average
exercise
exercise
exercise
shares
price
shares
price
shares
price
outstanding at beginning of year
$
26.50
$
26.44
$
27.48
awards forfeited
(7
)
25.99
(8
)
24.40
(14
)
44.41
awards granted
27.91
24.61
17.34
awards exercised
(18
)
20.22
(11
)
18.77
(3
)
14.57
awards expired/cancelled
(3
)
34.83
(6
)
33.56
(10
)
47.73
outstanding at end of year
27.06
26.50
26.44
exercisable at end of year
28.47
28.39
27.86
-112-
the following tables summarize information about
stock options outstanding at october1, 2005 (shares in
millions):
outstanding
range of
number
weighted
weighted averaged
exercise
of
average
remaining years of
prices
options
exercise price
contractual life
$15 $19
$
17.23
7.3
$20 $24
22.59
5.3
$25 $29
27.42
4.5
$30 $34
31.52
4.5
$35 $39
37.28
3.2
$40 $44
41.28
5.2
$45 $395
113.56
4.4
exercisable
range of
weighted
weighted averaged
exercise
number
average
remaining years of
prices
of options
exercise price
contractual life
$15 $19
$
17.24
7.2
$20 $24
22.03
3.9
$25 $29
27.07
3.0
$30 $34
31.65
4.4
$35 $39
37.36
3.2
$40 $44
41.31
5.2
$45 $395
113.56
4.4
the aggregate intrinsic values of stock options
outstanding and exercisable at october1, 2005 were
$292million and $176million, respectively.
the following table summarizes information about
rsu transactions (shares in millions):
weighted
weighted
weighted
average
average
average
restricted
grant-date
restricted
grant-date
restricted
grant-date
stock units
fair value
stock units
fair value
stock units
fair value
unvested at beginning ofyear
$
22.58
$
19.84
$
24.54
granted
27.98
24.65
17.15
vested
(2
)
25.30
forfeited
(1
)
20.34
(1
)
22.42
unvested at end of year
26.04
22.58
19.84
rsus representing 1.3million shares and
0.3million shares, which vest based upon the achievement
of certain performance conditions, were granted in 2005 and
2004, respectively. approximately 2million of the unvested
rsus as of october1, 2005 vest upon the achievement of
performance conditions.
-113-
the weighted average grant-date fair values of
options granted during 2005, 2004 and 2003 were $7.71, $9.94 and
$6.71, respectively. the total intrinsic value (market value on
date of exercise less exercise price) of options exercised and
rsus vested during 2005, 2004 and 2003 totaled
$198million, $68million and $14million,
respectively.
the weighted average grant-date fair values of
rsus granted during 2005, 2004 and 2003 were $27.98, $24.65 and
$17.15, respectively, and compensation expense amounted to
$127million, $66million and $20million,
respectively, before tax benefits of $47million,
$24million and $7million in 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively.
as of october1, 2005, there was
$334million of unrecognized compensation cost related to
unvested stock options and $223million related to unvested
rsus. that cost is expected to be recognized over a
weighted-average period of 1.6years for stock options and
1.7years for rsus. the total fair value at grant date of
rsus vested during 2005 was $60million.
cash received from option exercises for 2005,
2004 and 2003, was $370million, $201million, and
$51million, respectively. tax benefits realized from tax
deductions associated with option exercises and rsu activity for
2005, 2004 and 2003 totaled $69million, $25million,
and $5million, respectively.
11detail of certain balance sheet
accounts
october1,
september30,
current receivables
accounts receivable
$
4,351
$
4,403
income tax receivable
other
allowance for doubtful accounts
(130
)
(148
)
$
4,585
$
4,558
other current assets
prepaid expenses
$
$
other
$
$
parks, resorts and other property, at
cost
attractions, buildings and improvements
$
13,633
$
12,348
leasehold improvements
furniture, fixtures and equipment
10,159
9,403
land improvements
3,278
2,924
27,570
25,168
accumulated depreciation
(12,605
)
(11,665
)
projects in progress
1,852
land
1,129
1,127
$
16,968
$
16,482
-114-
october1,
september30,
intangible assets
copyrights
$
$
other amortizable intangible assets
accumulated amortization
(70
)
(59
)
amortizable intangible assets
fcc licenses
1,432
1,489
trademarks
other indefinite lived intangible assets
$
2,731
$
2,815
other non-current assets
receivables
$
$
prepaid benefit costs
other prepaid expenses
other
$
$
1,040
accounts payable and other accrued
liabilities
accounts payable
$
4,294
$
4,531
payroll and employee benefits
1,009
other
$
5,339
$
5,623
other long-term liabilities
deferred revenues
$
$
capital lease obligations
program licenses and rights
participation and residual liabilities
accrued benefit liabilities
1,530
other
1,055
1,342
$
3,945
$
3,619
12financial instruments
interest rate risk management
the company is exposed to the impact of interest
rate changes primarily through its borrowing activities. the
companys objective is to mitigate the impact of interest
rate changes on earnings and cash flows and on the market value
of its investments and borrowings. in accordance with policy,
the company maintains its fixed rate debt expressed as a
percentage of its net debt between a minimum and maximum
percentage.
the company typically uses pay-floating and
pay-fixed interest rate swaps to facilitate its interest rate
risk management activities. pay-floating swaps effectively
convert fixed rate medium and long-term obligations to variable
rate instruments indexed to libor. pay-floating swap agreements
in place at year-end expire in one to 17years. pay-fixed
swaps effectively convert floating rate obligations to fixed
rate instruments. the pay-fixed swaps in place at year-end
expire in one to ten years. as of october1, 2005 and
september30, 2004 respectively, the company held
$151million and $148million notional value of
pay-fixed swaps that do not qualify as hedges. the changes in
market values of all swaps that do not qualify as hedges have
been included in earnings.
-115-
the impact of hedge ineffectiveness was not
significant for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003. the net amount of
deferred gains in aoci from interest rate risk management
transactions was $8million and $10million at
october1, 2005 and september30, 2004 respectively.
foreign exchange risk management
the company transacts business globally and is
subject to risks associated with changing foreign exchange
rates. the companys objective is to reduce earnings and
cash flow fluctuations associated with foreign exchange rate
changes thereby enabling management to focus attention on core
business issues and challenges.
the company enters into various contracts that
change in value as foreign exchange rates change to protect the
value of its existing foreign currency assets, liabilities, firm
commitments and forecasted but not firmly committed foreign
currency transactions. the company uses option strategies and
forward contracts to hedge forecasted transactions. in
accordance with policy, the company hedges its forecasted
foreign currency transactions for periods generally not to
exceed five years within an established minimum and maximum
range of annual exposure. the company uses forward contracts to
hedge foreign currency assets, liabilities and firm commitments.
the gains and losses on these contracts offset changes in the
u.s.dollar equivalent value of the related forecasted
transaction, asset, liability or firm commitment. the principal
currencies hedged are the euro, british pound, japanese yen and
canadian dollar. cross-currency swaps are used to effectively
convert foreign currency-denominated borrowings to
u.s.dollars.
mark to market gains and losses on contracts
hedging forecasted foreign currency transactions are initially
recorded to aoci and are reclassified to current earnings when
the hedged transactions are realized, offsetting changes in the
value of the foreign currency transactions. at october1,
2005 and september30, 2004, the company had pre-tax
deferred gains of $114million and $45million,
respectively, and pre-tax deferred losses of $69million
and $147million, respectively, related to foreign currency
hedges on forecasted foreign currency transactions.
deferred amounts to be recognized change with
market conditions and will be substantially offset by changes in
the value of the related hedged transactions. deferred losses
recorded in aoci for contracts that will mature in the next
twelve months totaled $21million. the company reclassified
after-tax losses of $108million and $144million from
aoci to earnings during fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively.
these losses were offset by changes in the u.s.dollar
equivalent value of the items being hedged.
at october1, 2005 and september30,
2004, changes in value related to cash flow hedges included in
aoci were a pre-tax gain of $45million and a pre-tax loss
of $102million, respectively. during fiscal 2005 and 2004,
the company recorded the change in fair market value related to
fair value hedges and the ineffectiveness related to cash flow
hedges to earnings. the amounts of hedge ineffectiveness on fair
value and cash flow hedges were not material for fiscal 2005,
fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003. the impact of foreign exchange risk
management activities on operating income in 2005, 2004 and 2003
was a loss of $168million, $277million and
$273million, respectively. the net losses from these
hedges offset changes in the u.s.dollar equivalent value
of the related exposures being hedged.
fair value of financial instruments
at october1, 2005 and september30,
2004, the companys financial instruments included cash,
cash equivalents, investments, receivables, accounts payable,
borrowings and interest rate and foreign exchange risk
management contracts.
at october1, 2005 and september30,
2004, the fair values of cash and cash equivalents, receivables
and accounts payable approximated the carrying values because of
the short-term nature of these instruments. the estimated fair
values of other financial instruments subject to fair value
-116-
disclosures, determined based on broker quotes or
quoted market prices or interest rates for the same or similar
instruments and the related carrying amounts are as follows:
carrying
fair
carrying
fair
amount
value
amount
value
investments
$
$
$
$
borrowings
(12,467
)
(12,733
)
(13,488
)
(13,811
)
risk management contracts:
foreign exchange forwards
$
$
$
(54
)
$
(54
)
foreign exchange options
(26
)
(26
)
interest rate swaps
cross-currency swaps
credit concentrations
the company continually monitors its positions
with, and the credit quality of, the financial institutions that
are counterparties to its financial instruments and does not
anticipate nonperformance by the counterparties.
the company would not realize a material loss as
of october1, 2005 in the event of nonperformance by any
single counterparty. the company enters into transactions only
with financial institution counterparties that have a credit
rating of a- or better. the companys current policy
regarding agreements with financial institution counterparties
is generally to require collateral in the event credit ratings
fall below a- or in the event aggregate exposures exceed limits
as defined by contract. in addition, the company limits the
amount of investment credit exposure with any one institution.
the companys trade receivables and
investments do not represent a significant concentration of
credit risk at october1, 2005 due to the wide variety of
customers and markets into which the companys products are
sold, their dispersion across geographic areas, and the
diversification of the companys portfolio among issuers.
13commitments and contingencies
commitments
the company has various contractual commitments
for the purchase of broadcast rights for sports, feature films
and other programming, aggregating approximately
$19.6billion, including approximately $957million
for available programming as of october1, 2005, and
approximately $15.8billion related to sports programming
rights, primarily nfl, nba, college football and mlb.
the company entered into a new agreement with the
nfl for the right to broadcast nfl monday night football games
on espn. the contract provides for total payments of
approximately $8.87billion over the eight-year period,
commencing with the 2006-2007 season. the company has rights to
21games in the 2006-2007 season, which begins in the
fourth quarter of the companys fiscal year 2006.
the company has entered into operating leases for
various real estate and equipment needs, including retail
outlets and distribution centers for consumer products,
broadcast equipment and office space for general and
administrative purposes. rental expense for the operating leases
during 2005, 2004 and 2003, including common-area maintenance
and contingent rentals, was $482million, $518million
and $528million, respectively.
-117-
the company also has contractual commitments
under various creative talent and employment agreements
including obligations to actors, producers, sports personnel,
television and radio personalities and executives.
contractual commitments for broadcast programming
rights, future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable
operating leases and creative talent and other commitments
totaled $23.3billion at october1, 2005, payable as
follows:
broadcast
operating
programming
leases
other
total
$
4,174
$
$
$
5,340
2,836
3,573
2,445
2,973
1,944
2,311
2,093
2,334
thereafter
6,065
6,741
$
19,557
$
1,636
$
2,079
$
23,272
the company has certain non-cancelable capital
leases primarily for land and broadcast equipment. future
payments under these leases as of october1, 2005 are as
follows:
$
thereafter
total minimum obligations
less amount representing interest
(542
)
present value of net minimum obligations
less current portion
(18
)
long-term portion
$
contractual guarantees
the company has guaranteed certain special
assessment and water/sewer revenue bonds issued by the
celebration community development district and the enterprise
community development district (collectively, the districts).
the bond proceeds were used by the districts to finance the
construction of infrastructure improvements and the water and
sewer system in the mixed-use, residential community of
celebration, florida. as of october1, 2005, the remaining
debt service obligation guaranteed by the company was
$84million, of which $56million was principal. the
company is responsible to satisfy any shortfalls in debt service
payments, debt service and maintenance reserve funds, and to
ensure compliance with specified rate covenants. to the extent
that the company has to fund payments under its guarantees, the
districts have an obligation to reimburse the company from
district revenues.
the company has also guaranteed certain bond
issuances by the anaheim public authority that were used by the
city of anaheim to finance construction of infrastructure and a
public parking facility adjacent to the disneyland resort.
revenues from sales, occupancy and property taxes from
-118-
the disneyland resort and non-disney hotels are
used by the city of anaheim to repay the bonds. in the event of
a debt service shortfall, the company will be responsible to
fund the shortfall. as of october1, 2005, the remaining
debt service obligation guaranteed by the company was
$397million, of which $108million was principal. to
the extent that tax revenues exceed the debt service payments in
subsequent periods, the company would be reimbursed for any
previously funded shortfalls.
to date, tax revenues have exceeded the debt
service payments for both the celebration and anaheim bonds.
legal matters
milne and disney enterprises, inc.v.
stephen slesinger, inc. on
november5, 2002, clare milne, the granddaughter of a. a.
milne, author of the winnie the pooh books, and the
companys subsidiary disney enterprises, inc.
(dei)filed a complaint against stephen slesinger, inc.
(ssi)in the united states district court for the central
district of california. on november4, 2002, ms.milne
served notices to ssi and dei terminating a. a. milnes
prior grant of rights to winnie the pooh, effective
november5, 2004, and granted all of those rights to dei.
in their lawsuit, ms.milne and dei seek a declaratory
judgment, under united states copyright law, that
ms.milnes termination notices were valid; that
ssis rights to winnie the pooh in the united states
terminated effective november5, 2004; that upon
termination of ssis rights in the united states, the 1983
licensing agreement that is the subject of the stephen
slesinger, inc.v. the walt disney company lawsuit
terminated by operation of law; and that, as of november5,
2004, ssi was entitled to no further royalties for uses of
winnie the pooh. ssi filed (a)an answer denying the
material allegations of the complaint and (b)counterclaims
seeking a declaration that (i)ms.milnes grant
of rights to dei is void and unenforceable and (ii)dei
remains obligated to pay ssi royalties under the 1983 licensing
agreement. ssi also filed a motion to dismiss the complaint or,
in the alternative, for summary judgment. subsequently, the
court ruled that milnes termination notices are invalid
and dismissed ssis counterclaims as moot. following
further motions ssi filed an amended answer and counterclaims
and a third-party complaint against harriet hunt (heir to e. h.
shepard, illustrator of the original winnie the pooh stories),
who had served a notice of termination and a grant of rights
similar to ms.milnes. by order dated august3,
2004, the court granted ssi leave to amend its answer to assert
counterclaims against the company allegedly arising from the
milne and hunt terminations and the grant of rights to dei for
(a)unlawful and unfair business practices; and
(b)breach of the 1983 licensing agreement. in november
2004, the district court granted a motion by milne to dismiss
her complaint for the purpose of obtaining a final appealable
order of dismissal, so as to permit her appeal to the court of
appeals to proceed. oral argument of that appeal was heard on
september13, 2005.
stephen slesinger, inc.v. the walt
disney company. in this lawsuit, filed
on february27, 1991 in the los angeles county superior
court, the plaintiff claims that a company subsidiary defrauded
it and breached a 1983 licensing agreement with respect to
certain winnie the pooh properties, by failing to account for
and pay royalties on revenues earned from the sale of winnie the
pooh movies on videocassette and from the exploitation of winnie
the pooh merchandising rights. the plaintiff seeks damages for
the licensees alleged breaches as well as confirmation of
the plaintiffs interpretation of the licensing agreement
with respect to future activities. the plaintiff also seeks the
right to terminate the agreement on the basis of the alleged
breaches. if each of the plaintiffs claims were to be
confirmed in a final judgment, damages as argued by the
plaintiff could total as much as several hundred million dollars
and adversely impact the value to the company of any future
exploitation of the licensed rights. on march29, 2004, the
court granted the companys motion for terminating
sanctions against the plaintiff for a host of discovery abuses,
including the withholding, alteration, and theft of documents
and other information, and, on april5, 2004, dismissed
plaintiffs case with prejudice. plaintiffs
subsequent attempts to disqualify the judge who granted the
terminating sanctions were denied in 2004, and its motion for a
new trial was denied on january26, 2005,
allowing plaintiff to proceed with its noticed appeal from the
april5, 2004, order of dismissal.
-119-
management believes that it is not currently
possible to estimate the impact if any, that the ultimate
resolution of these matters will have on the companys
results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
the company, together with, in some instances,
certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant or
co-defendant in various other legal actions involving copyright,
breach of contract and various other claims incident to the
conduct of its businesses. management does not expect the
company to suffer any material liability by reason of such
actions.
-120-
quarterly financial summary
(in millions, except per share data)
(unaudited)
q1
q2
q3
q4
2005(1)(2)
revenues
$
8,666
$
7,829
$
7,715
$
7,734
income before the cumulative effect of accounting
change
net income
earnings per share before the cumulative effect
of accounting change:
diluted
$
0.33
$
0.31
$
0.39
$
0.20
basic
0.34
0.32
0.40
0.21
earnings per share:
diluted
$
0.33
$
0.31
$
0.39
$
0.19
basic
0.34
0.32
0.40
0.19
revenues
$
8,549
$
7,189
$
7,471
$
7,543
net income
earnings per share:
diluted
$
0.33
$
0.26
$
0.29
$
0.25
basic
0.34
0.26
0.29
0.25
(1)
income and earnings per share before the
cumulative effect of accounting change for fiscal 2005 does not
reflect the after-tax charge for the adoption of eitf d-108 of
$36million ($0.02) in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005.
see note2 to the consolidated financial statements.
(2)
the first three quarters of fiscal 2005 were
restated pursuant to the adoption of sfas123r. see
note2 to the consolidated financial statements.
-121-
