10-k
d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states  securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c.
20549  form 10-k  annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the  securities exchange act of
for the fiscal year ended october3, 2009
commission file number 1-11605
incorporated in delaware
i.r.s. employer identification
500 south buena vista street, burbank, california 91521 (818) 560-1000
no. 95-4545390
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange
on which registered
common stock, $.01 par value
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act: none.  indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act.  yesno  indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the act.  yesno  indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.  yesno  indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every interactive data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule
405 of regulation s-t during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).  yesno  indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be
contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k. []  indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller
reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer, and smaller reporting company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act (check one).  large accelerated
fileraccelerated filer
non-accelerated filer (do not check if  smaller reporting
company)smaller reporting company
indicate by
check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the act).  yes no  the aggregate market value of common stock held by non-affiliates (based on the closing price on the last business day of the
registrants most recently completed second fiscal quarter as reported on the new york stock exchange-composite transactions) was $31.9 billion. all executive officers and directors of the registrant and all persons filing a schedule 13d with
the securities and exchange commission in respect to registrants common stock have been deemed, solely for the purpose of the foregoing calculation, to be affiliates of the registrant.  there were 1,865,010,858 shares of common stock outstanding as of november20, 2009.  documents incorporated by reference  certain information required for part iii of this report is incorporated herein by reference to the proxy statement for the 2010 annual meeting of the companys shareholders.
table of contents
the walt disney company and subsidiaries  table of contents
page
part i
item1.
business
item1a.
risk factors
item 1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the company
part ii
item 5.
market for the companys common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
item 9b.
other information
part iii
item 10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item 14.
principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
consolidated financial information  the walt disney company
table of contents
(this page intentionally left blank)
table of contents
part i  item1.business  the walt disney
company, together with its subsidiaries, is a diversified worldwide entertainment company with operations in five business segments: media networks, parks and resorts, studio entertainment, consumer products and interactive media. for convenience,
the terms company and we are used to refer collectively to the parent company and the subsidiaries through which our various businesses are actually conducted.  information on the companys revenues, operating income, and identifiable assets appears in note 1 to the consolidated financial
statements included in item8 hereof. the company employed approximately 144,000 people as of october3, 2009.  media networks
the media networks segment is comprised of a domestic broadcast television network, television production and
distribution operations, domestic television stations, international and domestic cable networks, domestic broadcast radio networks and stations, and publishing and digital operations.  domestic broadcast television network  the company operates the abc
television network, which as of october3, 2009, had affiliation agreements with 233 local stations reaching 99% of all u.s. television households. the abc television network broadcasts programs in the following dayparts: early
morning, daytime, primetime, late night, news, children and sports.  the abc television network produces its own programs or
acquires broadcast rights from other third-parties, as well as entities that are owned by or affiliated with the company and pays varying amounts of compensation to affiliated stations for broadcasting the programs and commercial announcements
included therein. the abc television network derives substantially all of its revenues from the sale to advertisers of time in network programs for commercial announcements. the ability to sell time for commercial announcements and the rates
received are primarily dependent on the size and nature of the audience that the network can deliver to the advertiser as well as overall advertiser demand for time on network broadcasts.  abc.com is the official web site of the abc television network and provides access to full length episodes of abc shows online. abcnews.com
provides in-depth worldwide news coverage online. abcnews.com also offers broadband subscriptions to the 24-hour live internet news channel, abc news now and to video-on-demand news reports from all abc news broadcasts.  television production and distribution  the company produces and distributes live action and animated television programming under the abc studios, abc media productions, and abc family productions labels. program development is carried out in
collaboration with independent writers, producers, and creative teams, with a focus on half-hour comedies, one-hour dramas, and reality series primarily for primetime broadcasts. primetime programming produced either for our networks or for third
parties in the 2009/2010 television season include the returning one-hour dramas army wives, brothers& sisters, castle, criminal minds, desperate housewives, ghost whisperer, greys anatomy, lost, private practice, raising the bar,
and ugly betty; the returning half-hour comedies gary unmarried and scrubs; and new primetime series that premiered in the fall of 2009 which included the one-hour drama flash forward, and the half-hour comedies
cougar town and ruby& the rockits. greys anatomy, criminal minds, and ghost whisperer entered the domestic syndication market during 2009. we also produce jimmy kimmel live for late night and
a variety of primetime specials for network television and live-action syndicated programming. syndicated programming includes live! with regis and kelly, a daily talk show, at the movies, a weekly motion picture review program; who
wants to be a millionaire, a game show; and legend of the seeker, a one-hour drama.  disney-abc domestic television
and disney-abc-espn television international distribute the companys productions domestically and internationally, respectively. the companys productions are also distributed in dvd format by the studio entertainment segment and online.
table of contents
domestic television stations  the company owns ten television stations, six of which are located in the top-ten markets in the united states. all of our television
stations are affiliated with the abc television network and collectively reach 23% of the nations television households. each owned station broadcasts three digital channels: the first consists of local, abc television network, and syndicated
programming; the second is the live well hd network; and the third consists of weather reports powered by accuweather.  live
well hd network debuted in april 2009 and provides high-definition programming focusing on lifestyle topics such as interior design, healthy cooking, and outdoor activities.  markets and details for the stations we own are as follows:
market
tvstation
channel
televisionmarketranking(1)
new york, ny
wabc-tv
los angeles, ca
kabc-tv
chicago, il
wls-tv
philadelphia, pa
wpvi-tv
san francisco, ca
kgo-tv
houston, tx
ktrk-tv
raleigh-durham, nc
wtvd-tv
fresno, ca
kfsn-tv
flint, mi
wjrt-tv
toledo, oh
wtvg-tv
(1)
based on nielsen media research, u.s. television household estimates, january1, 2009  cable networks  our cable
networks group provides national programming networks, licenses television programming in domestic and international markets and invests in foreign television broadcasting, programming, production and distribution entities. programming at our cable
networks is both internally produced and acquired from third parties. the two primary brands for our cable networks are espn and disney channel. in addition to cable network operations, we have espn- and disney- branded radio operations which are
managed together with the cable operations.  cable networks derive a majority of their revenues from fees charged to cable,
satellite and telecommunications service providers (multi-channel video service providers or mvsps) and, for certain networks (primarily espn and abc family), the sale to advertisers of time in network programs for commercial announcements.
generally, the companys cable networks operate under multi-year carriage agreements with mvsps that include contractually determined fees. the amounts that we can charge to mvsps for our cable network services are largely dependent on
competition and the quality and quantity of programming that we can provide. the ability to sell time for commercial announcements and the rates received are primarily dependent on the size and nature of the audience that the network can deliver to
the advertiser as well as overall advertiser demand. certain programming developed by our cable networks is also distributed in dvd format by our home entertainment division in the studio entertainment segment and online.
table of contents
the companys significant cable networks and our ownership percentage and estimated
subscribers as of october3, 2009 are set forth in the following table:
estimateddomesticsubscribers(inmillions)(1)
estimatedinternationalsubscribers(inmillions)(2)
ownership%
espn
espn
80.0
espn2
80.0
espn classic
80.0
espnews
80.0
espn deportes
80.0
espnu (2)
80.0
disney channels worldwide
disney channel
100.0
playhouse disney
100.0
disney xd/toon disney
100.0
disney cinemagic
100.0
jetix europe
99.9
hungama
100.0
abc family
100.0
soapnet
100.0
a&e/lifetime
a&e
42.1
lifetime television
42.1
the history channel
42.1
lifetime movie network
42.1
the biography channel
42.1
history international
42.1
lifetime real women (2)
42.1
(1)
estimated u.s. subscriber counts according to nielsen media research as of september 2009
(2)
subscriber counts are not rated by nielsen and are based on internal management reports. espn and a&e programming is distributed internationally
through other networks discussed below.  espn espn is a multimedia, multinational sports
entertainment company that operates six domestic television sports networks: espn, espn2, espn classic, espnews, espn deportes (a spanish language network) and espnu (a network devoted to college sports). espn also operates four high-definition
television simulcast services, espn hd, espn2 hd, espnews hd and espnu hd. espn programs the sports schedule on the abc television network, which is branded espn on abc. espn owns, has equity interests in or has distribution agreements with 46
international sports networks reaching households in more than 197 countries and territories in 16 languages including a 50% equity interest in espn star sports, which distributes sports programming throughout most of asia. espn holds a 30% equity
interest in ctv specialty television, inc., which owns the sports network, the sports network 2, le rseau des sports, espn classic canada, the nhl network and discovery canada. espn also owns nasn limited (nasn) which operates cable
television networks in europe dedicated to north american sporting events.  espn also operates:
espn.com  which delivers comprehensive sports news, information and video to millions of online fans each month
espn360.com  which is a broadband service available to 50million subscribers that delivers more than 3,000 live events
espn mobile properties  which delivers content, including live game coverage, alerts and highlights, to mobile service providers
table of contents
espn regional television  which is a syndicator of collegiate sports programming
the espn radio network and five espn radio stations
espn the magazine
bass  which is an association of bass fishing enthusiasts
espn enterprises  which develops branded licensing opportunities
espn zone  which is a sports themed dining and entertainment facility.  espn holds a 20% equity interest in the active network, inc., a domestic online community and marketing platform for individuals and event
organizers to participate in and promote sports and recreational activities.  the espn radio network is carried on more than
750 stations, of which 355 are full-time, making it the largest sports radio network in the united states.  markets and
details for the stations we own are as follows:
market
radiostation
broadcastband
radiomarketranking(1)
new york, ny
wepn
am
los angeles, ca
kspn
am
chicago, il
wmvp
am
dallas-fort worth, tx
kesn
fm
pittsburgh, pa
weae
am
(1)
based on fall 2009 arbitron radio market rankings  the espn zone concept combines three interactive areas under one roof for a complete sports and entertainment experience: the studio grill, offering dining in an espn studio environment; the screening
room, offering fans an exciting sports viewing environment; and the sports arena, challenging guests with a variety of interactive and competitive games. the company currently operates six espn zone restaurants located in anaheim, california;
baltimore, maryland; chicago, illinois; las vegas, nevada; new york, new york; and washington, d.c. the company also licenses an espn zone restaurant located in los angeles, california.  disney channels worldwide  disney channel disney channel is a
24-hour cable network with programming targeted to children and families through original series and movies. shows developed and produced internally for initial exhibition on disney channel include live-action comedy series, animated programming and
educational preschool series, as well as projects for the disney channel original movie franchise. live-action comedy series include hannah montana, jonas, sonny with a chance, the suite life on deck and wizards of waverly place.
disney channel also airs the animated program, phineas and ferb. original series for preschoolers include the animated series disneys mickey mouse clubhouse, handy manny, my friends tigger& pooh, disneys little
einsteins and special agent oso, as well as the live-action series imagination movers. programming is also acquired from third parties and includes content from disneys theatrical film and television programming library.
the abc television networks saturday morning childrens daypart, abc kids includes many of the
live-action and animated series produced for disney channel, including hannah montana.   playhouse disney
playhouse disney provides learning-focused programming for preschoolers. in the u.s., the daily playhouse disney programming block is aired on disney channel. playhouse disney is aired internationally with channels in latin america, europe, asia,
australia and africa.
table of contents
disney xd in february 2009, the toon disney television and online platforms in the
u.s. were rebranded to become disney xd. disney xd has a mix of live-action and animated programming for kids ages 6-14, targeting boys and their quest for discovery, accomplishment, sports, adventure and humor. the programming includes original
series, movies and short-form content, as well as sports-themed series developed with espn.  in the u.s., disney xd is seen on
a 24-hour network. disney xd channels have launched in latin america, europe and asia building its distribution base to 107 countries/territories. as discussed below, many of the disney xd channels were previously jetix channels.  disney cinemagic disney cinemagic is a premium subscription service in europe. disney cinemagic shows disney movies, classic and
newer disney cartoons and shorts as well as animated television series such as disneys house of mouse, lilo& stitch: the series, and tarzan.  jetix during fiscal 2009, the company acquired an additional 26% interest in jetix europe, a publicly traded pan-european integrated childrens entertainment company (bringing our total
ownership interest to over 99%). the company also has 100% ownership interest in jetix latin america. the company is re-branding the jetix channels to either disney channel or disney xd which should be completed by the end of calendar year 2009.
hungama hungama is a kids general entertainment cable network in india which features a mix of anime, hindi-language
series and game shows.  abc family abc family is a u.s. television programming service that targets adults 18-34. abc
familys slate of original programming includes the secret life of the american teenager, greek, lincoln heights and the new series make it or break it. abc family also premiered two new original comedies in 2009:
10 things i hate about you, inspired by the hit 1999 film of the same name, and ruby& the rockits. additionally, abc family airs content acquired from third parties, and products from our owned theatrical film library. abc
family also features branded programming holiday events such as 13 nights of halloween and 25 days of christmas.  abcfamily.com creates digital extensions to abc family programming that feature interactivity and social networking. the site also features user-generated content and online programming that can be
downloaded and customized based on preferences of individual users.  soapnet soapnet offers same day episodes of
daytime dramas at night for convenient viewing and also original programming. programming includes same-day episodes of daytime dramas such as all my children, days of our lives, one life to live, general hospital and
the young and the restless; primetime series the o.c., one tree hill, beverly hills 90210, the gilmore girls; and original programs like southern belles: louisville, being erica, holidate and bank
of mom and dad.  content related to soapnets programming is available on soapnet.com, including video extras, games,
blogs, community forums, photos and downloadable content. additionally, soapnetic is a broadband fee service that provides behind-the-scenes coverage of the world of daytime dramas.  a&e/lifetime on september15, 2009, the company and the hearst corporation (hearst) both contributed their 50% interest in
lifetime entertainment services llc (lifetime) to a&e television networks, llc (aetn) in exchange for an increased interest in aetn. the company has a 42% ownership interest in the combined aetn/lifetime. see note 4 to the consolidated financial
statements for further discussion.  the a&e television networks include a&e, the history channel, the biography
channel and history international. a&e offers entertainment ranging from reality series to original movies, dramatic series, and justice shows. the history channel offers original non-fiction series and event-driven specials. the biography
channel offers original series about prominent people and their lives, including the biography series. history international focuses on the culture and history of various countries throughout the world from the perspective of locals.
internationally, a&e programming is available in 125 countries through joint ventures and distribution agreements with affiliates.  lifetime entertainment services includes lifetime television, lifetime movie network and lifetime real women. lifetime television is devoted to womens lifestyle programming. lifetime movie network is a 24-hour movie channel. lifetime
real women is a 24-hour cable network with programming from a womans point of view.
table of contents
the companys share of the financial results of aetn/lifetime is reported under the
heading equity in the income of investees in the companys consolidated statements of income.  radio
disney radio disney is a 24/7 radio network for kids, tweens and families. radio disney is available on 49 terrestrial radio stations and on radiodisney.com, sirius and xm satellite radio, itunes radio tuner, xm/directv and mobile phones. radio
disney programming can be downloaded via the itunes music store. radio disney is also available throughout most of south america via a separate spanish language terrestrial broadcast.  radio disney stations we own are as follows:
market
station
broadcastband
marketranking(1)
new york, ny
wqew
am
los angeles, ca
kdis
am
chicago, il
wrdz
am
san francisco, ca
kmky
am
dallas-fort worth, tx
kmki
am
houston, tx
kmic
am
atlanta, ga
wdwd
am
philadelphia, pa
wwjz
am
boston, ma
wmki
am
detroit, mi
wfdf
am
miami, fl
wmym
am
seattle, wa
kkdz
am
phoenix, az
kmik
am
minneapolis, mn
kdiz
am
tampa, fl
wwmi
am
denver, co
kddz
am
st. louis, mo
wsdz
am
portland, or
kdzr
am
charlotte, nc
wgfy
am
sacramento, ca
kiid
am
cleveland, oh
wwmk
am
salt lake city, ut
kwdz
am
san antonio, tx
krdy
am
kansas city, mo
kphn
am
orlando, fl
wdyz
am
milwaukee, wi
wksh
am
indianapolis, in
wrdz
fm
providence, ri
wddz
am
norfolk, va
whkt
am
greensboro, nc
wcog
am
jacksonville, fl
wbwl
am
west palm beach, fl
wmne
am
hartford, ct
wdzk
am
new orleans, la
wbyu
am
louisville, ky
wdrd
am
richmond, va
wdzy
am
albany, ny
wddy
am
tulsa, ok
kmus
am
albuquerque, nm
kaly
am
little rock, ar
kdis
fm
wichita, ks
kqam
am
(1)
based on fall 2009 arbitron radio market rankings
table of contents
competition and seasonality  the abc television network, disney channel, espn, abc family channel and the espn and radio disney networks and our other broadcast and
cable networks compete for viewers primarily with other television and cable networks, independent television stations and other media, such as dvds, video games and the internet. with respect to the sale of advertising time, our broadcasting
operations, certain of our cable networks and our television and radio stations compete with other television networks and radio stations, independent television stations, mvsps and other advertising media such as newspapers, magazines, billboards,
and the internet. our television and radio stations primarily compete for viewers in individual market areas. a television or radio station in one market generally does not compete directly with stations in other markets.  the growth in the number of networks distributed by mvsps has resulted in increased competitive pressures for advertising revenues for both
our broadcasting and cable networks. the companys cable networks also face competition from other cable networks for carriage by mvsps. the companys contractual agreements with mvsps are renewed or renegotiated from time to time in the
ordinary course of business. consolidation and other market conditions in the cable and satellite distribution industry and other factors may adversely affect the companys ability to obtain and maintain contractual terms for the distribution
of its various cable programming services that are as favorable as those currently in place.  the companys media
networks businesses also compete for the acquisition of sports and other programming. the market for programming is very competitive, particularly for sports programming. the company currently has sports rights agreements with the national football
league (nfl), college football (including college bowl games) and basketball conferences, national basketball association (nba), national association of stock car auto racing (nascar), major league baseball (mlb), world cup and various soccer
leagues, and golf and tennis associations.  the companys internet web sites and digital products compete with other web
sites and entertainment products in their respective categories.  advertising revenues at the media networks are subject to
seasonal advertising patterns and changes in viewership levels. revenues are typically somewhat higher during the fall and somewhat lower during the summer months. affiliate revenues are typically collected ratably throughout the year. certain
affiliate revenues at espn are deferred until annual programming commitments are met, and these commitments are typically satisfied during the second half of the companys fiscal year, which generally results in higher revenue recognition
during this period.  federal regulation  television and radio broadcasting are subject to extensive regulation by the federal communications commission (fcc) under federal laws and regulations, including the communications act of 1934, as
amended. violation of fcc regulations can result in substantial monetary forfeitures, limited renewals of licenses and, in egregious cases, denial of license renewal or revocation of a license. fcc regulations that affect our media networks segment
include the following:
licensing of television and radio stations. each of the television and radio stations we own must be licensed by the fcc. these licenses are
granted for periods of up to eight years, and we must obtain renewal of licenses as they expire in order to continue operating the stations. we (or the acquiring entity in the case of a divestiture) must also obtain fcc approval whenever we seek to
have a license transferred in connection with the acquisition or divestiture of a station. the fcc may decline to renew or approve the transfer of a license in certain circumstances. although we have generally received such renewals and approvals in
the past, there can be no assurance that we will always obtain necessary renewals and approvals in the future.
television and radio station ownership limits. the fcc imposes limitations on the number of television stations and radio stations we can own in
a specific market, on the combined number of television and radio stations we can own in a single market and on the aggregate percentage of the national audience that can be reached by television stations we own. currently:
fcc regulations may restrict our ability to own more than one television station in a market, depending on the size and nature of the market. we do not
own more than one television station in any of the ten markets in which we own a television station.
table of contents
federal statutes permit our television stations in the aggregate to reach a maximum of 39% of the national audience (for this purpose, fcc regulations
attribute to uhf television stations only 50% of the television households in their market). for purposes of the fccs rules, our 10 stations reach approximately 23% of the national audience.
fcc regulations in some cases impose restrictions on our ability to acquire additional radio or television stations in the markets in which we own
radio stations, but we do not believe any such limitations are material to our current operating plans.
dual networks. fcc rules currently prohibit any of the four major television networks  abc, cbs, fox and nbc  from being under
common ownership or control.
regulation of programming. the fcc regulates broadcast programming by, among other things, banning indecent programming, regulating
political advertising and imposing commercial time limits during childrens programming. broadcasters face a heightened risk of being found in violation of the indecency prohibition by the fcc because of recent fcc decisions, coupled with the
spontaneity of live programming. in the past several years, the fcc increased enforcement activities with respect to indecency, and a number of significant indecency cases against various broadcasters remain pending in the courts. moreover, congress
recently increased penalties for broadcasting indecent programming to a maximum of $325,000 per violation.  federal legislation and fcc rules also limit the amount of commercial matter that may be shown on broadcast or cable channels during programming designed for children 12 years of age and younger. in addition, broadcast channels are
generally required to provide a minimum of three hours per week of programming that has as a significant purpose meeting the educational and informational needs of children 16 years of age and younger. fcc rules also give television
station owners the right to reject or refuse network programming in certain circumstances or to substitute programming that the licensee reasonably believes to be of greater local or national importance.
cable and satellite carriage of broadcast television stations. with respect to cable systems operating within a television stations
designated market area, fcc rules require that every three years each television station elect either must carry status, pursuant to which cable operators generally must carry a local television station in the stations market, or
retransmission consent status, pursuant to which the cable operator must negotiate with the television station to obtain the consent of the television station prior to carrying its signal. under the satellite home viewer improvement act
and its successor, the satellite home viewer extension and reauthorization act, satellite carriers are permitted to retransmit a local television stations signal into its local market with the consent of the local television station. under
must carry, if a satellite carrier elects to carry one local station in a market, the satellite carrier must carry the signals of all local television stations that also request carriage. certain of the satellite carriage provisions are set to
expire on december31, 2009, although legislation is pending that would continue many of the relevant provisions.
digital television. all of the companys stations now operate exclusively on digital channels, and we are evaluating various options with
respect to use of digital capabilities.
cable and satellite carriage of programming. the communications act and fcc rules regulate some aspects of negotiations regarding cable and
satellite retransmission consent, and some cable and satellite companies have sought regulation of additional aspects of the carriage of programming on cable and satellite systems. litigation has been instituted against the company, other program
providers and distributors seeking among other things to achieve similar ends. new legislation, court action or regulation in this area could, depending on its specific nature, have an impact on the companys operations.
the foregoing is a brief summary of certain provisions of the communications act and other legislation and
of specific fcc rules and policies. reference should be made to the communications act, other legislation, fcc rules and public notices and rulings of the fcc for further information concerning the nature and extent of the fccs regulatory
authority.  fcc laws and regulations are subject to change, and the company generally cannot predict whether new legislation,
court action or regulations, or a change in the extent of application or enforcement of current laws and regulations, would have an adverse impact on our operations.
table of contents
parks and resorts  the company owns and operates the walt disney world resort in florida, the disneyland resort in california, the disney vacation club, the disney cruise line, and adventures by disney. the company manages
and has effective ownership interests of 51% and 47%, respectively, in disneyland paris and hong kong disneyland resort. the company also licenses the operations of the tokyo disney resort in japan. the companys walt disney imagineering unit
designs and develops new theme park concepts and attractions as well as resort properties. in november 2009, the companys project application report (par) for a disney theme park in the pudong district of shanghai received approval from the
relevant authorities of the central government of china. the par approval will enable the company and its shanghai partners to move forward toward a final agreement to build and operate a park and begin preliminary development work.  the businesses in the parks and resorts segment generate revenues predominately from the sale of admissions to the theme parks; room nights
at the hotels; merchandise, food and beverage sales; sales and rentals of vacation club properties; and cruise vacation packages. costs consist principally of labor; depreciation; costs of merchandise, food and beverage sold; marketing and sales
expense; repairs and maintenance; and entertainment.  walt disney world resort  the walt disney world resort is located 22 miles southwest of orlando, florida, on approximately 25,000 acres of owned land. the resort
includes theme parks (the magic kingdom, epcot, disneys hollywood studios and disneys animal kingdom); hotels; vacation club properties; a retail, dining and entertainment complex; a sports complex; conference centers; campgrounds; golf
courses; water parks; and other recreational facilities designed to attract visitors for an extended stay.  the walt disney
world resort is marketed through a variety of international, national and local advertising and promotional activities. a number of attractions in each of the theme parks are sponsored by other corporations through long-term agreements.
magic kingdom  the magic kingdom, which opened in 1971, consists of seven themed lands: main street usa, adventureland,
fantasyland, frontierland, liberty square, mickeys toontown fair and tomorrowland. each land provides a unique guest experience featuring themed rides and attractions, live disney character interaction, restaurants, refreshment areas and
merchandise shops. additionally, there are daily parades and a nighttime fireworks extravaganza, wishes.  epcot  epcot, which opened in 1982, consists of two major themed areas: future world and world showcase. future world dramatizes certain historical developments and addresses the challenges facing the world today
through major pavilions devoted to showcasing science and technology improvements, communication, energy, transportation, using your imagination, life and health, nature and food production, the ocean environment and space. world showcase presents a
community of nations focusing on the culture, traditions and accomplishments of people around the world. countries represented with pavilions include the united states, canada, china, france, germany, italy, japan, mexico, morocco, norway and the
united kingdom. both areas feature themed rides and attractions, restaurants and merchandise shops. epcot also features illuminations: reflections of earth, a nighttime entertainment spectacular.  disneys hollywood studios  disneys hollywood studios, which opened in 1989, consists of a theme park, a radio
studio and a film and television production facility. the park centers on hollywood as it was during the 1930s and 1940s and provides various attractions, themed food service and merchandise facilities. the production facility consists
of three sound stages, merchandise shops and a back lot and currently hosts both feature film and television productions. disneys hollywood studios also features fantasmic!, a nighttime entertainment spectacular.  disneys animal kingdom  disneys animal kingdom, which opened in 1998, consists of a 145-foot tree of life
centerpiece surrounded by six themed areas: dinoland u.s.a., africa, rafikis planet watch, asia, discovery island and camp minnie-mickey. each themed area contains adventure attractions, entertainment shows, restaurants and merchandise shops.
the park features more than 300 species of mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians and 3,000 varieties of trees and plants.
table of contents
hotels and other resort facilities  as of october3, 2009, the company
owned and operated 17 resort hotels at the walt disney world resort, with a total of approximately 22,000 rooms and 468,000 square feet of conference meeting space. in addition, disneys fort wilderness camping and recreational area offers
approximately 800 campsites.  the walt disney world resort also hosts a 120-acre retail, dining and entertainment complex
known as downtown disney, which consists of the marketplace, west side and pleasure island.downtown disney is home to the 50,000-square-foot world of disney retail store featuring disney-branded merchandise, cirque du soleil, the house of
blues, and the companys disneyquest facility. a number of the downtown disney facilities are operated by third parties that pay rent and license fees to the company. in september 2008, the company commenced a project to enhance pleasure
island, which will feature new shopping and dining experiences to entertain guests of all ages. the project is expected to be completed in 2012.  disneys wide world of sports, which opened in 1997, is a 220-acre sports complex providing professional caliber training and competition, festival and tournament events and interactive sports
activities. the complexs venues accommodate multiple sporting events, including baseball, tennis, basketball, softball, track and field, football and soccer. its stadium, which has a seating capacity exceeding 9,500, is the spring training
site for mlbs atlanta braves. the amateur athletic union hosts more than 30 championship events per year at the facility. the company is currently in the process of rebranding disneys wide world of sports complex to espns wide
world of sports, which is expected to be completed in 2010.  in the downtown disney resort area, seven independently-operated
hotels are situated on property leased from the company. these hotels have a capacity of approximately 3,700 rooms. additionally, the walt disney world swan and the walt disney world dolphin hotels, which have approximately 2,300 total rooms, are
independently operated on property leased from the company near epcot.  other recreational amenities and activities available
at the walt disney world resort include four championship golf courses, miniature golf courses, full-service spas, tennis, sailing, water skiing, swimming, horseback riding and a number of other noncompetitive sports and leisure time activities. the
resort also includes two water parks: blizzard beach and typhoon lagoon.  disneyland resort  the company owns 461 acres and has the rights under long-term lease for use of an additional 49 acres of land in anaheim, california. the
disneyland resort includes two theme parks (disneyland and disneys california adventure), three hotels and downtown disney, a retail, dining and entertainment complex designed to attract visitors for an extended stay.  the entire disneyland resort is marketed as a destination resort through international, national and local advertising and promotional
activities. a number of the attractions and restaurants at both of the theme parks are sponsored by other corporations through long-term agreements.  disneyland  disneyland, which opened in 1955, consists of main street usa and seven principal areas: adventureland, critter country, fantasyland, frontierland, new orleans square,
tomorrowland and toontown. these areas feature themed rides and attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and refreshment stands. additionally, disneyland offers daily parades and a nighttime entertainment spectacular, fantasmic!.
disneys california adventure  disneys california adventure, which opened in 2001, is adjacent to
disneyland and includes four principal areas: golden state, hollywood pictures backlot, paradise pier and a bugs land. these areas include rides, attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and refreshment stands.
in october 2007, the company announced a multi-year expansion that brings new entertainment and family-oriented attractions
to disneys california adventure, including an entirely new 12-acre cars land inspired by the animated film cars and a new nighttime water spectacular, world of color.  hotels and other resort facilities  disneyland resort includes three company-owned and operated hotels: the 969-room disneyland
hotel, the 481-room disneys paradise pier hotel, and disneys grand californian hotel& spa, a
table of contents
deluxe hotel located adjacent to disneys california adventure. disneys grand californian hotel& spa was recently expanded and now has 948 rooms as well as fifty vacation
club units.  disneyland resort also includes downtown disney, a themed 15-acre outdoor complex of entertainment, dining and
shopping venues, located adjacent to both disneyland park and disneys california adventure. a number of the downtown disney facilities are operated by third parties that pay rent and license fees to the company.  disneyland paris  the
company has a 51% effective ownership interest in disneyland paris, a 4,800-acre development located in marne-la-valle, approximately 20 miles east of paris, france, which was developed pursuant to a 1987 master agreement with french
governmental authorities. the company manages and has a 40% equity interest in euro disney s.c.a., a publicly-traded french entity that is the holding company for euro disney associs s.c.a.(disney s.c.a), the primary operating company of
disneyland paris. euro disney s.c.a. and its subsidiaries operate disneyland paris, which includes two theme parks (disneyland park and walt disney studios park); seven themed hotels; convention centers; a shopping, dining and entertainment complex;
and a 27-hole golf facility. of the 4,800 acres comprising the site, approximately 2,400 acres have been developed to date which includes the val deurope development discussed below. an indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary of the company is
responsible for managing disneyland paris. euro disney s.c.a. is required to pay royalties and management fees to certain indirect, wholly-owned subsidiaries of the walt disney company based on the operating performance of the resort.
disneyland park  disneyland park, which opened in 1992, consists of main street and four principal themed areas:
adventureland, discoveryland, fantasyland and frontierland. these areas include themed rides, attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and refreshment stands. disneyland park also features a daily parade.  walt disney studios park  walt disney studios park opened in march 2002 adjacent to disneyland park. the park takes guests into
the worlds of cinema, animation and television and includes four principal themed areas: front lot, toon studios, production courtyard and backlot. these areas each include themed rides, attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and
refreshment stands.  hotels and other facilities  disneyland paris operates seven resort hotels, with a total of
approximately 5,800 rooms and 250,000 square feet of conference meeting space. in addition, several on-site hotels opened between 2003 and 2006 that are owned and operated by third-party developers and provide approximately 2,400 rooms.
disneyland paris also includes disney village, a seven-acre retail, dining and entertainment complex, located between the theme parks and
the hotels. a number of the disney village facilities are operated by third parties that pay rent and license fees to a subsidiary of euro disney s.c.a.  val deurope is a planned community that is being developed near disneyland paris. the completed phases of the development include: a town center, which consists of a shopping center; a 150-room
hotel; office, commercial, and residential space; and a regional train station. third parties operate these developments on land leased or purchased from euro disney s.c.a. and its subsidiaries.  in fiscal 2005, euro disney s.c.a. completed a financial restructuring, which provided for an increase in capital and refinancing of its
borrowings. pursuant to the financial restructuring, the company agreed to conditionally and unconditionally defer certain management fees and royalties and convert them into long-term subordinated debt and provide a new ten year line of credit for
liquidity needs, which is currently 100 million.  hong kong disneyland resort  the company owns a 47% interest in hong kong disneyland resort through hongkong international theme parks limited, an entity in which the
government of the hong kong special administrative region (hksar) owns a 53% majority interest. a separate hong kong subsidiary of the company is responsible for managing hong kong disneyland resort.  located on 311 acres on lantau island, the resort is in close proximity to the hong kong international airport. hong kong disneyland resort
includes one theme park and two themed hotels.
table of contents
hong kong disneyland  hong kong disneyland opened in 2005 and consists of the
following themed lands: adventureland, fantasyland, main street usa and tomorrowland. these areas feature themed rides and attractions, shows, restaurants, merchandise shops and refreshment stands. additionally, there are daily parades and a
nighttime fireworks extravaganza.  hotels  hong kong disneyland resort includes two themed hotels: the 400-room
hong kong disneyland hotel and the 600-room disneys hollywood hotel.  in july 2009, the company and the hksar agreed to
a capital realignment and expansion plan for hong kong disneyland. the expansion will bring three new themed areas to hong kong disneyland, which are scheduled to be completed in phases by 2014. pursuant to the plan, the company converted a loan to
hong kong disneyland into equity and made an additional $40 million capital contribution and the hksar converted a like amount of its loan into equity. this increased the companys effective ownership interest from 43% to 47% as of october 3,
2009. the company expects to make additional capital contributions over approximately five years to fund the expansion of hong kong disneyland. see note 7 to the consolidated financial statements.  based on the operating performance of hong kong disneyland resort, the company is entitled to receive royalties and management fees. the
company has, however, waived management fees and deferred royalties for the 2008 and 2009 fiscal years.  tokyo disney resort
tokyo disney resort is located on approximately 494 acres of land, six miles east of downtown tokyo, japan. the resort
includes two theme parks (tokyo disneyland and tokyo disneysea); three disney-branded hotels; six independently operated hotels; and a retail, dining and entertainment complex.  tokyo disneyland  tokyo disneyland, which opened in 1983, was the first disney theme park to open outside the united states.
tokyo disneyland consists of seven principal areas: adventureland, critter country, fantasyland, tomorrowland, toontown, westernland and world bazaar.  tokyo disneysea  tokyo disneysea, adjacent to tokyo disneyland, opened in 2001. the park is divided into seven unique ports of call, including mediterranean harbor, american
waterfront, port discovery, lost river delta, mermaid lagoon, mysterious island and arabian coast.  hotels and other resort
facilities  the resort includes the 504-room disney ambassador hotel, the 502-room tokyo disneysea hotel miracosta and the 705-room tokyo disneyland hotel. the resort also includes the disney resort line monorail, which links theme parks
and resort hotels with ikspiari, a retail, dining and entertainment complex; bon voyage, a disney-themed merchandise location; as well as the first cirque du soleil theatre in japan.  the company earns royalties on revenues generated by the tokyo disney resort, which is owned and operated by oriental land co., ltd. (olc),
a japanese corporation in which the company has no equity interest. olc markets the tokyo disney resort through a variety of local, domestic and international advertising and promotional activities. in addition, third parties sponsor many of the
theme park attractions under long-term arrangements.  disney vacation club  the disney vacation club (dvc) offers ownership interests in ten resort facilities located at the walt disney world resort; disneyland
resort; vero beach, florida; and hilton head island, south carolina. available units at each facility are offered for sale under a vacation ownership plan and are operated as rental property until the units are sold. dvc inventory consists of a mix
of units ranging from one bedroom studios to three bedroom villas. unit counts in this document are presented in terms of two bedroom equivalents. as of october3, 2009, dvc has 3,060 units including the second phase of disneys animal
kingdom villas, bay lake tower at disneys contemporary resort and the treehouse villas at disneys saratoga springs resort& spa, all of which opened in 2009 on walt disney world resort property. additionally, dvc opened its
first property on the west coast in 2009 with the opening of 50 units at disneys grand californian hotel& spa at disneyland resort. in 2007, the company purchased 21 acres of oceanfront property on the island of oahu, hawaii, which
will be home to a new dvc resort. this resort, scheduled to open in phases beginning in 2011, will include 350 traditional hotel rooms and 480 vacation club units.
table of contents
disney cruise line  disney cruise line, which is operated out of port canaveral, florida, is a vacation cruise line that includes two 85,000-ton ships, the disney magic and the disney wonder. both ships cater
to children, families and adults, with distinctly-themed areas and activities for each group. each ship features 877 staterooms, 73% of which are outside and provide guests with ocean views. cruise vacations often include a visit to disneys
castaway cay, a 1,000-acre private bahamian island. the company packages three, four and seven-day cruise vacations with visits to the walt disney world resort and also offers cruise-only options.  in 2007, the company announced that it is expanding its cruise business by adding two new ships, the disney dream in 2011 and the
disney fantasy in 2012. the new ships will each be approximately 128,000 tons with 1,250 staterooms. in 2009, the company announced that the disney wonder will move its home to the port of los angeles in 2011, to accommodate pacific
itineraries.  adventures by disney  adventures by disney, which began operations in 2005, offers a series of all-inclusive guided vacation tour packages at predominantly non-disney sites around the world. the company provided 22 specialized
excursion packages during 2009.  walt disney imagineering  walt disney imagineering provides master planning, real estate development, attraction and show design, engineering support, production
support, project management and other development services, including research and development for the companys operations.  competition and seasonality  the companys theme parks and resorts as well as disney cruise line and
disney vacation club compete with other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreational activities. the profitability of the leisure-time industry may be influenced by various factors that are not directly controllable, such as economic
conditions including business cycle and exchange rate fluctuations, travel industry trends, amount of available leisure time, oil and transportation prices and weather patterns.  all of the theme parks and the associated resort facilities are operated on a year-round basis. historically, the theme parks and resort
business experiences fluctuations in theme park attendance and resort occupancy resulting from the seasonal nature of vacation travel and local entertainment excursions. peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur during the summer months
when school vacations occur and during early-winter and spring-holiday periods.  studio entertainment  the studio entertainment segment produces and acquires live-action and animated motion pictures, direct-to-video content, musical recordings
and live stage plays.  the company distributes produced and acquired films (including its film and television library) in the
theatrical, home entertainment and television markets. each of these market windows is discussed in more detail below.  in
august 2009, the company entered into an agreement with dreamworks studios (dreamworks) to distribute live-action motion pictures produced by dreamworks over the next seven years under the touchstone pictures banner. as part of the
agreement, the company will provide certain financing, which as of october 3, 2009, totaled $100 million.  theatrical market
walt disney pictures, a subsidiary of the company, produces and acquires live-action motion pictures focusing on the
production of disney-branded films that are distributed primarily under the walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures and disneynature banners. miramax film corp. (miramax), another subsidiary of the company, acquires and
table of contents
produces motion pictures under the miramax banner. the company also owns and distributes motion pictures under the dimension banner that were produced and distributed by the company under that
banner with initial release dates before september30, 2005. the company also produces and distributes animated motion pictures under the banners walt disney pictures and pixar.  during fiscal 2010, we expect to distribute domestically approximately 14 feature films under the walt disney pictures, pixar, touchstone
pictures and disneynature banners and approximately seven films under the miramax banner. these releases include several live-action family films and full-length animated films, with the remainder targeted to teenagers and/or adults. as of
october3, 2009, the company had released domestically 949 full-length live-action features, 83 full-length animated features, approximately 548 cartoon shorts and 53 live action shorts under the walt disney pictures, pixar, touchstone
pictures, hollywood pictures, miramax and dimension banners.  we distribute and market our filmed products principally through
our own distribution and marketing companies in the u.s. in the international markets, we distribute our filmed products both directly and through independent distribution companies or joint ventures. films released theatrically in the u.s. can be
released simultaneously in international territories or generally up to six months later.  the company incurs significant
marketing and advertising costs before and throughout the theatrical release of a film in an effort to generate public awareness of the film, to increase the publics intent to view the film and to help generate consumer interest in the
subsequent home entertainment and other ancillary markets. these costs are expensed as incurred; therefore, we typically incur losses on a film in the theatrical markets, including in periods prior to the theatrical release of the film.
home entertainment market  in the domestic market, we distribute home entertainment releases directly under each of our motion picture banners. in the international market, we distribute home entertainment releases under each of our motion picture banners both
directly and through independent foreign distribution companies. in addition, we acquire and produce original content for direct-to-video release.  the domestic and international home entertainment window typically starts four to six months after the theatrical release in each market with the issuance of a variety of physical and electronic versions
of each title (including dvd, blu-ray and electronic formats). most titles are sold simultaneously to both rentailers, such as blockbuster, and retailers, such as wal-mart and best buy.  as of october 3, 2009 under the banners walt disney pictures, pixar, touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures, miramax and dimension, there
were approximately 1,900 active produced and acquired titles, including 1,500 live-action titles and 400 animated titles, in the domestic home entertainment marketplace and approximately 2,900 active produced and acquired titles, including 2,400
live-action titles and 500 animated titles, in the international marketplace.  television market  pay-per-view (ppv)/video-on-demand (vod): generally about one to two months after the home entertainment window begins, the
studios television distributors, disney-abc domestic television and disney-abc-espn television international, license titles for use on a ppv/vod basis in the cable and satellite markets, as well as for internet, console games, and mobile
platforms. ppv/vod services deliver one-time rentals electronically to consumers at a price comparable to that of physical media rentals.  pay television (pay 1): there are generally two pay television windows. the first window is generally sixteen months in duration and follows the ppv/vod window. the company has licensed exclusive
domestic pay television rights to substantially all films released under the walt disney pictures, pixar, touchstone pictures, hollywood pictures, miramax and dimension banners to the starz pay television service through fiscal 2013.  free television (free 1): the pay 1 window is followed by a television window with telecasts accessible to consumers without charge.
this free window may last up to 84 months. motion pictures are usually sold in the free 1 window on an ad-hoc basis to major networks, including the abc television network, and basic cable services, including abc family, disney channel, disney xd,
and soapnet.
table of contents
pay television 2 (pay 2) and free television 2 (free 2): in the u.s., free 1 is
generally followed by a fourteen- month pay 2 window under our license arrangement with starz, and finally by a free 2 window. the free 2 window is a syndication window where films are licensed both to basic cable networks and to third-party
television station groups. major packages of the companys feature films have been licensed for broadcast under multi-year agreements.  international television: the company also licenses its theatrical and television properties outside of the u.s. the typical windowing sequence is broadly consistent with the domestic cycle such
that titles premiere on television in ppv/vod then air in pay tv before airing in free tv. windowing strategies are developed in response to local market practices and conditions, and the exact sequence and length of each window can vary country by
country.  disney music group  the disney music group includes walt disney records, hollywood records (including the mammoth records and buena vista records labels), lyric street records, buena vista concerts and disney music
publishing.  walt disney records produces and distributes compact discs and music dvds in the united states and licenses our
music properties throughout the rest of the world. music categories include infant, childrens read-along, teens, all-family and soundtracks from film and television series distributed by walt disney pictures and disney channel. hollywood
records develops, produces and markets recordings from talent across a spectrum of popular music. nashville-based lyric street records develops, produces and markets recordings in the country music genre.  each of the labels commissions new music for the companys motion picture and television programs, records the songs and licenses the
song copyrights to others for printed music, records, audio-visual devices, public performances and digital distribution. buena vista concerts produces live-entertainment events with artists signed to the disney music group record labels.
disney music publishing controls the copyrights of thousands of musical compositions derived from the companys motion
picture, television, record and theme park properties, as well as musical compositions written by songwriters under exclusive contract. it is responsible for the management, protection, and licensing of the disney song catalog on a worldwide basis,
including licensing for printed music, records, audio-visual works and new media.  disney theatrical group  the disney theatrical group includes both disney theatrical productions and disney live family entertainment.  disney theatrical productions develops, produces and licenses live entertainment events. the company has produced and
licensed broadway musicals around the world, including beauty and the beast, the lion king, elton john& tim rices aida, mary poppins (a co-production with cameron mackintosh ltd), tarzan, the professional touring stage version of high school musical, and the little mermaid. in addition,
the company licenses musicals for local school and community theatre productions.  disney live family entertainment delivers
worldwide touring productions under the disney on ice and disney live! brands under a license to feld entertainment. north american tours for disney live! rockin road show and disney on ices latest ice show,
celebrations!, were launched in august 2009 and september 2009, respectively.  competition and seasonality  the studio entertainment businesses compete with all forms of entertainment. a significant number of companies produce and/or distribute
theatrical and television films, exploit products in the home entertainment market, provide pay television programming services and sponsor live theater. we also compete to obtain creative and performing talents, story properties, advertiser support
and broadcast rights that are essential to the success of our studio entertainment businesses.  the success of studio
entertainment operations is heavily dependent upon public taste and preferences. in addition, studio entertainment operating results fluctuate due to the timing and performance of releases in the theatrical, home entertainment and television
markets. release dates are determined by several factors, including competition and the timing of vacation and holiday periods.
table of contents
consumer products  the consumer products segment engages with licensees, manufacturers, publishers and retailers throughout the world to design, develop, publish, promote and sell a wide variety of products based on
existing and new disney characters and other company intellectual property through its merchandise licensing, publishing and retail businesses. in addition to leveraging the companys film and television properties, consumer products also
develops new intellectual property with the potential of also being used in the companys other businesses.  merchandise licensing
the companys worldwide merchandise licensing operations include a diverse range of product categories, the
most significant of which are: toys, apparel, accessories, footwear, home furnishings, home dcor, health, beauty, food, stationery and consumer electronics. the company licenses characters from its film, television and other properties and
earns royalties, which are usually based on a fixed percentage of the wholesale or retail selling price of the products. some of the major properties licensed by the company include mickey mouse, winnie the pooh, disney princess, cars, hannah
montana, and high school musical. the company also designs individual products and creates exclusive themed and seasonal promotional campaigns for retailers based on characters, movies and tv shows.  publishing  disney
publishing worldwide (dpw) publishes childrens books and magazines in multiple countries and languages. dpws businesses include disney global book group, global childrens magazines, disney familyfun group, and disney english. in
fiscal 2009, the disney global books group published titles around the world in support of such franchises as disney princess, disney fairies, winnie the pooh, mickey mouse clubhouse, handy manny, high school musical, cars
and hannah montana, and of the films bolt, up, and g-force. the global childrens magazines business launched new titles in over 30 languages to support disney channel hits, including high school musical,
hannah montana, jonas, and camp rock. the disney familyfun group includes the disney familyfun and disney en familia magazines, special publications and branded books, and custom media solutions. disney english
currently offers more than 400 hours of classroom programming for young children at five disney english centers in shanghai.  retail
the company markets disney-themed products directly through retail stores operated under the disney store name and through
internet sites in north america (as disneystore.com and disneyoutlet.com) and the united kingdom (as disneystore.co.uk). the stores, which are generally located in leading shopping malls and other retail complexes, carry a wide variety of disney
merchandise and promote other businesses of the company. the company owns and operates 231 stores in north america and 109 stores in europe. in japan, the stores are operated by a subsidiary of oriental land co., ltd. under a licensing arrangement.
competition and seasonality  the companys merchandise licensing, publishing and retail businesses compete with other licensors, publishers and retailers of character, brand and celebrity names. based on independent surveys, we
believe the company is the largest worldwide licensor of character-based merchandise based on retail sales. operating results for the licensing and retail businesses are influenced by seasonal consumer purchasing behavior and by the timing and
performance of animated theatrical releases and cable programming broadcasts.  interactive media  the disney interactive media group creates and delivers disney-branded entertainment and lifestyle content across interactive media
platforms. the primary operating businesses of the disney interactive media group are disney interactive studios which produces video games for global distribution and disney online which produces web sites and online virtual worlds in the united
states and internationally. the disney interactive media groups internet operations derive revenue from a combination of advertising and sponsorships, subscription services and e-commerce. the disney interactive media group also manages the
companys disney-branded mobile phone initiative in japan and provides technical infrastructure services to the companys non disney-branded websites, such
table of contents
as abc.com and espn.com, and to its disney-branded e-commerce websites, principally disneystore.com and walt disney parks and resorts online.the disney interactive media group is reimbursed
for the cost of providing these technical infrastructure services, and since these other websites are managed within the companys other segments, the financial results of these websites are reported within the companys other segments
rather than as part of the disney interactive media group.  disney interactive studios  disney interactive studios creates, develops, markets and distributes multi-platform video games worldwide based on the companys
creative content, including pirates of the caribbean, high school musical and the chronicles of narnia and from properties developed by disney interactive studios, such as pure and spectrobes. the division has been
increasing its investment in internally developed and published games through the acquisition of studios and increased product development spending. disney interactive studios also licenses properties for games, such as cars, finding nemo
and ratatouille to third-party publishers. the company has a licensing agreement with thq, inc. that includes one upcoming pixar title.  disney online  disney online develops, publishes and distributes content for disney-branded online services
intended for family entertainment. disney online produces disney.com, disneyfamily.com, which is an online lifestyle destination for moms, and a portfolio of virtual worlds, including club penguin, disneys toontown and disneys pirates of
the caribbean online. disney.com integrates many of the companys disney-branded internet sites including sites for the disney channel, disney parks and resorts, walt disney pictures and disney consumer products.  competition and seasonality  the companys internet sites and products compete with other internet sites and products. the companys video game business competes primarily with other publishers of video game software and other types of home entertainment.
operating results for the video game business fluctuate due to the timing and performance of video game releases which are determined by several factors, including theatrical releases and cable programming broadcasts, competition and the timing of
holiday periods. revenues from our internet and mobile operations are generally not subject to significant seasonal trends.  intellectual
property protection  the companys businesses throughout the world are affected by its ability to exploit and protect
against infringement of its intellectual property, including trademarks, trade names, copyrights, patents and trade secrets. important intellectual property includes rights in the content of motion pictures, television programs, electronic games,
sound recordings, character likenesses, theme park attractions, books and magazines. risks related to the protection and exploitation of intellectual property rights are set forth in item1a  risk factors.  available information  our
annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k and amendments to those reports are available without charge on our website, www.disney.com/investors, as soon as reasonably practicable after they are filed
electronically with the sec. we are providing the address to our internet site solely for the information of investors. we do not intend the address to be an active link or to otherwise incorporate the contents of the website into this report.
table of contents
item1a.risk factors  for an enterprise as large and complex as the company, a wide range of factors could materially affect future developments and performance.
in addition to the factors affecting specific business operations identified in connection with the description of these operations and the financial results of these operations elsewhere in this report, the most significant factors affecting our
operations include the following:  recent changes in u.s., global, or regional economic conditions could have a continuing adverse effect
on the profitability of some or all of our businesses.  the recent decline in economic activity in the united states and
other regions of the world in which we do business has affected demand for some of our products and services, and continuation of this condition could adversely affect demand for any of our businesses, thus reducing our revenue and earnings. the
decline in economic conditions has reduced and could continue to reduce spending at our parks and resorts, purchase of or prices for advertising on our broadcast or cable networks or owned stations, performance of our home entertainment releases,
and purchases of company-branded consumer products. a continuing decline in economic conditions could also reduce attendance at our parks and resorts or prices that mvsps pay for our cable programming. economic conditions have also and could
continue to impair the ability of those with whom we do business to satisfy their obligations to us. in addition, an increase in price levels generally, or in price levels in a particular sector such as the energy sector, could result in a shift in
consumer demand away from the entertainment and consumer products we offer, which could also adversely affect our revenues and, at the same time, increase our costs. changes in exchange rates for foreign currencies may reduce international demand
for our products, increase our labor or supply costs in non-united states markets, or reduce the united states dollar value of revenue we receive from other markets.  changes in public and consumer tastes and preferences for entertainment and consumer products could reduce demand for our entertainment offerings and products and adversely affect the profitability of
any of our businesses.  each of our businesses creates entertainment or consumer products whose success depends
substantially on consumer tastes and preferences that change in often unpredictable ways. the success of our businesses depends on our ability to consistently create and distribute filmed entertainment, broadcast and cable programming, online
material, electronic games, theme park attractions, hotels and other resort facilities and consumer products that meet the changing preferences of the broad consumer market. many of our businesses increasingly depend on worldwide acceptance of our
offerings and products outside the united states, and their success therefore depends on our ability to successfully predict and adapt to changing consumer tastes and preferences outside as well as inside the united states. moreover, we must often
invest substantial amounts in film production, broadcast and cable programming, electronic games, theme park attractions, or hotels and other resort facilities before we learn the extent to which these products will earn consumer acceptance. if our
entertainment offerings and products do not achieve sufficient consumer acceptance, our revenue from advertising sales (which are based in part on ratings for the programs in which advertisements air) or subscription fees for broadcast and cable
programming and online services, from theatrical film receipts or home video or electronic game sales, from theme park admissions, hotel room charges and merchandise, food and beverage sales, from sales of licensed consumer products or from sales of
our other consumer products and services may decline and adversely affect the profitability of one or more of our businesses.  changes in
technology and in consumer consumption patterns may affect demand for our entertainment products or the cost of producing or distributing products.  the media entertainment and internet businesses in which we participate depend significantly on our ability to acquire, develop, adopt and exploit new technologies to distinguish our products and services
from those of our competitors. in addition, new technologies affect the demand for our products, the time and manner in which consumers acquire and view some of our entertainment products and the options available to advertisers for reaching their
desired markets. for example:
the success of our offerings in the home entertainment market depends in part on consumer preferences with respect to home entertainment formats,
including dvd players and personal video recorders, as well as the availability of alternative home entertainment offerings and technologies, including web-based delivery of entertainment offerings;
table of contents
technological developments offer consumers an expanding array of entertainment options and if consumers favor options we have not yet fully developed
rather than the entertainment products we offer, our sales may be adversely affected.  the success of our businesses is
highly dependent on the existence and maintenance of intellectual property rights in the entertainment products and services we create.  the value to us of our intellectual property rights is dependent on the scope and duration of our rights as defined by applicable laws in the united states and abroad and the manner in which those laws
are construed. if those laws are drafted or interpreted in ways that limit the extent or duration of our rights, or if existing laws are changed, our ability to generate revenue from our intellectual property may decrease, or the cost of obtaining
and maintaining rights may increase.  the unauthorized use of our intellectual property rights may increase the cost of
protecting these rights or reduce our revenues. new technologies such as the convergence of computing, communication, and entertainment devices, the falling prices of devices incorporating such technologies, and increased broadband internet speed
and penetration have made the unauthorized digital copying and distribution of our films, television productions and other creative works easier and faster and enforcement of intellectual property rights more challenging. there is evidence that
unauthorized use of intellectual property rights in the entertainment industry generally is a significant and rapidly growing phenomenon. inadequate laws or weak enforcement mechanisms to protect intellectual property in one country can adversely
affect the results of the companys operations worldwide, despite the companys efforts to protect its intellectual property rights. these developments require us to devote substantial resources to protecting our intellectual property
against unlicensed use and present the risk of increased losses of revenue as a result of unlicensed digital distribution of our content and sales of unauthorized dvds, blu-ray discs and other products.  with respect to intellectual property developed by the company and rights acquired by the company from others, the company is subject to the
risk of challenges to our rights in intellectual property by third parties. successful challenges to our rights in intellectual property may result in increased costs for obtaining rights or the loss of the opportunity to earn revenue from the
intellectual property that is the subject of challenged rights. the company is not aware of any challenges to its intellectual property rights that it currently foresees having a material effect on its operations.  a variety of uncontrollable events may reduce demand for our products and services, impair our ability to provide our products and services or increase
the cost of providing our products and services.  demand for our products and services, particularly our theme parks and
resorts, is highly dependent on the general environment for travel and tourism. the environment for travel and tourism, as well as demand for other entertainment products, can be significantly adversely affected in the united states, globally or in
specific regions as a result of a variety of factors beyond our control, including: adverse weather conditions or natural disasters (such as excessive heat or rain, hurricanes and earthquakes); health concerns; international, political or military
developments; and terrorist attacks. these events and others, such as fluctuations in travel and energy costs and computer virus attacks or other widespread computing or telecommunications failures, may also damage our ability to provide our
products and services or to obtain insurance coverage with respect to these events. in addition, we derive royalties from the sales of our licensed goods and services by third parties and the management of businesses operated under brands licensed
from the company, and we are therefore dependent on the successes of those third parties for that portion of our revenue. a wide variety of factors could influence the success of those third parties and if negative factors significantly impacted a
sufficient number of our licensees they could adversely affect the profitability of one or more of our businesses. we obtain insurance against the risk of losses relating to some but not all of these events, and when insurance is obtained it is
subject to deductibles, exclusions and caps. the types and levels of coverage we obtain vary from time to time depending on our view of the likelihood of specific types and levels of loss in relation to the cost of obtaining coverage for such types
and levels of loss.  changes in our business strategy or restructuring of our businesses may increase our costs or otherwise affect the
profitability of our businesses.  as changes in our business environment occur we may need to adjust our business
strategies to meet these changes or we may otherwise find it necessary to restructure our operations or particular businesses or assets. in
table of contents
addition, external events including acceptance of our theatrical offerings and changes in macro-economic conditions may impair the value of our assets. when these changes or events occur, we may
incur costs to change our business strategy and may need to write down the value of assets. we may also need to invest in new businesses that have short-term returns that are negative or low and whose ultimate business prospects are uncertain. in
any of these events, our costs may increase, we may have significant charges associated with the write-down of assets or returns on new investments may be lower than prior to the change in strategy or restructuring.  turmoil in the financial markets could increase our cost of borrowing and impede access to or increase the cost of financing our operations and
investments.  u.s. and global credit and equity markets experienced significant disruption beginning in late 2008, making
it difficult for many businesses to obtain financing on acceptable terms. in addition, equity markets experienced rapid and wide fluctuations in value. these conditions tended to increase the cost of borrowing and if they recur, our cost of
borrowing could increase and it may be more difficult to obtain financing for our operations or investments. in addition, our borrowing costs can be affected by short and long-term debt ratings assigned by independent rating agencies which are
based, in significant part, on the companys performance as measured by credit metrics such as interest coverage and leverage ratios. a decrease in these ratings would likely increase our cost of borrowing and/or make it more difficult for us
to obtain financing. the disruption in the global financial markets also impacted some of the financial institutions with which we do business. a similar decline in the financial stability of financial institutions could affect our ability to secure
credit-worthy counterparties for our interest rate and foreign currency hedging programs and could affect our ability to settle existing contracts.  increased competitive pressures may reduce our revenues or increase our costs.  we face substantial
competition in each of our businesses from alternative providers of the products and services we offer and from other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreational activities. we also must compete to obtain human resources, programming
and other resources we require in operating our business. for example:
our broadcast and cable networks, stations and online offerings compete for viewers with other broadcast, cable and satellite services as well as with
home video products and internet usage.
our broadcast and cable networks and stations compete for the sale of advertising time with other broadcast, cable and satellite services, and the
internet, as well as with newspapers, magazines and billboards.
our cable networks compete for carriage of their programming with other programming providers.
our broadcast and cable networks compete for the acquisition of creative talent and sports and other programming with other broadcast and cable
networks.
our theme parks and resorts compete for guests with all other forms of entertainment, lodging, tourism and recreation activities.
our studio operations compete for customers with all other forms of entertainment.
our studio operations, broadcast and cable networks and publishing businesses compete to obtain creative and performing talent, story properties,
advertiser support, broadcast rights and market share.
our consumer products segment competes in the character merchandising and other licensing, publishing, and retail activities with other licensors,
publishers and retailers of character, brand and celebrity names.
our interactive media video game operations compete primarily with other publishers of video game software and other types of home entertainment.
competition in each of these areas may divert consumers from our creative or other products, or to other
products or other forms of entertainment, which could reduce our revenue or increase our marketing costs. competition for the acquisition of resources can increase the cost of producing our products and services.
table of contents
sustained increases in costs of pension and postretirement medical and other employee health and welfare
benefits may reduce our profitability.  with approximately 144,000 employees, our profitability is substantially affected
by costs of pension benefits and current and postretirement medical benefits. we may experience significant increases in these costs as a result of macro-economic factors, which are beyond our control, including increases in the cost of health care.
in addition, changes in investment returns and discount rates used to calculate pension expense and related assets and liabilities can be volatile and may have an unfavorable impact on our costs in some years. these macro-economic factors as well as
the decline in the fair value of pension plan assets may put upward pressure on the cost of providing pension and medical benefits and may increase future funding contributions. although we have actively sought to control increases in these costs,
there can be no assurance that we will succeed in limiting cost increases, and continued upward pressure could reduce the profitability of our businesses.  our results may be adversely affected if long-term programming or carriage contracts are not renewed on sufficiently favorable terms.  we enter into long-term contracts for both the acquisition and the distribution of media programming and products, including contracts for
the acquisition of programming rights for sporting events and other programs, and contracts for the distribution of our programming to mvsps. as these contracts expire, we must renew or renegotiate the contracts, and if we are unable to renew them
on acceptable terms, we may lose programming rights or distribution rights. even if these contracts are renewed, the cost of obtaining programming rights may increase (or increase at faster rates than our historical experience) or the revenue from
distribution of programs may be reduced (or increase at slower rates than our historical experience). with respect to the acquisition of programming rights, particularly sports programming rights, the impact of these long-term contracts on our
results over the term of the contracts depends on a number of factors, including the strength of advertising markets, effectiveness of marketing efforts and the size of viewer audiences. there can be no assurance that revenues from programming based
on these rights will exceed the cost of the rights plus the other costs of producing and distributing the programming.  changes in
regulations applicable to our businesses may impair the profitability of our businesses.  our broadcast networks and
television stations are highly regulated, and each of our other businesses is subject to a variety of united states and overseas regulations. these regulations include:
united states fcc regulation of our television and radio networks, our national programming networks, and our owned television stations. see
item1  business  media networks, federal regulation.
environmental protection regulations.
federal, state and foreign privacy and data protection laws and regulations.
regulation of the safety of consumer products and theme park operations.
imposition by foreign countries of trade restrictions or motion picture or television content requirements or quotas.
domestic and international tax laws or currency controls.  changes in any of these regulatory areas may require us to spend additional amounts to comply with the regulations, or may restrict our
ability to offer products and services that are profitable.  labor disputes may disrupt our operations and adversely affect the
profitability of any of our businesses.  a significant number of employees in various of our businesses are covered by
collective bargaining agreements, including employees of our theme parks and resorts as well as writers, directors, actors, production personnel and others employed in our media networks and studio operations. in addition, the employees of licensees
who manufacture and retailers who sell our consumer products may be covered by labor agreements with their employers. in general, a labor dispute involving our employees or the employees of our licensees or retailers who sell our consumer products
may disrupt our operations and reduce our revenues, and resolution of disputes may increase our costs.
table of contents
provisions in our corporate documents and delaware state law could delay or prevent a change of control,
even if that change would be beneficial to shareholders.  our restated certificate of incorporation contains a provision
regulating the ability of shareholders to bring matters for action before annual and special meetings and authorizes our board of directors to issue and set the terms of preferred stock. the regulations on shareholder action could make it more
difficult for any person seeking to acquire control of the company to obtain shareholder approval of actions that would support this effort. the issuance of preferred stock could effectively dilute the interests of any person seeking control or
otherwise make it more difficult to obtain control. in addition, provisions in our restated certificate of incorporation require supermajority shareholder approval of some acquisition transactions and we are subject to the anti-takeover provisions
of the delaware general corporation law, either of which could have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control in some circumstances.  the seasonality of certain of our businesses could exacerbate negative impacts on our operations.  each of our
businesses is normally subject to seasonal variations, as follows:
revenues in our media networks segment are subject to seasonal advertising patterns and changes in viewership levels. in general, advertising revenues
are somewhat higher during the fall and somewhat lower during the summer months. affiliate revenues are typically collected ratably throughout the year. certain affiliate revenues at espn are deferred until annual programming commitments are met,
and these commitments are typically satisfied during the second half of the companys fiscal year, which generally results in higher revenue recognition during this period.
revenues in our parks and resorts segment fluctuate with changes in theme park attendance and resort occupancy resulting from the seasonal nature of
vacation travel and local entertainment excursions. peak attendance and resort occupancy generally occur during the summer months when school vacations occur and during early-winter and spring-holiday periods.
revenues in our studio entertainment segment fluctuate due to the timing and performance of releases in the theatrical, home entertainment, and
television markets. release dates are determined by several factors, including competition and the timing of vacation and holiday periods.
revenues in our consumer products segment are influenced by seasonal consumer purchasing behavior and by the timing and performance of theatrical
releases and cable programming broadcasts.
revenues in our interactive media segment fluctuate due to the timing and performance of video game releases which are determined by several factors,
including theatrical releases and cable programming broadcasts, competition and the timing of holiday periods. revenues from certain of our internet and mobile operations are subject to similar seasonal trends.  accordingly, if a short term negative impact on our business occurs during a time of high seasonal demand (such as hurricane damage to our
parks during the summer travel season), the effect could have a disproportionate effect on the results of that business for the year.  the
companys acquisition of marvel is expected to cause short term dilution in earnings per share and there can be no assurance that anticipated improvements in earnings per share will be realized.  on august31, 2009, the company entered into an agreement to acquire marvel entertainment, inc. in a merger transaction. based on the
number of fully diluted shares of marvel common stock outstanding as of september18, 2009, the company expects (assuming there is no adjustment to the exchange ratio) that the number of issued and outstanding shares will increase by
approximately 58.5million shares as a result of the merger. we expect that the merger will initially result in lower earnings per share than we would have earned in the absence of the merger. we expect that over time the merger will yield
benefits to the combined company such that the merger will ultimately be accretive to earnings per share. however, there can be no assurance that the increase in earnings per share expected in the long term will be achieved. in order to achieve
increases in earnings per share as a result of the merger, the combined company will, among other things, need to effectively continue the successful operations of marvel after the
table of contents
merger, develop successful new content (including future feature films and television series or sequels to marvel productions) based on marvel characters and successfully integrate marvel
products into the combined companys various distribution channels.  item1b. unresolved
staff comments  the company has received no written comments regarding its periodic or current reports from the staff of
the securities and exchange commission that were issued 180 days or more preceding the end of its 2009 fiscal year and that remain unresolved.  item2. properties  the walt disney world resort, disneyland resort
and other properties of the company and its subsidiaries are described in item1 under the caption parks and resorts. film library properties are described in item1 under the caption studio entertainment. radio and
television stations owned by the company are described under the caption media networks.
table of contents
the company and its subsidiaries own and lease properties throughout the world. in addition
to the properties noted above, the table below provides a brief description of other significant properties and the related business segment.
location
property / approximate size
use
business segment (1)
burbank, ca
land (52 acres) &buildings (2,000,000 ft2)
ownedoffice/production/ warehouse
corp/studio/media/cp
burbank, ca& surrounding cities (2)
buildings (1,800,000 ft2)
leased office/warehouse (includes 12,000 ft2
sublet to third party tenants)
corp/studio/media/cp/img
glendale, ca& north hollywood, ca
land (154 acres) &buildings (2,500,000 ft2)
ownedoffice/warehouse (includes650,000ft2sublet to third party tenants)
corp/studio/media/cp/tp&r/img
glendale, ca
buildings (160,000 ft2)
leased office/warehouse
corp
los angeles, ca
land (22 acres) &buildings (600,000 ft2)
ownedoffice/production/ technical
media
los angeles, ca
buildings (180,000 ft2)
leasedoffice/production/ technical
media/studio/img
new york, ny
land (6.5 acres) &buildings (1,400,000 ft2)
ownedoffice/production/ technical (includes 15,000ft2 sublet to
third party tenants)
media
new york, ny
buildings (660,000 ft2)
leasedoffice/production/ warehouse (includes 10,000ft2 sublet to
third party tenants)
studio/media/img
bristol, ct
land (115 acres) &buildings (720,000 ft2
)
ownedoffice/production/ technical
media
bristol, ct
buildings (440,000 ft2)
leasedoffice/warehouse/ technical
media
emeryville, ca
land (21 acres) &buildings (270,000ft2
)
ownedoffice/production/ technical (includes 20,000ft2 sublet to
third party tenants)
studio
emeryville, ca
buildings (125,000 ft2)
leased office/storage
studio
usa& canada
land and buildings (multiple sites and sizes)
ownedandleasedoffice/ production/transmitter/retail/ warehouse
corp/studio/media/cp/ tp&r/img
hammersmith, england
land (1 acre) &building (85,000 ft2)
owned office
corp/studio/media/cp/img
hammersmith, england
building (225,000 ft2)
leased office (includes 25,000 ft2 sublet to third party tenants)
corp/studio/media/cp/img
europe, asia, australia& latin america
buildings (multiple sites and sizes)
leased office/retail/warehouse
corp/studio/media/cp/img
(1)
corp  corporate, cp  consumer products, tp&r  theme parks and resorts and img  interactive media group
(2)
surrounding cities include north hollywood, ca and sun valley, ca
table of contents
item3. legal proceedings  milne and disney enterprises, inc. v. stephen slesinger, inc. on november5, 2002, clare milne, the granddaughter of a. a.
milne, author of the winnie the pooh books, and the companys subsidiary disney enterprises, inc. (dei) filed a complaint against stephen slesinger, inc. (ssi) in the united states district court for the central district of california. on
november4, 2002, ms.milne served notices to ssi and dei terminating a. a. milnes prior grant of rights to winnie the pooh, effective november5, 2004, and granted all of those rights to dei. in their lawsuit, ms.milne
and dei sought a declaratory judgment, under united states copyright law, that ms.milnes termination notices were valid; that ssis rights to winnie the pooh in the united states terminated effective november5, 2004; that upon
termination of ssis rights in the united states, the 1983 licensing agreement that is the subject of the stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney company lawsuit (the state court action) terminated by operation of law; and
that, as of november5, 2004, ssi was entitled to no further royalties for uses of winnie the pooh. ssi filed (a)an answer denying the material allegations of the complaint and (b)counterclaims seeking a declaration that
(i)ms.milnes grant of rights to dei is void and unenforceable and (ii)dei remains obligated to pay ssi royalties under the 1983 licensing agreement. the district court ruled that milnes termination notices were invalid.
the court of appeals for the ninth circuit affirmed, and on june26, 2006, the united states supreme court denied milnes petition for a writ of certiorari. on august1, 2003, ssi filed an amended answer and counterclaims and a
third-party complaint against harriet hunt (heir to e. h. shepard, illustrator of the original winnie the pooh stories), who had served a notice of termination and a grant of rights similar to ms.milnes, and asserted counterclaims
against the company allegedly arising from the milne and hunt terminations and the grant of rights to dei for (a)unlawful and unfair business practices; and (b)breach of the 1983 licensing agreement.  on october19, 2006, the parties stipulated to ssis filing its fourth amended answer and counterclaims (fourth amended answer)
seeking (a)to invalidate the hunt termination notice, (b)to terminate the companys rights vis--vis ssi, and (c)damages in excess of two billion dollars, among other relief. that stipulation also provided that hunt and
the company need not respond to the fourth amended answer until the conclusion of two events: the state court appeal in stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney company, and the trial in the district court on the validity of the hunt
termination notice. ssi then sought to withdraw both the fourth amended answer and its stipulation, but on november3, 2006, the district court denied that request. ssis motion for summary judgment on the validity of hunts 2002
attempt to recapture e. h. shepards rights was granted on february15, 2007, and thereafter, on march27, 2007, the district court dismissed as moot all claims against hunt and three of ssis counterclaims against the company
related to the companys agreements with milne and hunt concerning the termination and disposition of their rights. on january3, 2008, the california supreme court denied ssis petition for review in the state court action, whereupon
on april21, 2008, the company moved for summary judgment on all of ssis claims in the district court action. on june3, 2008, the district court ordered further briefing on the issue of whether ssis misconduct in the state
court action warrants dismissal of all of its claims in the district court, and then on july29, 2008, the district court referred the summary judgment motion to a special master, who rendered a sealed recommendation on march26, 2009. on
may19, 2009, the district court granted the companys motion for summary judgment and dismissed without prejudice ssis four contract and fraud counterclaims and invited the parties to file summary judgment motions on the remaining
infringement and unfair competition claims. on september25, 2009, the district court granted the companys motion for summary judgment on ssis remaining claims and on october21, 2009, ssi and the company filed applications for
attorneys fees. on november5, 2009, ssi appealed from the district courts judgment to the court of appeals for the ninth circuit.  relatedly, on december4, 2006,august22, 2007,february8,april18,august27 and october31, 2008, and february17,july27, and
november17, 2009, ssi initiated proceedings in the united states patent and trademark office (pto) seeking cancellation of certain winnie the pooh trademark registrations and opposing applications for other winnie the pooh trademarks. prior to
july27, the pto had already suspended the then-pending proceedings on the grounds that the relief sought is effectively duplicative of that sought in the fourth amended answer. on october8, 2009, the company advised the pto of the
district courts grant of summary judgment against ssi, and requested dismissal of all of ssis pending proceedings. also, on april18,october16 and october27, 2008 and july28, 2009, ssi initiated actions
before the canadian intellectual property office (cipo) opposing applications for certain winnie the pooh trademarks. on august4, 2009, ssi requested an extension of time to oppose another application by the company for a winnie
the pooh trademark. on september4, 2008, and february12 and march10, 2009, the company filed answers to the actions before the cipo, denying ssis claims.
table of contents
the company, together with, in some instances, certain of its directors and officers, is a
defendant or codefendant in various other legal actions involving copyright, breach of contract and various other claims incident to the conduct of its businesses. management does not expect the company to suffer any material liability by reason of
such actions.  item4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders  no matters were submitted to a vote of shareholders during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year covered by this report.  executive officers of the company  the executive officers of the company are elected each year at the organizational meeting of the board of directors, which follows the annual meeting of the shareholders, and at other board of directors
meetings, as appropriate. each of the executive officers has been employed by the company in the position or positions indicated in the list and pertinent notes below. except as noted, each of the executive officers has been employed by the company
for more than five years.  at october3, 2009, the executive officers of the company were as follows:
name
age
title
executiveofficersince
robert a. iger
president and chief executive officer
(1)
thomas o. staggs
senior executive vice president and chief financial officer
alan n. braverman
senior executive vice president, general counsel and secretary
kevin a. mayer
executive vice president, corporate strategy, business development and technology (2)
christine m. mccarthy
executive vice president, corporate finance and real estate and treasurer (3)
mary jayne parker
executive vice president and chief human resources officer (4)
(1)
mr.iger was appointed president and chief executive officer effective october2, 2005. he was president and chief operating officer from
january 2000.
(2)
mr.mayer was named executive vice president, corporate strategy, business development, and technology of the company in june 2005 and was
designated an executive officer in october 2005. he previously was partner and head of the global media and entertainment practice of l.e.k. consulting llc, a consulting firm, from february 2002.
(3)
ms.mccarthy was named executive vice president, corporate finance and real estate in june 2005 and has been treasurer since january 2000. prior
to her appointment as executive vice president, corporate finance and real estate, ms.mccarthy was senior vice president and treasurer from january 2000 to june 2005.
(4)
ms.parker was named executive vice president  human resources and chief human resources officer of the company, effective september1,
2009, and designated an executive officer of the company october2, 2009. ms.parker was previously senior vice president of human resources for walt disney parks and resorts from october 2005 to july 2007 and vice president human
resources administration for walt disney parks and resorts from march 2003 to october 2005.  on
november12, 2009, the company announced that mr.staggs would become chairman, walt disney parks and resorts worldwide, effective january1, 2010, and that james a. rasulo, currently chairman, walt disney parks and resorts worldwide,
will become senior executive vice president and chief financial officer of the company. mr.rasulo, 53, has held his current position since 2005, and before that was president, walt disney parks and resorts, since 2002.
table of contents
part ii  item5.market for the companys common equity, related stockholder
matters and issuer purchases of equity securities  the companys common stock is listed on the new york stock
exchange under the ticker symbol dis.the following table shows, for the periods indicated, the high and low sales prices per share of common stock as reported in the bloomberg financial markets services.
sales price
high
low
4th quarter
$
28.68
$
22.05
3rd quarter
26.29
17.54
2nd quarter
24.83
15.14
1st quarter
32.95
18.60
4th quarter
$
34.85
$
28.55
3rd quarter
35.02
29.57
2nd quarter
33.23
26.30
1st quarter
35.69
30.68
the company declared a $648 million dividend ($0.35 per share) on december3,
2008 related to fiscal 2008, which was paid in the second quarter of fiscal 2009. the board of directors has not declared a dividend related to fiscal 2009 as of the date of this report.  as of october3, 2009, the approximate number of common shareholders of record was 1,009,288.  the following table provides information about company purchases of equity securities that are registered by the company pursuant to
section12 of the exchange act during the quarter ended october3, 2009:
period
totalnumberof sharespurchased (1)
averagepricepaidpershare
totalnumberofsharespurchased aspart of publiclyannouncedplans orprograms
maximumnumber ofshares thatmay yet bepurchasedunder theplans orprograms(2)
june28, 2009  july31, 2009
156,772
$
24.28
180million
august1, 2009  august31, 2009
118,524
26.27
180 million
september1, 2009  october3,2009
1,443,928
26.08
1,310,900
179 million
total
1,719,224
25.93
1,310,900
179 million
(1)
408,324 shares were purchased on the open market to provide shares to participants in the walt disney investment plan and employee stock purchase plan.
these purchases were not made pursuant to a publicly announced repurchase plan or program.
(2)
under a share repurchase program implemented effective june10, 1998, the company is authorized to repurchase shares of its common stock. on
may1, 2007, following share repurchases made through may1, 2007, the companys board of directors increased the repurchase authorization to a total of 400million shares as of that date. the repurchase program does not have an
expiration date.
table of contents
item6.selected financial data
(in millions, except per share data)
2009(1)
2008(2)
2007(3)(4)
2006(3)(5)
2005(3)(6)
statements of income
revenues
$
36,149
$
37,843
$
35,510
$
33,747
$
31,374
income from continuing operations before the cumulative effect of accounting changes
3,307
4,427
4,674
3,304
2,460
per common share
earnings from continuing operations before the cumulative effect of accounting changes
diluted
$
1.76
$
2.28
$
2.24
$
1.60
$
1.19
basic
1.78
2.34
2.33
1.65
1.21
dividends
0.35
0.35
0.31
0.27
0.24
balance sheets
total assets
$
63,117
$
62,497
$
60,928
$
59,998
$
53,158
long-term obligations
16,939
14,889
14,916
13,974
14,102
shareholders equity
33,734
32,323
30,753
31,820
26,210
statements of cash flows cash provided (used) by:
continuing operating activities
$
5,064
$
5,446
$
5,398
$
5,960
$
4,139
continuing investing activities
(2,096)
(2,162)
(618)
(220)
(1,682)
continuing financing activities
(2,552)
(3,953)
(3,619)
(5,166)
(2,899)
(1)
the fiscal 2009 results include restructuring and impairment charges ($0.17 per diluted share), a non-cash gain in connection with the merger of
lifetime and aetn ($0.08 per diluted share) and a gain on the sale of our investment in two pay television services in latin america ($0.04 per diluted share). including the impact of rounding, these items collectively resulted in a net adverse
impact of $0.06 per diluted share.
(2)
the fiscal 2008 results include an accounting gain related to the acquisition of the disney stores north america and a gain on the sale of movies.com
(together $0.01 per diluted share), the favorable resolution of certain income tax matters ($0.03 per diluted share), a bad debt charge for a receivable from lehman brothers ($0.03 per diluted share) and an impairment charge ($0.01 per diluted
share). these items collectively had no net impact on earnings per share.
(3)
during fiscal 2007, the company concluded the spin-off of the abc radio business and thus reports abc radio as discontinued operations for all periods
presented (see note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion).
(4)
the fiscal 2007 results include gains from the sales of e! entertainment and us weekly (together $0.31 per diluted share), the favorable resolution of
certain income tax matters ($0.03 per diluted share), an equity-based compensation plan modification charge ($0.01 per diluted share) and an impairment charge ($0.01 per diluted share). these items collectively resulted in a net benefit of $0.32 per
diluted share.
(5)
during fiscal 2006, the company completed an all stock acquisition of pixar for $7.5 billion. in addition, results include gains on sales of a spanish
cable equity investment and discover magazine (together $0.02 per diluted share), the favorable resolution of certain income tax matters ($0.02 per diluted share), a net benefit associated with the completion of the pixar acquisition ($0.01 per
diluted share) and an impairment charge ($0.01 per diluted share). these items collectively resulted in a net benefit of $0.04 per diluted share.
(6)
the fiscal 2005 results include the favorable resolution of certain income tax matters ($0.06 per diluted share), a benefit from the restructuring of
euro disneys borrowings ($0.02 per diluted share), an income tax benefit from the repatriation of foreign earnings under the american jobs creation act ($0.02 per diluted share), a gain on the sale of the mighty ducks of anaheim ($0.01 per
diluted share), a write-off of investments in leveraged leases ($0.03 per diluted share), a write-down related to the moviebeam venture ($0.02 per diluted share), an impairment charge for a cable television investment in latin america ($0.01 per
diluted share) and restructuring and impairment charges related to the sale of the disney stores north america ($0.01 per diluted share). these items collectively resulted in a net benefit of $0.04 per diluted share.
table of contents
item7.managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations  consolidated results  (in millions, except per share data)
% changebetter/(worse)
2009vs.2008
2008vs.2007
revenues
$
36,149
$
37,843
$
35,510
(4)%
7%
costs and expenses
(30,452)
(30,400)
(28,655)
%
(6)%
restructuring and impairment charges
(492)
(39)
(26)
nm
(50)%
other income (expense)
(59)
1,004
nm
nm
net interest expense
(466)
(524)
(593)
11%
12%
equity in the income of investees
(1)%
20%
income from continuing operations before income taxes and minority interests
5,658
7,402
7,725
(24)%
(4)%
income taxes
(2,049)
(2,673)
(2,874)
23%
7%
minority interests
(302)
(302)
(177)
%
(71)%
income from continuing operations
3,307
4,427
4,674
(25)%
(5)%
discontinued operations, net of tax
nm
nm
net income
$
3,307
$
4,427
$
4,687
(25)%
(6)%
diluted earnings per share (1):
earnings per share, continuing operations
$
1.76
$
2.28
$
2.24
(23)%
2%
earnings per share, discontinued operations
0.01
nm
nm
earnings per share
$
1.76
$
2.28
$
2.25
(23)%
1%
basic earnings per share:
earnings per share, continuing operations
$
1.78
$
2.34
$
2.33
(24)%
%
earnings per share, discontinued operations
0.01
nm
nm
earnings per share
$
1.78
$
2.34
$
2.34
(24)%
%
weighted average number of common and common equivalent shares outstanding:
diluted
1,875
1,948
2,092
basic
1,856
1,890
2,004
(1)
the calculation of diluted earnings per share assumes the conversion of the companys convertible senior notes into 45million shares of
common stock for periods presented prior to their redemption in the third quarter of fiscal 2008. related after-tax interest expense of $12 million for fiscal 2008 and $21 million for fiscal 2007 has been added back for the calculation of diluted
earnings per share.
table of contents
organization of information  managements discussion and analysis provides a narrative on the companys financial performance and condition that should be read
in conjunction with the accompanying financial statements. it includes the following sections:
consolidated results
business segment results  2009 vs. 2008
non-segment items  2009 vs. 2008
pension and benefit costs
business segment results  2008 vs. 2007
non-segment items  2008 vs. 2007
liquidity and capital resources
contractual obligations, commitments, and off balance sheet arrangements
accounting policies and estimates
accounting changes
forward-looking statements  consolidated results  2009 vs. 2008  revenues for the year decreased 4%, or $1.7 billion, to $36.1 billion; net income decreased 25%, or $1.1 billion, to $3.3 billion; and diluted earnings per share decreased 23% to $1.76.  net income for the current year included certain items that affected comparability, including restructuring and impairment charges ($0.17
per diluted share), a non-cash gain in connection with the merger of lifetime and aetn ($0.08 per diluted share) and a gain on the sale of our investment in two pay television services in latin america ($0.04 per diluted share). including the impact
of rounding, these items collectively resulted in a net adverse impact of $0.06 per diluted share. fiscal 2008 included an accounting gain related to the acquisition of the disney stores north america and a gain on the sale of movies.com (together
$0.01 per diluted share), the favorable resolution of certain income tax matters ($0.03 per diluted share), a bad debt charge for a receivable from lehman brothers ($0.03 per diluted share) and an impairment charge ($0.01 per diluted share). these
items collectively had no net impact on earnings per share. the current year results also include the benefit from one additional week of operations compared to fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2007 due to the timing of our fiscal period end. fiscal 2010 will
not include an additional week and will be a fifty-two week fiscal year.  the decrease in diluted earnings per share reflected
lower operating results and the items discussed above, partially offset by a decrease in weighted average shares outstanding. the decrease in operating results was primarily due to lower broadcast and cable advertising revenues, a decline in
worldwide sales of dvd units, decreased guest spending at our domestic parks and resorts and disneyland paris, higher programming costs and production cost amortization at our cable and broadcast businesses, lower performance of our movies in
worldwide theatrical and television distribution and lower earned revenue at our licensing business. these decreases were partially offset by contractual rate increases on revenues from mvsps (affiliate fees), principally at espn, cost mitigation
activities at walt disney world resort and disneyland paris and higher international and domestic sales of abc studios productions.  2008
vs. 2007  revenues for the year increased 7%, or $2.3 billion, to $37.8 billion; net income decreased 6%, or $260 million,
to $4.4 billion; and diluted earnings per share increased 1% to $2.28.  as discussed above, net income for fiscal 2008
included certain items which affected comparability. fiscal 2007 included gains from the sales of e! entertainment and us weekly (together $0.31 per diluted share), the favorable resolution of certain income tax matters ($0.03 per diluted share),
income from the discontinued operations of the abc radio business ($0.01 per diluted share), an equity-based compensation plan modification charge ($0.01 per diluted share) and an impairment charge ($0.01 per diluted share). these items collectively
resulted in a net benefit of $0.33 per diluted share.
table of contents
the increase in diluted earnings per share for fiscal 2008 was the result of an increase in
segment operating results and a decrease in weighted average shares outstanding, partially offset by the absence of the gains in fiscal 2007 discussed above. higher segment operating results reflected increases in affiliate fees and advertising
revenues at our cable businesses, higher guest spending and attendance at walt disney world resort and disneyland paris, and strong sales of licensed products, partially offset by a decline in worldwide dvd sales.  restructuring and impairment charges  the company recorded charges totaling $492 million for the current year which included impairment charges of $279 million and restructuring costs of $213 million. the most significant of the impairment
charges were $142 million related to fcc radio licenses and $65 million related to our investment in utv software communications limited (utv). the restructuring charges included severance and other related costs as a result of various ongoing
organizational and cost structure initiatives across our businesses. restructuring and impairment charges for the prior year consisted of an impairment charge of $39 million related to fcc radio licenses.  other income (expense)  other income (expense) is as follows (in millions):
gain on lifetime/aetn transaction (1)
$
$
$
gain on sale of investment in two pay television services in latin america
gain related to the acquisition of the disney stores north america
gain on sale of movies.com
bad debt charge for lehman brothers receivable
(91)
gain on sale of equity investment in e! entertainment
gain on sale of equity investment in us weekly
equity-based compensation plan modification charge
(48)
other income (expense)
$
$
(59)
$
1,004
(1)
on september 15, 2009, the company and hearst both contributed their 50% interest in lifetime to aetn in exchange for an increased interest in aetn.
the transaction resulted in a $228 million non-cash gain. see note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for further details of this transaction.  business segment results  2009 vs. 2008
% changebetter/(worse)
(in
millions)
2009vs.2008
2008vs.2007
revenues:
media networks
$
16,209
$
15,857
$
14,913
%
%
parks and resorts
10,667
11,504
10,626
(7)
%
%
studio entertainment
6,136
7,348
7,491
(16)
%
(2)
%
consumer products
2,425
2,415
1,990
%
%
interactive media
(1)
%
%
$
36,149
$
37,843
$
35,510
(4)
%
%
segment operating income (loss) (1):
media networks
$
4,765
$
4,981
$
4,534
(4)
%
%
parks and resorts
1,418
1,897
1,710
(25)
%
%
studio entertainment
1,086
1,195
(84)
%
(9)
%
consumer products
(22)
%
%
interactive media
(295)
(258)
(291)
(14)
%
%
$
6,672
$
8,484
$
7,837
(21)
%
%
(1)
segment operating income includes equity in the income of investees. in the business segment results discussion, equity in the income of investees is
included in segment operating income but does not affect segment revenues or costs and expenses.
table of contents
the company evaluates the performance of its operating segments based on segment operating
income, and management uses aggregate segment operating income as a measure of the overall performance of the operating businesses. the company believes that information about aggregate segment operating income assists investors by allowing them to
evaluate changes in the operating results of the companys portfolio of businesses separate from factors other than business operations that affect net income. the following table reconciles segment operating income to income from continuing
operations before income taxes and minority interests.
% changebetter/(worse)
(in
millions)
2009vs.2008
2008vs.2007
segment operating income
$
6,672
$
8,484
$
7,837
(21)
%
%
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
(398)
(460)
(497)
%
%
restructuring and impairment charges (1)
(492)
(39)
(26)
nm
(50)
%
other income (expense)
(59)
1,004
nm
nm
net interest expense
(466)
(524)
(593)
%
%
income from continuing operations before income taxes and minority interests
$
5,658
$
7,402
$
7,725
(24)
%
(4)
%
(1)
the fiscal 2008 and 2007 amounts consist of impairment charges for fcc radio licenses which were previously reported in media networks operating income
in the fiscal 2008 and 2007 financial statements. for the fiscal 2009 financial statements, these amounts have been reclassified to restructuring and impairment charges in the consolidated statements of income to conform to the fiscal
2009 presentation.  media networks  the following table provides supplemental revenue and operating income detail for the media networks segment:
% changebetter/(worse)
(inmillions)
2009vs.2008
2008vs.2007
revenues
cable networks
$
10,555
$
10,041
$
9,167
5%
%
broadcasting
5,654
5,816
5,746
(3)%
%
$
16,209
$
15,857
$
14,913
2%
%
segment operating income
cable networks
$
4,260
$
4,139
$
3,603
3%
%
broadcasting
(40)%
(10)
%
$
4,765
$
4,981
$
4,534
(4)%
%
revenues  media networks revenues increased 2%, or $352 million, to $16.2 billion, consisting of a 5% increase, or $514 million, at the cable networks offset by a 3% decrease, or $162 million, at broadcasting.
increased cable networks revenues were primarily due to growth of $614 million from affiliate fees, partially offset by a
decrease of $149 million from advertising revenues. affiliate fees are generally derived from fees charged on a per-subscriber basis, and the increase in the current year was primarily due to contractual rate increases at espn and, to a lesser
extent, at the domestic disney channel and abc family, the impact of the additional week of
table of contents
operations and subscriber growth at espn. lower advertising revenue reflected a decrease at espn, partially offset by an increase at abc family. the decrease at espn reflected fewer units sold,
partially offset by higher rates. the increase at abc family reflected increased units sold and higher rates. higher affiliate fees at the domestic disney channel were more than offset by lower dvd sales.  certain of the companys contracts with cable and satellite operators include annual live programming commitments. in these cases,
recognition of revenues subject to the commitments is deferred until the annual commitments are satisfied, which generally results in higher revenue recognition in the second half of the year.  decreased broadcasting revenues were primarily due to lower advertising sales at the abc television network and at the owned television
stations, partially offset by higher international and domestic sales of abc studios productions driven by greys anatomy, private practice, and criminal minds. lower advertising revenues at the abc television network reflected
lower primetime ratings.  costs and expenses  costs and expenses, which consist primarily of programming rights costs, production costs, participation costs, distribution and marketing expenses and general and administrative costs, increased 5%, or
$539 million, to $12.0 billion, consisting of a 6% increase, or $367 million, at the cable networks and a 3% increase, or $172 million, at broadcasting. the increase at cable networks was driven by higher rights costs at espn due to contractual rate
increases for key contracts and costs of new and renewed contracts for college and international sports programming and increased programming costs at abc family due to more original series. the increase at broadcasting was driven by higher
programming and production costs and a bad debt charge in connection with a bankruptcy of a syndication customer. higher programming and production costs reflected more hours of original scripted primetime programming at the abc television network
and higher production cost amortization related to sales of abc studios productions.  sports programming costs  the company has various contractual commitments for the purchase of rights for multi-year sports programming packages, including the national
football league, college football (including college bowl games) and basketball conferences, national basketball association, nascar, major league baseball, world cup and various soccer leagues, and golf and tennis associations. the costs of these
contracts have increased significantly in recent years. we enter into these contractual commitments with the expectation that, over the life of the contracts, revenue from advertising during the programming and affiliate fees will exceed the costs
of the programming. while contract costs may initially exceed incremental revenues and negatively impact operating income, it is our expectation that the combined value to our networks from all of these contracts will result in long-term benefits.
the actual impact of these contracts on the companys results over the term of the contracts is dependent upon a number of factors, including the strength of advertising markets, effectiveness of marketing efforts and the size of viewer
audiences.  segment operating income  segment operating income decreased 4%, or $216 million, to $4.8 billion for the year due to a decrease of $337 million at broadcasting, partially offset by an increase of $121 million at the cable
networks. the decrease at broadcasting was primarily due to lower advertising sales, higher programming costs and the syndication customer bad debt charge, partially offset by increased sales of abc studios productions. the increase at the cable
networks was primarily due to growth at espn and abc family.  parks and resorts  revenues  parks and resorts
revenues decreased 7%, or $837 million, to $10.7 billion due to decreases of $531 million at our domestic operations and $306 million at our international operations.
table of contents
the following table presents attendance, per capita theme park guest spending, and hotel
statistics for our domestic properties:
east coast
west coast
total domestic
fiscal year2009
fiscal year2008
fiscal year2009
fiscal year2008
fiscal year2009
fiscal year2008
parks
increase/ (decrease)
attendance
%
2%
7%
%
2%
2%
per capita guest spending
(4)%
3%
(9)%
2%
(6)%
3%
hotels (1)
occupancy
87%
90%
80%
88%
87%
89%
available room nights (in thousands)
8,732
8,566
9,549
9,367
per room guest spending
$
$
$
$
$
$
(1)
per room guest spending consists of the average daily hotel room rate as well as guest spending on food, beverages and merchandise at the hotels. hotel
statistics include rentals of disney vacation club units.  at our domestic operations, decreased revenue
reflected a decrease in guest spending, principally at our parks and resorts, and lower gains on securitized sales of ownership interests at disney vacation club. decreased guest spending at the domestic parks and resorts reflected lower average
ticket prices, lower average daily hotel room rates and decreased merchandise spending. these decreases were partially offset by an increase in revenue recognition at disney vacation club in connection with the completion of a vacation club
property.  at our international operations, lower revenues resulted from a decrease at disneyland paris due to the unfavorable
impact of foreign currency translation as a result of the strengthening of the u.s. dollar against the euro and decreased guest spending. decreased guest spending was due to lower average ticket prices, decreased merchandise spending and lower
average daily hotel room rates.  costs and expenses  costs and expenses, which consist primarily of labor, depreciation, costs of merchandise, food and beverage sold, marketing and sales expense, repairs and maintenance and entertainment, decreased 4%, or
$358 million. the decrease in costs and expenses was driven by decreases at disneyland paris and the walt disney world resort, partially offset by an increase at disney vacation club. the decrease at disneyland paris was due to the favorable impact
of foreign currency translation as a result of the strengthening of the u.s. dollar against the euro and savings from cost mitigation activities partially offset by labor and other cost inflation. the decrease at the walt disney world resort was
driven by savings from cost mitigation activities, partially offset by labor and other cost inflation. the increase at disney vacation club was driven by higher per unit cost of sales and expense recognition in connection with the completion of a
vacation club property.  segment operating income  segment operating income decreased 25%, or $479 million, to $1.4 billion, due to decreases at our domestic operations and at disneyland paris.  studio entertainment  revenues
revenues decreased 16%, or $1.2 billion, to $6.1 billion primarily due to decreases of $978 million in worldwide home
entertainment, $129 million in music distribution and $106 million in worldwide television distribution.  the decrease in
worldwide home entertainment revenues was primarily due to lower unit sales and net effective pricing, reflecting the overall decline in the dvd market and the strength of pirates of the caribbean: at worlds end in the prior year.
significant other titles included wall-e and the chronicles of narnia: prince caspian in the current year while the prior year included ratatouille, national treasure 2: book of secrets and enchanted.
table of contents
lower revenues in music distribution reflected the strong performance of the hannah
montana concert tour and miley cyrus and jonas brothers cd titles in the prior year. the decrease in worldwide television distribution was driven by fewer significant titles in the current year.  cost and expenses  costs
and expenses, which consist primarily of production cost amortization, distribution and marketing expenses, product costs and participation costs decreased 5%, or $305 million, primarily due to decreases in worldwide home entertainment and music
distribution, partially offset by an increase in worldwide theatrical distribution.  the decrease in costs at worldwide home
entertainment was primarily due to lower distribution costs and production cost amortization resulting from a decline in dvd unit sales. the decrease in music distribution reflected the absence of costs associated with the hannah montana
concert tour in the prior year. increased costs and expenses in worldwide theatrical distribution reflected higher marketing costs for current year releases and higher film cost write-downs.  segment operating income  segment operating income decreased 84%, or $911 million, to $175 million primarily due to decreases at worldwide home entertainment, worldwide theatrical distribution and worldwide television distribution.  consumer products  revenues
revenues were essentially flat at $2.4 billion as an increase of $131 million at our retail business was offset by
decreases of $86 million at merchandise licensing and $44 million at publishing. the increase at our retail business was primarily due to the acquisition of the disney stores north america during the third quarter of fiscal 2008 (see discussion of
the disney stores acquisition below), partially offset by the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation at the disney stores europe as a result of the strengthening of the u.s. dollar against the british pound and euro. the decrease at
merchandise licensing was primarily due to lower earned royalty revenue across multiple product categories due to the difficult retail environment as well as the strength of hannah montana and high school musical properties in the
prior year. the decrease at publishing reflected lower magazine sales driven by the closure of wondertime magazine.  costs and
expenses  costs and expenses, which consist primarily of cost of sales, salaries and benefits, marketing and occupancy,
increased 11%, or $181 million, to $1.8 billion primarily due to an increase at our retail business, partially offset by a decrease at publishing. the increase at retail was due to the acquisition of the disney stores north america in the third
quarter of fiscal 2008, partially offset by a favorable impact of foreign currency translation at the disney stores europe as a result of the strengthening of the u.s. dollar against the british pound and euro. the decrease at publishing reflected
lower cost of sales and other operating costs.  segment operating income  segment operating income decreased 22%, or $169 million, to $609 million due to lower results at merchandise licensing and at our retail
business, which reflected the adverse impact of a full year of company-owned operations at the disney stores north america in fiscal 2009 whereas the prior year included five months of company-owned operations and seven months of licensed
operations.  disney stores acquisition  on april30, 2008, the company acquired certain assets of the disney stores north america for approximately $64 million of cash from, and terminated its long-term licensing arrangement for the disney
stores with, the childrens place, the former licensee. the company acquired the inventory, leasehold improvements, and certain fixed assets of, and assumed the leases on, 229 stores. the company conducted the wind-down and closure of an
additional 88 stores but did not assume the leases on these stores.
table of contents
interactive media  revenues  interactive media revenues decreased 1%, or $7 million, to $712
million primarily due to a decrease of $58 million at disney interactive studios, driven by lower sales of self-published video games and decreased licensing revenues, partially offset by increases of $39 million at our mobile phone service business
in japan, which was launched in the second quarter of fiscal 2008, and $11 million at disney online driven by increased subscription revenues at club penguin.  at disney interactive studios, lower self-published video games sales reflected decreased net effective pricing and unit sales. significant current year titles included high school musical 3, sing it
and bolt as compared to the prior year, which included high school musical, turok, hannah montana 2 and pure. the decrease in licensing revenues was primarily due to the performance of wall-e, cars and
ratatouille in the prior year.  costs and expenses  costs and expenses, which consist primarily of video game and internet product development costs, cost of sales, distribution and marketing expenses, general and administrative costs, and technology
infrastructure costs, increased 4%, or $35 million, to $1.0 billion.  the increase was primarily due to higher unit cost of
sales and distribution costs, which included the costs for bundled accessories and music royalties for certain current-year titles at disney interactive studios, higher expenses at our mobile phone service business in japan driven by a full year of
operations, partially offset by a decrease at disney online driven by lower marketing costs.  segment operating loss  segment operating loss increased 14%, or $37 million, to $295 million driven by lower results at disney interactive studio partially offset
by improved results at disney online.  non-segment items  2009 vs. 2008  corporate and unallocated shared expenses  corporate and unallocated shared expense decreased 13%, from $460 million to $398 million, driven by savings from cost mitigation activities and an increase in allocation of costs to the business
segments.  net interest expense  net interest expense is detailed below:
(in
millions)
%changebetter/(worse)
interest expense
$
(588)
$
(712)
%
interest and investment income
(35)
%
net interest expense
$
(466)
$
(524)
%
the decrease in interest expense and interest and investment income for the year was
driven by lower effective interest rates.  effective income tax rate  the effective tax rate was comparable to the prior year at 36.2% as the favorable impact of legislative changes in the current year was
offset by the favorable resolution of certain income tax matters in the prior year.  minority interests  minority interest expense was flat at $302 million for the current year as the impact of lower financing costs at hong kong disneyland and
improved operating results at espn were offset by lower performance at disneyland paris. the minority interest is determined on income after royalties, financing costs and income taxes.
table of contents
pension and postretirement medical benefit costs  pension and postretirement medical benefit plan costs affect results in all five segments, with approximately one-half of these costs being
borne by the parks and resorts segment. the company recognized pension and postretirement medical benefit plan expenses of $214 million, $255 million and $278 million for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. the decrease in fiscal 2009
was primarily due to an increase in the discount rate used to measure the present value of plan obligations. the assumed discount rate reflects market rates for high-quality corporate bonds currently available. the companys discount rate was
determined by considering the average of pension yield curves constructed from a large population of high quality corporate bonds. the resulting discount rate reflects the matching of plan liability cash flows to the yield curves.  we expect pension and postretirement medical costs to increase by approximately $268 million to $482 million in fiscal 2010 primarily due to
a decrease in the discount rate used to measure the present value of plan obligations and asset returns that were below the assumed return. the decrease in the discount rate and the asset return shortfall versus our expected return in fiscal 2009
also resulted in an increase in the underfunded status of our plans and an increase in unrecognized pension and postretirement medical expense which totals $2.8 billion ($1.8 billion after-tax) as of october 3, 2009. if our investment performance
does not improve relative to our long-term assumption and/or discount rates do not increase, we expect that pension and post-retirement medical costs will continue to be considerably higher than fiscal 2009 for the next few years as a result of
amortizing these unrecognized expenses. see note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for further details of the impacts of our pension and postretirement medical plans on our financial statements. during fiscal 2009, the company made
contributions to its pension and postretirement medical plans totaling $473 million, which included discretionary contributions above the minimum requirements for pension plans. the company expects pension and post-retirement medical plan
contributions in fiscal 2010 to range from $350 million to $450 million, which is expected to include discretionary contributions above the minimum requirements. final minimum funding requirements for fiscal 2010 will be determined based on our
january1, 2010 funding actuarial valuation which will be available late fiscal 2010. see item 1a  risk factors for the impact of factors affecting pension and postretirement medical costs.  business segment results  2008 vs. 2007  media networks  revenues  media networks revenues increased 6%, or $944 million, to $15.9 billion, consisting of a 10% increase, or $874 million, at the cable networks and a 1% increase, or $70 million, at broadcasting.
increased cable networks revenues were primarily due to growth of $654 million from affiliate fees and $206 million from
advertising revenues. increased affilitate fees in fiscal 2008 were driven by increases at espn and, to a lesser extent, the worldwide disney channels and abc family. the increase at espn was primarily due to contractual rate increases and
subscriber growth, the increase at the worldwide disney channels was driven by subscriber growth and the increase at abc family was due to contractual rate increases. higher advertising revenues at espn and abc family reflected improved rates and
ratings. higher dvd sales, primarily high school musical, were partially offset by the favorable settlement of a claim with an international distributor in fiscal 2007.  increased broadcasting revenues reflected higher international sales of abc studios productions partially offset by decreased advertising
revenues, largely at the owned television stations. increased international sales of abc studios productions were driven by greys anatomy, private practice and reaper. fiscal 2008 revenues at the abc television network were
comparable to fiscal 2007 as the impact of lower ratings was offset by higher advertising rates and digital media revenues.  costs and
expenses  costs and expenses increased 6%, or $609 million, to $11.5 billion, consisting of an 7% increase, or $448
million, at the cable networks and a 3% increase, or $161 million, at broadcasting. the increase at cable networks was primarily due to increased costs at espn and to a lesser extent, the worldwide disney channels, driven by higher programming,
administrative and marketing costs. these increases were partially offset by the absence of major league baseball programming costs at abc family. the increase at broadcasting was primarily due to higher production cost amortization related to
international sales of our programs.
table of contents
segment operating income  segment operating income increased 10%, or $447 million, to $5.0 billion due to an increase of $536 million at the cable networks partially
offset by a decrease of $89 million at broadcasting.the increase at the cable networks was primarily due to growth at espn, higher income at our cable equity investments, and increases at abc family and the domestic disney channels, partially
offset by a favorable settlement of a claim with an international distributor in fiscal 2007. the decrease at broadcasting was due to lower advertising revenues at the owned television stations. the increase in income at our cable equity investments
was primarily due to higher affiliate and advertising revenue at lifetime and a gain on the sale of a european cable channel.  abc radio
transaction  on june12, 2007, the company completed the spin-off of its wholly-owned subsidiary, abc radio holdings,
inc., which was then merged into a subsidiary of citadel broadcasting corporation (citadel). prior to the spin-off, the company consolidated its abc radio business, consisting of 22 large-market radio stations and the abc radio network businesses,
under abc radio holdings, inc. the transaction did not include the companys espn radio or radio disney network and station businesses. the results of the abc radio business have been reported as discontinued operations for all periods
presented. the company now includes the espn radio and radio disney network and stations businesses with cable networks in the media networks segment. prior to the transaction, the companys radio businesses were included with broadcasting in
the media networks segment. previously reported results have been reclassified to reflect this presentation.  summarized
financial information for the discontinued operations is as follows (in millions, except per share data):
revenues
$
income from discontinued operations before income taxes
income from discontinued operations, net of tax
diluted eps, discontinued operations
0.01
parks and resorts  revenues  parks and resorts revenues increased 8%, or $878 million, to
$11.5 billion due to increases of $439 million at our domestic operations and $439 million at our international operations.  the following table presents attendance, per capita theme park guest spending, and hotel statistics for our domestic properties:
east coast
west coast
total domestic
fiscal year2008
fiscal year2007
fiscal year2008
fiscal year2007
fiscal year2008
fiscal year2007
parks
increase/(decrease)
attendance
2%
6%
%
(1)%
2%
3%
per capita guest spending
3%
3%
2%
2%
3%
3%
hotels (1)
occupancy
90%
89%
88%
92%
89%
89%
available room nights (in thousands)
8,566
8,614
9,367
9,424
per room guest spending
$
$
$
$
$
$
(1)
per room guest spending consists of the average daily hotel room rate as well as guest spending on food, beverages and merchandise at the hotels. hotel
statistics include rentals of disney vacation club units.
table of contents
at our domestic operations, growth in revenues was primarily due to increases at the walt
disney world resort and disney vacation club. revenue growth at walt disney world resort was primarily due to increased guest spending and theme park attendance. increased guest spending was due to higher average ticket prices, increased food and
beverage sales and higher average daily hotel room rates. at disney vacation club, revenue growth reflected higher vacation club ownership sales, including extensions of the term of ownership on existing vacation club properties.  at our international operations, revenue growth resulted from an increase at disneyland paris due to the favorable impact of foreign
currency translation as a result of the weakening of the u.s. dollar against the euro and increased guest spending and theme park attendance. increased guest spending was due to higher average daily hotel room rates and average ticket prices.
costs and expenses  costs and expenses increased 8%, or $691 million, primarily due to increases at disneyland paris, walt disney world resort and disney vacation club. the increase at disneyland paris was due to the unfavorable impact of foreign currency
translation as a result of the weakening of the u.s. dollar against the euro, labor cost inflation and higher volume-related costs. the increase at the walt disney world resort was due to labor and other cost inflation, new guest offerings and
volume-related costs. the increase at disney vacation club was driven by higher per unit cost of sales.  segment operating income
segment operating income increased 11%, or $187 million, to $1.9 billion, primarily due to increases at disneyland paris
and the walt disney world resort.  studio entertainment  revenues  revenues decreased 2%, or $143 million, to $7.3 billion primarily
due to decreases of $117 million in worldwide television distribution, $112 million in domestic theatrical distribution, and $66 million in domestic home entertainment, partially offset by an increase of $147 million in international home
entertainment.  the decrease in worldwide television distribution revenues was driven by the absence of the multi-season sale
of home improvement which occurred in fiscal 2007. lower revenues in domestic theatrical distribution reflected the strong performance of fiscal 2007 titles, including pirates of the caribbean: at worlds end, ratatouille, and
wild hogs, compared to the titles in fiscal 2008, which included national treasure 2: book of secrets and wall-e. lower revenues in domestic home entertainment were primarily due to a decline in unit sales reflecting the
performance of pirates of the caribbean: at worlds end and ratatouille in fiscal 2008 compared to pirates of the caribbean: dead mans chest and cars in fiscal 2007.  revenue growth in international home entertainment was primarily due to a higher unit sales mix of television series dvd sets, which have
higher average unit sales prices.  cost and expenses  costs and expenses for fiscal 2008 were comparable to fiscal 2007 as decreases in worldwide television distribution and domestic theatrical distribution were largely offset by an increase in international
home entertainment.  lower costs and expenses in worldwide television distribution were primarily due to a decrease in
amortization and participation costs driven by the absence of the home improvement sale. the decrease in domestic theatrical distribution was primarily due to lower amortization expense reflecting decreased revenues for fiscal 2008 releases
and lower film cost write-downs. the increase in international home entertainment was primarily due to higher distribution costs driven by extensive marketing campaigns in fiscal 2008.  segment operating income  segment operating income decreased 9%, or $109
million, to $1.1 billion primarily due to lower revenues in domestic home entertainment.
table of contents
consumer products  revenues  revenues increased 21%, or $425 million, to $2.4 billion, due to
increases of $196 million at our retail business and $181 million at merchandise licensing.  the increase at our retail
business was due to the acquisition of the disney stores north america during the third quarter of fiscal 2008. the revenue growth at merchandise licensing was primarily due to higher earned royalties across multiple product categories, led by
hannah montana and high school musical merchandise, partially offset by lower recognition of minimum guarantee revenues.  costs and expenses  costs and expenses increased 26%, or $336 million, to $1.6 billion primarily due to the
acquisition of the disney stores north america during the third quarter of fiscal 2008, and higher salary and benefits expenses and increased participation costs at merchandise licensing.  segment operating income  segment operating income increased 13%, or $89 million, to $778 million due to growth at merchandise licensing, partially offset by a decrease at our retail business.  interactive media  revenues  interactive media revenues increased 47%, or $229 million, to $719 million primarily due to increases of $160 million at disney interactive
studios and $71 million at disney online.  the increase at disney interactive studios was primarily due to the performance of
new high school musical, hannah montana and turok self-published video games in fiscal 2008 compared to pirates of the caribbean, spectrobes and meet the robinsons games in fiscal 2007. the increase at
disney online reflected higher virtual world subscription revenue due to a full year of club penguin, which was acquired in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007.  costs and expenses  costs and expenses increased 25%, or $193 million, to
$974 million driven by increases at disney interactive studios and disney online, partially offset by lower costs related to the domestic mobile phone service, which was shut down in the first quarter of fiscal 2008. the increase at disney
interactive studios reflected higher product, distribution and marketing costs associated with volume growth and increased investment in video game development. at disney online the increase was driven by higher development and marketing costs
related to the disney.com website and virtual worlds, including the impact of a full year of club penguin, and the family.com website.  segment operating loss  segment operating loss decreased 11%, or $33 million, to $258 million driven by reduced
costs due to the shutdown of the domestic mobile phone service in the first quarter of fiscal 2008, partially offset by higher marketing costs at disney online.  non-segment items  2008 vs. 2007  corporate and unallocated shared expenses
corporate and unallocated shared expense decreased 7%, from $497 million to $460 million, primarily due to an increase in
allocation of costs to the business segments, partially offset by higher investments in strategic initiatives.
table of contents
net interest expense  net interest expense is detailed below:
(in
millions)
%changebetter/(worse)
interest expense
$
(712)
$
(746)
%
interest and investment income
%
net interest expense
$
(524)
$
(593)
%
net interest expense decreased 12% for the year driven by lower effective interest
rates and a gain on the sale of an investment, partially offset by higher average debt balances.  effective income tax rate
the effective income tax rate decreased 1.1 percentage points from 37.2% in 2007 to 36.1% in 2008. the lower effective tax rate for the
year was primarily due to increased benefits from internal revenue code (irc) section199 related to qualified domestic production activities.  minority interests  minority interest expense increased from $177 million to $302 million reflecting the
impact of improved results at disneyland paris, espn and hong kong disneyland. the minority interest is determined on income after royalties, financing costs and income taxes.  liquidity and capital resources  the change in cash and cash equivalents
is as follows:
(in millions)
cash provided by continuing operations
$
5,064
$
5,446
$
5,398
cash used by continuing investing activities
(2,096)
(2,162)
(618)
cash used by continuing financing activities
(2,552)
(3,953)
(3,619)
cash flows from discontinued operations
increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
$
$
(669)
$
1,259
operating activities  cash provided by continuing operating activities for fiscal 2009 decreased 7% or $382 million to $5.1 billion as compared to fiscal 2008.
the decrease was driven by lower segment operating results and higher contributions to our pension plans, partially offset by lower income tax payments and a decreased net investment in working capital.  cash provided by continuing operating activities for fiscal 2008 increased 1% or $48 million to $5.4 billion as compared to fiscal 2007. the
increase was driven by higher segment operating results and lower pension contributions, partially offset by increased film and television spending and higher net investment in working capital including higher spending on disney vacation club
properties.
table of contents
depreciation expense from continuing operations is as follows:
(in millions)
media networks
cable networks
$
$
$
broadcasting
total media networks
parks and resorts
domestic
international
total parks and resorts
1,148
1,145
1,094
studio entertainment
consumer products
interactive media
corporate
total depreciation expense from continuing operations
$
1,580
$
1,527
$
1,459
the companys studio entertainment and media networks segments incur costs to
acquire and produce television and feature film programming. film and television production costs include all internally produced content such as live action and animated feature films, animated direct-to-video programming, television series,
television specials, theatrical stage plays or other similar product. programming costs include film or television product licensed for a specific period from third parties for airing on the companys broadcast, cable networks, and television
stations. programming assets are generally recorded when the programming becomes available to us with a corresponding increase in programming liabilities. accordingly, we analyze our programming assets net of the related liability.  the companys film and television production and programming activity for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 are as follows:
(in millions)
beginning balances:
production and programming assets
$5,935
$5,682
$5,650
programming liabilities
(1,108)
(1,210)
(1,118)
4,827
4,472
4,532
spending:
film and television production
3,421
3,237
2,906
broadcast programming
3,896
3,812
3,898
7,317
7,049
6,804
amortization:
film and television production
(3,486)
(3,076)
(3,223)
broadcast programming
(3,788)
(3,672)
(3,696)
(7,274)
(6,748)
(6,919)
change in film and television production and programming costs
(115)
other non-cash activity
(154)
ending balances:
production and programming assets
5,756
5,935
5,682
programming liabilities
(1,040)
(1,108)
(1,210)
$4,716
$4,827
$4,472
table of contents
investing activities  investing activities from continuing operations consist principally of investments in parks, resorts, and other property and acquisition and divestiture activity. the companys investments in parks,
resorts and other property from continuing operations for the last three years are as follows:
(in millions)
media networks:
cable networks
$
$
$
broadcasting
parks and resorts:
domestic
1,039
international
studio entertainment
consumer products
interactive media
corporate
$
1,753
$
1,578
$
1,566
capital expenditures for the parks and resorts segment are principally for theme park
and resort expansion, new rides and attractions, cruise ships, recurring capital and capital improvements. the increase in capital expenditures at domestic parks and resorts in fiscal 2009 reflected spending on disneys california adventure
expansion and construction progress payments on two new cruise ships. the decrease in capital expenditures at international parks and resorts in fiscal 2008 reflected lower expenditures at disneyland paris as a result of completion of projects
related to a multi-year investment program established with the 2005 financial restructuring (see note 7 to the consolidated financial statements).  capital expenditures at media networks primarily reflect investments in facilities and equipment for expanding and upgrading broadcast centers, production facilities, and television station facilities.
the increase in fiscal 2008 was driven by the construction of new production and television station facilities.  other investing activities
during fiscal 2009, acquisitions totaled $517 million and included the purchase of additional interests in jetix europe
n.v. and utv (see note 4 to the consolidated financial statements), partially offset by proceeds totaling $185 million from the sale of our investment in two pay television services in latin america.  during fiscal 2008, acquisitions totaled $660 million which included an additional interest in utv.  during fiscal 2007, the company received $1.5 billion in proceeds from the sales of our interests in e! entertainment television and us
weekly. acquisitions totaled $608 million driven by club penguin entertainment, inc. and nasn limited (see note 4 to the consolidated financial statements).  financing activities  cash used in continuing financing activities
decreased by $1.4 billion to $2.6 billion in fiscal 2009 and consisted of repayments of borrowings, the payment of dividends and repurchases of common stock. the decrease from fiscal 2008 was due to lower share repurchases, partially offset by
higher repayments of borrowings and decreased proceeds from stock option exercises. cash used in continuing financing activities during fiscal 2008 and 2007 of $4.0 billion and $3.6 billion, respectively, consisted of share repurchases and
dividends, partially offset by borrowings and the proceeds from stock option exercises. borrowings during fiscal 2007 included $1.35 billion of pre-spin-off borrowings of abc radio holdings, inc. that were removed from the companys balance
sheet in connection with the spin-off.
table of contents
during the year ended october3, 2009, the companys borrowing activity was as
follows:
(in millions)
september27,2008
additions
payments
otheractivity
october3,2009
commercialpaper borrowings
$
1,985
$
$(1,985)
$
$
u.s. medium-termnotes
7,005
1,500
(880)
(7)
7,618
european medium-term notes
other foreign currency denominated debt (1)
capital cities / abc debt
(60)
(2)
film financing
(174)
other (2)
(7)
euro disney borrowings
2,457
(121)
2,344
hong kong disneyland borrowings (3)
1,249
(375)
(350)
total
$
14,639
$
1,750
$(3,602)
$(86)
$12,701
(1)
the other activity is primarily the impact of foreign currency translation as a result of the weakening of the u.s. dollar against the japanese yen.
(2)
the other activity is primarily market value adjustments for debt with qualifying hedges.
(3)
the other activity is due to the conversion of the hksars loan to equity pursuant to the capital realignment and expansion plan (see note 7 to
the consolidated financial statements).  the companys bank facilities are as follows:
(in millions)
committedcapacity
capacityused
unusedcapacity
bank facilities expiring february 2010
$
2,225
$
$
2,225
bank facilities expiring february 2011
2,225
1,988
total
$
4,450
$
$
4,213
these bank facilities allow for borrowings at libor-based rates plus a spread, which
depends on the companys public debt rating and can range from 0.175% to 0.75%. as of october3, 2009, the company had not borrowed under these bank facilities. the company also has the ability to issue up to $800 million of letters of
credit under the facility expiring in 2011, which if utilized, reduces available borrowing under this facility. as of october3, 2009, $326 million of letters of credit had been issued of which $237 million was issued under this facility.
the company may use commercial paper borrowings up to the amount of its unused bank facilities (see above), in conjunction
with term debt issuance and operating cash flow, to retire or refinance other borrowings before or as they come due.  as of
the filing date of this report, the board of directors had not yet declared a dividend related to fiscal 2009. the company paid a $648 million dividend ($0.35 per share) during the second quarter of fiscal 2009 related to fiscal 2008. the company
paid a $664 million dividend ($0.35 per share) during the second quarter of fiscal 2008 related to fiscal 2007; and paid a $637 million dividend ($0.31 per share) during the second quarter of fiscal 2007 related to fiscal 2006.  during fiscal 2009, the company repurchased 5million shares of disney common stock for $138 million. during fiscal 2008, the company
repurchased 139million shares of disney common stock for $4.5 billion. during fiscal 2007, the company repurchased 202million shares of disney common stock for $6.9 billion. as of october3, 2009, the company had remaining
authorization in place to repurchase 179million additional shares. the repurchase program does not have an expiration date.
table of contents
we believe that the companys financial condition is strong and that its cash balances,
other liquid assets, operating cash flows, access to debt and equity capital markets and borrowing capacity, taken together, provide adequate resources to fund ongoing operating requirements and future capital expenditures related to the expansion
of existing businesses and development of new projects. however, the companys operating cash flow and access to the capital markets can be impacted by macroeconomic factors outside of its control. see item 1a  risk factors.
in addition to macroeconomic factors, the companys borrowing costs can be impacted by short and long-term debt ratings assigned by independent rating agencies, which are based, in significant part, on the companys performance as measured
by certain credit metrics such as interest coverage and leverage ratios. as of december 2, 2009, moodys investors services long and short-term debt ratings for the company were a2 and p-1, respectively, with stable outlook;
standard& poors long and short-term debt ratings for the company were a and a-1, respectively, with creditwatch negative; and fitchs long and short-term debt ratings for the company were a and f-1, respectively, with stable
outlook. the companys bank facilities contain only one financial covenant, relating to interest coverage, which the company met on october3, 2009, by a significant margin. the companys bank facilities also specifically exclude
certain entities, such as euro disney and hong kong disneyland, from any representations, covenants or events of default.  euro disney has covenants under its debt agreements that limit its investment and financing activities and require it to meet certain annual financial performance covenants. subject to final third-party review as provided in its debt
agreements, euro disney believes that it has complied with its financial performance covenants for fiscal year 2009.  contractual
obligations, commitments and off balance sheet arrangements  the company has various contractual obligations which are
recorded as liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. other items, such as certain purchase commitments and other executory contracts are not recognized as liabilities in our consolidated financial statements but are required to be
disclosed in the footnotes to the financial statements. for example, the company is contractually committed to acquire broadcast programming and make certain minimum lease payments for the use of property under operating lease agreements.
the following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commitments on an undiscounted basis at
october3, 2009 and the future periods in which such obligations are expected to be settled in cash. in addition, the table reflects the timing of principal and interest payments on outstanding borrowings. additional details regarding these
obligations are provided in the notes to the consolidated financial statements, as referenced in the table:
payments due by period
(in
millions)
total
less than1
year
1-3years
4-5years
more than5
years
borrowings (note 9) (1)
$
17,240
$
1,690
$
3,642
$
3,993
$
7,915
operating leasecommitments (note 15)
2,036
capital lease obligations (note 15)
sports programmingcommitments (note 15)
17,979
2,973
5,975
5,551
3,480
broadcast programming commitments (note 15)
3,228
2,050
total sports and other broadcast programming commitments
21,207
5,023
6,692
5,909
3,583
other (2)
4,832
1,250
2,504
total contractual obligations (3)
$
46,105
$
8,417
$
13,590
$
10,717
$
13,381
(1)
amounts exclude market value adjustments totaling $291 million, which are recorded in the balance sheet. amounts include interest payments based on
contractual terms for fixed rate debt, and on current interest rates for variable rate debt.
table of contents
(2)
other commitments primarily comprise contractual commitments for the construction of two new cruise ships, creative talent and employment agreements
and unrecognized tax benefits. creative talent and employment agreements include obligations to actors, producers, sports personnel, television and radio personalities and executives.
(3)
contractual commitments include the following:
liabilities recorded on the balance sheet
$
14,448
commitments not recorded on the balance sheet
31,657
$
46,105
the company also has obligations with respect to its pension and postretirement
medical benefit plans. see note 11 to the consolidated financial statements.  contingent commitments and contractual guarantees
the company also has certain contractual arrangements that would require the company to make payments or provide funding
if certain circumstances occur. the company does not currently expect that these arrangements will result in any significant amounts being paid by the company. see note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding the
companys contingent commitments and contractual guarantees.  legal and tax matters  as disclosed in notes 10 and 15 to the consolidated financial statements, the company has exposure for certain legal and tax matters.
accounting policies and estimates  we believe that the application of the following accounting policies, which are important to our financial position and results of operations, require significant judgments and estimates on the part of
management. for a summary of our significant accounting policies, including the accounting policies discussed below, see note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.  film and television revenues and costs  we expense film and television
production, participation and residual costs over the applicable product life cycle based upon the ratio of the current periods revenues to the estimated remaining total revenues (ultimate revenues) for each production. if our estimate of
ultimate revenues decreases, amortization of film and television costs may be accelerated. conversely, if estimates of ultimate revenues increase, film and television cost amortization may be slowed. for film productions, ultimate revenues include
revenues from all sources that will be earned within ten years from the date of the initial theatrical release. for television series, we include revenues that will be earned within ten years from delivery of the first episode, or if still in
production, five years from delivery of the most recent episode, if later.  with respect to films intended for theatrical
release, the most sensitive factor affecting our estimate of ultimate revenues (and therefore affecting future film cost amortization and/or impairment) is domestic theatrical performance. revenues derived from other markets subsequent to the
domestic theatrical release (e.g. the home video or international theatrical markets) have historically been highly correlated with domestic theatrical performance. domestic theatrical performance varies primarily based upon the public interest and
demand for a particular film, the popularity of competing films at the time of release and the level of marketing effort. upon a films release and determination of domestic theatrical performance, the companys estimates of revenues from
succeeding windows and markets are revised based on historical relationships and an analysis of current market trends. the most sensitive factor affecting our estimate of ultimate revenues for released films is the extent of home entertainment sales
achieved. home entertainment sales vary based on the number and quality of competing home video products, as well as the manner in which retailers market and price our products.  with respect to television series or other television productions intended for broadcast, the most sensitive factors affecting estimates of
ultimate revenues is the programs rating and the strength of the advertising market. program ratings, which are an indication of market acceptance, directly affect the companys ability to generate advertising
table of contents
revenues during the airing of the program. in addition, television series with greater market acceptance are more likely to generate incremental revenues through the eventual sale of the program
rights in the syndication, international and home entertainment markets. alternatively, poor ratings may result in a television series cancellation, which would require the immediate write-off of any unamortized production costs. a significant
decline in the advertising market would also negatively impact our estimates.  we expense the cost of television broadcast
rights for acquired movies, series and other programs based on the number of times the program is expected to be aired or on a straight-line basis over the useful life, as appropriate. amortization of those television programming assets being
amortized on a number of airings basis may be accelerated if we reduce the estimated future airings and slowed if we increase the estimated future airings. the number of future airings of a particular program is impacted primarily by the
programs ratings in previous airings, expected advertising rates and availability and quality of alternative programming. accordingly, planned usage is reviewed periodically and revised if necessary. rights costs for multi-year sports
programming arrangements are amortized based upon the ratio of the current periods revenues to ultimate revenues (the projected revenue method) or on a straight-line basis over the contract period, as appropriate. revenues include both
advertising revenues and an allocation of affiliate fees. if the annual contractual payments related to each season over the term of a multi-year sports programming arrangement approximate each seasons rights cost based on the projected
revenue method, we expense the related annual payments during the applicable season. if ultimate revenues change significantly from projections, amortization of the rights costs may be accelerated or slowed.  costs of film and television productions are subject to regular recoverability assessments which compare the estimated fair values with the
unamortized costs. the net realizable value of the television broadcast program licenses and rights are reviewed using a daypart methodology. a daypart is defined as an aggregation of programs broadcast during a particular time of day or programs of
a similar type. the companys dayparts are early morning, daytime, late night, primetime, news, children, and sports (includes network and cable). the net realizable values of other cable programming assets are reviewed on an aggregated basis
for each cable channel. individual programs are written-off when there are no plans to air or sublicense the program. estimated values are based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. if actual demand or market conditions are
less favorable than our projections, film, television and programming cost write-downs may be required.  revenue recognition
the company has revenue recognition policies for its various operating segments that are appropriate for the circumstances
of each business. see note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for a summary of these revenue recognition policies.  we
reduce home entertainment and software product revenues for estimated future returns of merchandise and for customer programs and sales incentives. these estimates are based upon historical return experience, current economic trends and projections
of customer demand for and acceptance of our products. if we underestimate the level of returns and concessions in a particular period, we may record less revenue in later periods when returns exceed the estimated amount. conversely, if we
overestimate the level of returns and concessions for a period, we may have additional revenue in later periods when returns and concessions are less than estimated.  revenues from advance theme park ticket sales are recognized when the tickets are used. for non-expiring, multi-day tickets, we recognize revenue over a three-year time period based on estimated usage,
which is derived from historical usage patterns. if actual usage is different than our estimated usage, revenues may not be recognized in the periods the related services are rendered. in addition, a change in usage patterns would impact the timing
of revenue recognition.  pension and postretirement medical plan actuarial assumptions  the companys pension and postretirement medical benefit obligations and related costs are calculated using a number of actuarial
assumptions. two critical assumptions, the discount rate and the expected return on plan assets, are important elements of expense and/or liability measurement which we evaluate annually. other assumptions include the healthcare cost trend rate and
employee demographic factors such as retirement patterns, mortality, turnover and rate of compensation increase.  the discount
rate enables us to state expected future cash payments for benefits as a present value on the measurement date. a lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations and increases pension
table of contents
expense. the guideline for setting this rate is a high-quality long-term corporate bond rate. we decreased our discount rate to 5.75% at the end of fiscal 2009 from 7.80% at the beginning of
fiscal 2009 to reflect market interest rate conditions at our october3, 2009 measurement date. this decrease in the discount rate will affect net periodic pension and postretirement medical expense in fiscal 2010. the assumed discount rate
reflects market rates for high-quality corporate bonds currently available. the companys discount rate was determined by considering the average of pension yield curves constructed of a large population of high quality corporate bonds. the
resulting discount rate reflects the matching of plan liability cash flows to the yield curves. a one percentage point decrease in the assumed discount rate would have increased total net periodic pension and postretirement medical expense for
fiscal 2010 by $169 million and would increase the projected benefit obligation at october3, 2009 by $1.3 billion, respectively. a one percentage point increase in the assumed discount rate would have decreased these amounts by $149 million
and $1.1 billion, respectively.  to determine the expected long-term rate of return on the plan assets, we consider the
current and expected asset allocation, as well as historical and expected returns on each plan asset class. a lower expected rate of return on pension plan assets will increase pension expense. our long-term expected return on plan assets was 7.75%
and 7.50% for the 2009 and 2008 actuarial valuations, respectively. the increase in the rate used for the year end 2009 actuarial valuation was due to changes in the ranges of expected returns on certain plan asset classes. a one percentage point
change in the long-term return on pension plan asset assumption would impact fiscal 2010 annual pension and postretirement medical expense by approximately $57 million.  see note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for more information on our pension and postretirement medical plans.  goodwill, intangible assets and investments  the company is required to
test goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests if current events or circumstances require an interim impairment assessment. goodwill is allocated to various reporting units,
which are generally an operating segment or one reporting level below the operating segment. the company compares the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying amount to determine if there is potential goodwill impairment. if the fair value
of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent that the fair value of the goodwill within the reporting unit is less than the carrying value of its goodwill.  to determine the fair value of our reporting units, we generally use a present value technique (discounted cash flow) corroborated by market
multiples when available and as appropriate.we apply what we believe to be the most appropriate valuation methodology for each of our reporting units. the discounted cash flow analyses are sensitive to our estimates of future revenue growth
and margins for these businesses. we include in the projected cash flows an estimate of the revenue we believe the reporting unit would receive if the intellectual property developed by the reporting unit that is being used by other reporting units
was licensed to an unrelated third party at its fair market value. these amounts are not necessarily the same as those included in segment operating results. we believe our estimates of fair value are consistent with how a marketplace participant
would value our reporting units.  in light of recent adverse economic conditions in the global economy, the companys
long-term cash flow projections are subject to a greater degree of uncertainty than usual. if we had established different reporting units or utilized different valuation methodologies or assumptions, the impairment test results could differ, and we
could be required to record impairment charges. because of the way the accounting rules work, a relatively modest reduction in our estimate of the fair value of our broadcasting reporting unit could result in a significant goodwill impairment
charge.  the company is required to compare the fair values of other indefinite-lived intangible assets to their carrying
amounts. if the carrying amount of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized. fair values of other indefinite-lived intangible assets are determined based on discounted cash flows or appraised
values, as appropriate.  the company has cost and equity investments. the fair value of these investments is dependent on the
performance of the investee companies, as well as volatility inherent in the external markets for these investments. in assessing the potential impairment for these investments, we consider these factors, as well as the forecasted financial
performance of our investees and market values, where available. if these forecasts are not met or market values indicate an other-than-temporary decline in value, impairment charges may be required.
table of contents
during the current year, the company tested its goodwill and other intangible assets,
investments and long-lived assets for impairment and recorded non-cash impairment charges of $279 million. the impairment charges include $142 million for fcc radio licenses and $65 million for our investment in utv. during fiscal years 2008 and
2007, the company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $39 million and $26 million, respectively, related to fcc radio licenses. the fcc radio license impairment charges reflected overall market declines in certain radio markets in which we
operate. these impairment charges, which were estimated using a discounted cash flow model, were recorded in restructuring and impairment charges in the consolidated statements of income.  allowance for doubtful accounts  we evaluate our allowance for doubtful accounts and estimate collectibility of accounts receivable based on our analysis of historical bad debt experience in conjunction with our assessment of the financial condition of individual companies
with which we do business. in light of the recent turmoil in the domestic and global economy that has affected many companies, our estimates and judgments with respect to the collectibility of our receivables from these companies have become subject
to greater uncertainty than in more stable periods. if our estimate of uncollectible accounts is too low, costs and expenses may increase in future periods, and if it is too high, cost and expenses may decrease in future periods.  contingencies and litigation  we are currently involved in certain legal proceedings and, as required, have accrued estimates of the probable and estimable losses for the resolution of these claims. these estimates have been developed in consultation with outside
counsel and are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. it is possible, however, that future results of operations for any particular quarterly or annual period could be materially
affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies related to these proceedings. see note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for more detailed information on litigation exposure.  income tax audits  as a
matter of course, the company is regularly audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities.from time to time, these audits result in proposed assessments.our determinations regarding the recognition of income tax benefits are made
in consultation with outside tax and legal counsel where appropriate and are based upon the technical merits of our tax positions in consideration of applicable tax statutes and related interpretations and precedents and upon the expected outcome of
proceedings (or negotiations) with taxing and legal authorities. the tax benefits ultimately realized by the company may differ from those recognized in our financial statements based on a number of factors, including the companys decision to
settle rather than litigate a matter, relevant legal precedent related to similar matters and the companys success in supporting its filing positions with taxing authorities.  stock option compensation expense  each year during the second quarter, the
company awards stock options and restricted stock units to a broad-based group of management and creative personnel (the annual grant). the company uses a binomial valuation model which takes into account variables such as volatility, dividend
yield, and the risk-free interest rate. the binomial valuation model also considers the expected exercise multiple (the multiple of exercise price to grant price at which exercises are expected to occur on average) and the termination rate (the
probability of a vested option being cancelled due to the termination of the option holder) in computing the value of the option. accordingly, the company believes that the binomial valuation model should produce a fair value that is representative
of the value of an employee option.  in fiscal years 2009, 2008, and 2007, the weighted average assumptions used in the
options-pricing models were as follows:
risk-free interest rate
2.0%
3.6%
4.5%
expected volatility
47%
29%
26%
dividend yield
1.19%
1.02%
0.79%
termination rate
7.5%
7.5%
7.4%
exercise multiple
1.39
1.39
1.38
table of contents
although the initial fair value of stock options is not adjusted after the grant date,
changes in the companys assumptions may change the value of, and therefore the expense related to, future stock option grants. the assumptions that cause the greatest variation in fair value in the binomial valuation model are the expected
volatility and expected exercise multiple. increases or decreases in either the expected volatility or expected exercise multiple will cause the binomial option value to increase or decrease, respectively.  the volatility assumption considers both historical and implied volatility and may be impacted by the companys performance as well as
changes in economic and market conditions. see note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for more detailed information. if the expected volatility of 47% used by the company during 2009 was increased or decreased by five percentage points
(i.e. to 52% or to 42%), the weighted average grant date fair value of our 2009 stock option grants would have increased by 9% or decreased by 7%, respectively.  the expected exercise multiple may be influenced by the companys future stock performance, stock price volatility, and employee turnover rates. if the exercise multiple assumption of 1.39 used by
the company during 2009 were increased to 1.6 or decreased to 1.2, the weighted average binomial value of our 2009 stock option grants would have increased by 7% or decreased by 8%, respectively.  accounting changes  revenue
arrangements with multiple deliverables  in october 2009, the financial accounting standards board (fasb) issued guidance
on revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables effective for the companys 2011 fiscal year, although early adoption is permitted. the guidance revises the criteria for separating, measuring, and allocating arrangement consideration to each
deliverable in a multiple element arrangement. the guidance requires companies to allocate revenue using the relative selling price of each deliverable, which must be estimated if there is no history of selling the deliverable on a stand-alone basis
nor third-party evidence of selling price. the company is assessing the potential effect of this guidance on its financial statements.  transfers and servicing of financial assets  in june2009, the fasb issued guidance on transfers and
servicing of financial assets to eliminate the concept of a qualifying special-purpose entity, change the requirements for off balance sheet accounting for financial assets including limiting the circumstances where off balance sheet treatment for a
portion of a financial asset is allowable, and require additional disclosures. the guidance is effective for the companys 2011 fiscal year. the company does not expect that the adoption of this guidance will have a material impact on its
financial statements.  variable interest entities  in june 2009, the fasb issued guidance to revise the approach to determine when a variable interest entity (vie) should be consolidated. the new consolidation model for vies considers whether the company
has the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the vies economic performance and shares in the significant risks and rewards of the entity. the guidance on vies requires companies to continually reassess vies to
determine if consolidation is appropriate and provide additional disclosures. the guidance is effective for the companys 2011 fiscal year. the company is assessing the potential effect of this guidance on its financial statements.
collaborative arrangements  in december 2007, the fasb issued guidance that defines collaborative arrangements and establishes accounting and reporting requirements for such arrangements. a collaborative arrangement is a contractual arrangement that involves a joint
operating activity, for example an agreement to co-produce and distribute a motion picture with another studio. the guidance is effective for the companys 2010 fiscal year. the company does not expect that the adoption of the guidance on
collaborative arrangements will have a material impact on its financial statements.  business combinations  in december 2007, the fasb issued guidance that establishes principles and requirements for determining how a company recognizes and measures
the fair value of certain assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination, including noncontrolling interests, contingent consideration, and certain acquired contingencies. the guidance on business combinations also requires
acquisition-related transaction expenses and restructuring costs be expensed as incurred rather than capitalized. this guidance will be applicable prospectively to business combinations beginning in the companys 2010 fiscal year.
table of contents
noncontrolling interest (minority interests)  in december 2007, the fasb issued guidance on the accounting and reporting for a noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary.
upon adoption of this guidance, the company will be required to report its noncontrolling interests as a separate component of shareholders equity. the company will also be required to present net income attributable to the noncontrolling
interests and net income attributable to the shareholders of the company separately in its consolidated statements of income. currently, noncontrolling interests are reported between liabilities and shareholders equity in the companys
statement of financial position and the related income attributable to non-controlling interests is reflected as an expense in arriving at net income. the guidance is effective for the companys 2010 fiscal year and requires retroactive
adoption of the presentation and disclosure requirements for existing non-controlling interests. all other requirements are to be applied prospectively.  employee compensation  retirement benefits  in september 2006, the
fasb issued guidance that requires recognition of the overfunded or underfunded status of defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans as an asset or liability in the statement of financial position and changes in that funded status to be
recognized in comprehensive income in the year in which the changes occur. the guidance on retirement benefits also requires measurement of the funded status of a plan as of the end of the fiscal year. the company adopted the recognition provision
in fiscal year 2007 which resulted in a $261 million charge to accumulated other comprehensive income. the company adopted the measurement date provision by remeasuring plan assets and benefit obligations at the beginning of fiscal 2009. adoption of
the measurement date provisions resulted in a reduction of $35 million to retained earnings and a $100 million benefit to accumulated other comprehensive income.  key assumptions used for the measurement of pension and postretirement medical plans at the beginning of fiscal 2009 were 7.80% for the discount rate, 7.50% for the rate of return on plan assets, and
5.00% for salary increases. based on this measurement of plan assets and benefit obligations, pension and postretirement medical costs decreased to approximately $214 million for fiscal 2009 compared to $255 million for fiscal 2008. the decrease in
pension and postretirement medical expense was primarily due to an increase in the discount rate used to measure the present value of plan obligations.  the company remeasured plan assets and benefit obligations at october3, 2009 in accordance with new guidance on accounting for retirement plans. key assumptions for the measurement at
october3, 2009 were 5.75% for the discount rate, 7.75% for the rate of return on plan assets, and 4.50% for salary increases. based on the measurement at october3, 2009, the company recorded an increase in unrecognized pension and
postretirement medical expense, which totals $2.8 billion ($1.8 billion after-tax) as of october 3, 2009.  income tax  in july 2006, the fasb issued guidance which clarifies the accounting for income taxes by prescribing a minimum probability threshold that a
tax position must meet before a financial statement benefit is recognized. the minimum threshold is defined as a tax position that is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the applicable taxing authority, including resolution of
any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. the tax benefit to be recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate
settlement. the company adopted the guidance on income taxes at the beginning of fiscal year 2008. applying the guidance on income taxes to all tax positions upon adoption resulted in reductions of $148 million and $15 million to opening retained
earnings and minority interests, respectively.  forward-looking statements  the private securities litigation reform act of 1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the
company. we may from time to time make written or oral statements that are forward-looking, including statements contained in this report and other filings with the securities and exchange commission and in reports to our shareholders.
such statements may, for example, express expectations or projections about future actions that we may take, including restructuring or strategic initiatives, or about developments beyond our control including changes in domestic or global economic
conditions. these statements are made on the basis of managements views and assumptions as of the time the statements are made and we undertake no obligation to update these statements. there can be no assurance, however, that our expectations
will necessarily come to pass. significant factors affecting these expectations are set forth under item1a  risk factors of this report on form 10-k.
table of contents
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk  the company is exposed to the impact of interest rate changes, foreign currency fluctuations, commodity fluctuations
and changes in the market values of its investments.  policies and procedures  in the normal course of business, we employ established policies and procedures to manage the companys exposure to changes in interest
rates, foreign currencies, commodities, and the fair market value of certain investments in debt and equity securities using a variety of financial instruments.  our objectives in managing exposure to interest rate changes are to limit the impact of interest rate volatility on earnings and cash flows and to lower overall borrowing costs. to achieve these
objectives, we primarily use interest rate swaps to manage net exposure to interest rate changes related to the companys portfolio of borrowings. by policy, the company targets fixed-rate debt as a percentage of its net debt between minimum
and maximum percentages.  our objective in managing exposure to foreign currency fluctuations is to reduce volatility of
earnings and cash flow in order to allow management to focus on core business issues and challenges. accordingly, the company enters into various contracts that change in value as foreign exchange rates change to protect the u.s. dollar equivalent
value of its existing foreign currency assets, liabilities, commitments, and forecasted foreign currency revenues and expenses. the company utilizes option strategies and forward contracts that provide for the purchase or sale of foreign currencies
to hedge probable, but not firmly committed, transactions. the company also uses forward and option contracts to hedge foreign currency assets and liabilities. the principal foreign currencies hedged are the euro, british pound, japanese yen, and
canadian dollar. cross-currency swaps are used to effectively convert foreign currency denominated borrowings to u.s. dollar denominated borrowings. by policy, the company maintains hedge coverage between minimum and maximum percentages of its
forecasted foreign exchange exposures generally for periods not to exceed four years. the gains and losses on these contracts offset changes in the u.s. dollar equivalent value of the related exposures.  our objectives in managing exposure to commodity fluctuations are to use commodity derivatives to reduce volatility of earnings and cash
flows arising from commodity price changes. the amounts hedged using commodity swap contracts are based on forecasted levels of consumption of certain commodities, such as fuel oil and gasoline.  it is the companys policy to enter into foreign currency and interest rate derivative transactions and other financial instruments
only to the extent considered necessary to meet its objectives as stated above. the company does not enter into these transactions or any other hedging transactions for speculative purposes.  value at risk (var)  the
company utilizes a var model to estimate the maximum potential one-day loss in the fair value of its interest rate, foreign exchange, and market sensitive equity financial instruments. the var model estimates were made assuming normal market
conditions and a 95% confidence level. various modeling techniques can be used in a var computation. the companys computations are based on the interrelationships between movements in various interest rates, currencies, and equity prices (a
variance/co-variance technique). these interrelationships were determined by observing interest rate, foreign currency, and equity market changes over the preceding quarter for the calculation of var amounts at fiscal year end. the model includes
all of the companys debt as well as all interest rate and foreign exchange derivative contracts and market sensitive equity investments. forecasted transactions, firm commitments, and receivables and accounts payable denominated in foreign
currencies, which certain of these instruments are intended to hedge, were excluded from the model.  the var model is a risk
analysis tool and does not purport to represent actual losses in fair value that will be incurred by the company, nor does it consider the potential effect of favorable changes in market factors.  var on a combined basis decreased to $34 million at october3, 2009 from $68 million at september27, 2008. the decrease was
primarily due to increased diversification benefits across financial instruments and lower volatility of interest rates and foreign exchange rates.
table of contents
the estimated maximum potential one-day loss in fair value, calculated using the var model,
is as follows (unaudited, in millions):
fiscal year 2009
interest ratesensitivefinancialinstruments
currencysensitivefinancialinstruments
equitysensitivefinancialinstruments
combinedportfolio
year end var
$
$
$
$
average var
$
$
$
$
highest var
$
$
$
$
lowest var
$
$
$
$
beginning of year var (year end fiscal 2008)
$
$
$
$
the var for euro disney and hong kong disneyland is immaterial as of october3,
2009 and accordingly, has been excluded from the above table.  item8.financial statements and
supplementary data  see index to financial statements and supplemental data on page 60.  item9.changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure  none.  item9a.controls and procedures  evaluation of disclosure controls and
procedures  we have established disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that the information required to be disclosed
by the company in the reports that it files or submits under the securities exchange act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in sec rules and forms and that such information is accumulated and
made known to the officers who certify the companys financial reports and to other members of senior management and the board of directors as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.  based on their evaluation as of october3, 2009, the principal executive officer and principal financial officer of the company have
concluded that the companys disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the securities exchange act of 1934) are effective.  managements report on internal control over financial reporting  managements report set forth on page 61 is incorporated herein by reference.  changes in internal controls
there have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year ended
october3, 2009, that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.  item9b.other information  none.
table of contents
part iii  item10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance  information regarding section16(a) compliance, the audit committee, the companys code of ethics and background of the directors appearing under the captions section 16(a) beneficial
ownership reporting compliance, committees, corporate governance guidelines and code of ethics and election of directors in the companys proxy statement for the 2010 annual meeting of shareholders is
hereby incorporated by reference.  information regarding executive officers is included in part i of this form 10-k as
permitted by general instruction g(3).  item11. executive compensation  information appearing under the captions board compensation and executive compensation in the 2010 proxy statement
(other than the compensation committee report, which is deemed furnished herein by reference) is hereby incorporated by reference.  item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters  information setting forth the security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management appearing under the caption stock ownership and information in the equity compensation
plans table appearing under the caption equity compensation plans in the 2010 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by reference.  item13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence  information regarding certain related transactions appearing under the captions certain relationships and related person transactions and information regarding director independence appearing
under the caption director independence in the 2010 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by reference.
item14. principal accountant fees and services  information appearing under the captions
auditor fees and services and policy for approval of audit and permitted non-audit services in the 2010 proxy statement is hereby incorporated by reference.
table of contents
part iv  item15. exhibits and financial statement schedules
(1)
financial statements and schedules  see index to financial statements and supplemental data at page 60.
(2)
exhibits  the documents set
forth below are filed herewith or incorporated herein by reference to the location indicated.
exhibit
location
2.1
agreement and plan of merger, by and among the company, maverick acquisition sub, inc., maverick merger sub, llc and marvel entertainment, inc., dated as of august31, 2009.
exhibit 2.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated august 31, 2009
3.1
amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the company
annex c to the joint proxy statement/ prospectus included in the registration statement on form s-4 (no. 333-88105) of the company, filed sept. 30, 1999
3.2
bylaws of the company
exhibit 3.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated june 29, 2007
4.1
amended and restated five year credit agreement dated as of february 22, 2006
exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company, filed march 31, 2006
4.2
amended and restated four year credit agreement dated as of february 22, 2006
exhibit 10.2 to the current report on form 8-k of the company filed march 31, 2006
4.3
indenture, dated as of nov. 30, 1990, between dei and bankers trust company, as trustee
exhibit 2 to the current report on form 8-k of dei, dated jan. 14, 1991
4.4
indenture, dated as of mar. 7, 1996, between the company and citibank, n.a., as trustee
exhibit 4.1(a) to the current report on form 8-k of the company, dated march 7, 1996
4.5
senior debt securities indenture, dated as of september 24, 2001, between the company and wells fargo bank, n.a., as trustee
exhibit 4.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company, dated september 24, 2001
4.6
other long-term borrowing instruments are omitted pursuant to item 601(b)(4)(iii) of regulation s-k. the company undertakes to furnish copies of such instruments to the commission
upon request
10.1
amended and restated employment agreement, dated as of december 23, 2008, between the company and robert a. iger
exhibit 10.1 to the form 10-q of the company for the quarter ended december 27, 2008
10.2
amended and restated employment agreement, dated as of december 18, 2008 between the company and thomas o. staggs
exhibit 10.2 to the form 10-q of the company for the quarter ended december 27, 2008
10.3
employment agreement, dated as of october 1, 2008 between the company and alan n. braverman
exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated october 3, 2008
10.4
employment agreement dated as of october 1, 2008 between the company and kevin a. mayer
exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated october 3, 2008
10.5
employment agreement dated as of september 1, 2009 between the company and jayne parker
filed herewith
10.6
description of directors compensation
filed herewith
table of contents
exhibit
location
10.7
amended and restated directors retirement policy
exhibit 10.4 to the current report on form 8-k of the company filed december 1, 2006
10.8
form of indemnification agreement for certain officers and directors
annex c to the proxy statement for the 1987 annual meeting of dei
10.9
1995 stock option plan for non-employee directors
exhibit 20 to the form s-8 registration statement (no. 33-57811) of dei, dated feb. 23, 1995
10.10
amended and restated 1995 stock incentive plan and rules
exhibit 10.17 to the form 10-k of the company for the year ended september 27, 2008
10.11
amendment to amended and restated 1995 stock incentive plan
item 1.01(a) of current report on form 8-k of the company filed september 23, 2004
10.12
amended and restated 2002 executive performance plan
exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company, filed march 12, 2009
10.13
management incentive bonus program
the section of the proxy statement for the 2008 annual meeting of the company titled annual bonus incentives for named executive officers
10.14
amended and restated 1997 non-employee directors stock and deferred compensation plan
annex ii to the proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting of the company
10.15
amended and restated 2005 stock incentive plan
annex a to the proxy statement for the 2009 annual meeting of the company
10.16
the walt disney company/pixar 1995 stock plan
exhibit 10.1 to the form s-8 registration statement (n0. 333-133840) of the company dated may 5, 2006
10.17
amended and restated the walt disney company/pixar 2004 equity incentive plan
exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company filed december 1, 2006
10.18
amended and restated key employees deferred compensation and retirement plan
exhibit 10.28 to the form 10-k of the company for the year ended september 27, 2008
10.19
amended and restated benefit equalization plan of abc, inc.
exhibit 10.29 to the form 10-k of the company for the year ended september 27, 2008
10.20
group personal excess liability insurance plan
exhibit 10(x) to the form 10-k of the company for the period ended september 30, 1997
10.21
family income assurance plan (summary description)
exhibit 10(y) to the form 10-k of the company for the period ended september 30, 1997
10.22
amended and restated severance pay plan
exhibit 10.4 to the form 10-q of the company for the quarter ended december 27, 2008
10.23
form of restricted stock unit award agreement (time-based vesting)
exhibit 10(aa) to the form 10-k of the company for the period ended september 30, 2004
10.24
form of restricted stock unit award agreement (bonus related)
exhibit 10.3 to the current report on form 8-k of the company filed december 15, 2006
10.25
form of performance-based stock unit award
exhibit 10.5 to the form 10-q of the company for the quarter ended december 27, 2008
10.26
form of performance-based stock unit award agreement (dual performance goals)
exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company filed december15, 2006
10.27
form of performance-based stock unit award agreement (total shareholder return/average annual adjusted eps growth goals)
exhibit 10.5 to the form 10-q of the company for the period ended december 29, 2007
table of contents
exhibit
location
10.28
form of non-qualified stock option award agreement (seven-year form)
exhibit 10.3 to the form 10-q of the company for the period ended march 28, 2009
10.29
form of restricted stock unit award agreement in lieu of equitable adjustment
exhibit 10.1 to the form 10-q of the company for the period ended june 30, 2007
10.30
voting agreement, by and between the walt disney company and mr. isaac perlmutter, dated as of august31, 2009
exhibit 10.1 to the current report on form 8-k of the company dated august 31, 2009
subsidiaries of the company
filed herewith
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
filed herewith
31(a)
rule 13a  14(a) certification of chief executive officer of the company in accordance with section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
filed herewith
31(b)
rule 13a-14(a) certification of chief financial officer of the company in accordance with section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
filed herewith
32(a)
section 1350 certification of chief executive officer of the company in accordance with section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002*
furnished herewith
32(b)
section 1350 certification of chief financial officer of the company in accordance with section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002*
furnished herewith
the following materials from the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended october 3, 2009 formatted in extensible business reporting language (xbrl): (i) the
consolidated statements of income, (ii) the consolidated balance sheets, (iii) the consolidated statements of cash flows, (iv) the consolidated statements of shareholders equity and (v) related notes, tagged as blocks of text
furnished herewith
*
a signed original of this written statement required by section906 has been provided to the company and will be retained by the company and furnished to the
securities and exchange commission or its staff upon request.
table of contents
signatures  pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report
to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the walt disney company
(registrant)
date: december 2, 2009
by:
/s/ robert a. iger
(robert a. iger, president and chief executive officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has
been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
principal executive officer
president and chief executive officer
december 2,2009
/s/ robert a. iger
(robert a. iger)
principal financial and accounting officers
senior executive vice president and chief financial officer
december 2,2009
/s/ thomas o. staggs
(thomas o. staggs)
/s/ brent a. woodford
senior vice president-planning and control
december 2,2009
(brent a. woodford)
directors  /s/ susan e. arnold
director
december 2,2009
(susan e. arnold)
/s/ john e. bryson
director
december 2,2009
(john e. bryson)
/s/ john s. chen
director
december 2,2009
(john s. chen)
/s/ judith l. estrin
director
december 2,2009
(judith l. estrin)
/s/ robert a. iger
director
december 2,2009
(robert a. iger)
/s/ steven p. jobs
director
december 2,2009
(steven p. jobs)
/s/ fred h. langhammer
director
december 2,2009
(fred h. langhammer)
/s/ aylwin b. lewis
director
december 2,2009
(aylwin b. lewis)
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/ monica c. lozano
director
december 2,2009
(monica c. lozano)
/s/ robert w. matschullat
director
december 2,2009
(robert w. matschullat)
/s/ john e. pepper, jr.
chairman of the board and director
december 2,2009
(john e. pepper, jr.)
/s/ orin c. smith
director
december 2,2009
(orin c. smith)
table of contents
the walt disney company and subsidiaries
index to financial statements and supplemental data
page
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements of the walt disney company and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of income for the years ended october3, 2009,september
27, 2008, and september29, 2007
consolidated balance sheets as of october3, 2009 and september27, 2008
consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended october3, 2009,september
27, 2008, and september29, 2007
consolidated statements of shareholders equity for the years ended october3, 2009,
september27, 2008, and september29, 2007
notes to consolidated financial statements
quarterly financial summary (unaudited)
all schedules are omitted for the reason that they are not applicable or the required
information is included in the financial statements or notes.
table of contents
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting  management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting,
as such term is defined in exchange act rule 13a-15(f). the companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements prepared for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to
future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  under the supervision and with the participation of management, including our principal executive officer and principal financial officer,
we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in internal control  integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission. based on our evaluation under the framework in internal control  integrated framework, management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of october3, 2009.  the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of october3, 2009 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers
llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included herein.
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and shareholders of the walt disney company  in our opinion, the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and the related consolidated statements of income, shareholders equity and cash flows present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the walt disney company and its subsidiaries (the company) at october3, 2009 and september27, 2008, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended
october3, 2009 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. also in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of
october3, 2009, based on criteria established in internal control  integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the companys management is responsible for these
financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying managements report on internal
control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements and on the companys internal control over financial reporting based on our integrated audits. we conducted our audits in accordance with
the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement and
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. our audits also
included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.  as discussed in notes 2 and 3 to the consolidated financial statements, the company changed its method of accounting for uncertainty in income taxes in 2008 and its method of accounting for pension and
other postretirement benefit plans in 2007 and 2009.  a companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
(ii)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being
made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys
assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  pricewaterhousecoopers llp  los angeles, california  december 2, 2009
table of contents
consolidated statements of income  (in millions, except per share data)
revenues
$
36,149
$
37,843
$
35,510
costs and expenses
(30,452)
(30,400)
(28,655)
restructuring and impairment charges
(492)
(39)
(26)
other income (expense)
(59)
1,004
net interest expense
(466)
(524)
(593)
equity in the income of investees
income from continuing operations before income taxes and minority interests
5,658
7,402
7,725
income taxes
(2,049)
(2,673)
(2,874)
minority interests
(302)
(302)
(177)
income from continuing operations
3,307
4,427
4,674
discontinued operations, net of tax
net income
$
3,307
$
4,427
$
4,687
diluted earnings per share:
earnings per share, continuing operations
$
1.76
$
2.28
$
2.24
earnings per share, discontinued operations
0.01
earnings per share
$
1.76
$
2.28
$
2.25
basic earnings per share:
earnings per share, continuing operations
$
1.78
$
2.34
$
2.33
earnings per share, discontinued operations
0.01
earnings per share
$
1.78
$
2.34
$
2.34
weighted average number of common andcommon equivalent shares outstanding:
diluted
1,875
1,948
2,092
basic
1,856
1,890
2,004
see notes to consolidated financial statements
table of contents
consolidated balance sheets  (in millions, except per share data)
october3,2009
september27,2008
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
3,417
$
3,001
receivables
4,854
5,373
inventories
1,271
1,124
television costs
deferred income taxes
1,140
1,024
other current assets
total current assets
11,889
11,666
film and television costs
5,125
5,394
investments
2,554
2,249
parks, resorts and other property, at cost attractions, buildings and equipment
32,475
31,493
accumulated depreciation
(17,395)
(16,310)
15,080
15,183
projects in progress
1,350
1,169
land
1,167
1,180
17,597
17,532
intangible assets, net
2,247
2,428
goodwill
21,683
21,465
other assets
2,022
1,763
$
63,117
$
62,497
liabilities and shareholders equity
current liabilities
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
$
5,616
$
5,980
current portion of borrowings
1,206
3,529
unearned royalties and other advances
2,112
2,082
total current liabilities
8,934
11,591
borrowings
11,495
11,110
deferred income taxes
1,819
2,350
other long-term liabilities
5,444
3,779
minority interests
1,691
1,344
commitments and contingencies (note 15)
shareholders equity
preferred stock, $.01 par value authorized  100million shares, issued  none
common stock, $.01 par value authorized  3.6 billion shares, issued  2.6 billion shares
27,038
26,546
retained earnings
31,033
28,413
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(1,644)
(81)
56,427
54,878
treasury stock, at cost, 781.7million shares at october3, 2009 and 777.1million shares at september27,
(22,693)
(22,555)
33,734
32,323
$
63,117
$
62,497
see notes to consolidated financial statements
table of contents
consolidated statements of cash flows  (in millions)
operating activities of continuing operations
net income
$
3,307
$
4,427
$
4,687
income from discontinued operations
(13)
depreciation and amortization
1,631
1,582
1,491
gains on sales of equity investments and businesses
(342)
(14)
(1,052)
deferred income taxes
(128)
(137)
equity in the income of investees
(577)
(581)
(485)
cash distributions received from equity investees
minority interests
net change in film and television costs
(43)
(301)
equity-based compensation
impairment charges
other
(247)
(209)
(91)
changes in operating assets and liabilities
receivables
(594)
(355)
inventories
(117)
(329)
other assets
(565)
(64)
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
(325)
income taxes
(50)
cash provided by continuing operations
5,064
5,446
5,398
investing activities of continuing operations
investments in parks, resorts and other property
(1,753)
(1,578)
(1,566)
sales of investments
proceeds from sales of equity investments and businesses
1,530
acquisitions
(517)
(660)
(608)
other
(57)
(8)
cash used in continuing investing activities
(2,096)
(2,162)
(618)
financing activities of continuing operations
commercial paper borrowings, net
(1,985)
(701)
1,847
borrowings
1,750
1,706
3,143
reduction of borrowings
(1,617)
(477)
(2,294)
dividends
(648)
(664)
(637)
repurchases of common stock
(138)
(4,453)
(6,923)
exercise of stock options and other
1,245
cash used in continuing financing activities
(2,552)
(3,953)
(3,619)
cash flows of discontinued operations
net cash provided by operating activities of discontinued operations
net cash used in investing activities of discontinued operations
(3)
net cash provided by financing activities of discontinued operations
increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(669)
1,259
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
3,001
3,670
2,411
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
3,417
$
3,001
$
3,670
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
interest paid
$
$
$
income taxes paid
$
1,609
$
2,768
$
2,796
see notes to consolidated financial statements
table of contents
consolidated statements of shareholders equity
(in millions, except per share data)
shares
commonstock
retainedearnings
accumulatedothercomprehensiveincome(loss)
treasurystock
totalshareholdersequity
balance at september 30, 2006
2,062
$
22,377
$
20,630
$
(8)
$
(11,179)
$
31,820
net income
4,687
4,687
market value adjustments for investments and hedges
(71)
(71)
foreign currency translation and other
increase in minimum pension liability adjustment
comprehensive income
4,799
exercise of stock options and issuance of restricted stock and stock options
1,823
1,823
common stock repurchases
(202)
(6,923)
(6,923)
dividends ($0.31 per share)
(644)
(637)
adoption of new benefit plan accounting guidance (net of tax of $154 million)
(261)
(261)
distribution of abc radio business
balance at september 29, 2007
1,917
$
24,207
$
24,805
$
(157)
$
(18,102)
$
30,753
net income
4,427
4,427
market value adjustments for investments and hedges
foreign currency translation and other
(27)
(27)
pension and postretirement medical plan adjustments:
reclassification of prior losses to net income
net actuarial loss
(42)
(42)
comprehensive income
4,503
exercise of stock options and issuance of restricted stock and stock options
1,012
1,012
redemption of convertible senior notes
1,320
1,320
common stock repurchases
(139)
(4,453)
(4,453)
dividends ($0.35 per share)
(671)
(664)
adoption of new income tax guidance
(148)
(148)
balance at september 27, 2008
1,854
$
26,546
$
28,413
$
(81)
$
(22,555)
$
32,323
net income
3,307
3,307
market value adjustments for investments and hedges
(57)
(57)
foreign currency translation and other
(33)
(33)
pension and postretirement medical plan adjustments:
reclassification of prior net gains to net income
(4)
(4)
net actuarial loss
(1,569)
(1,569)
comprehensive income
1,644
adoption of new pension and postretirement medical plan measurement date and other (net of tax of $37 million)
(32)
exercise of stock options and issuance of restricted stock and stock options
common stock repurchases
(5)
(138)
(138)
dividends ($0.35 per share)
(655)
(648)
balance at october 3, 2009
1,861
$
27,038
$
31,033
$
(1,644)
$
(22,693)
$
33,734
see notes to consolidated financial statements
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements  (tabular dollars in millions, except per share amounts)
description of the business and segment information  the walt disney company, together with the subsidiaries
through which businesses are conducted (the company), is a diversified worldwide entertainment company with operations in the following business segments: media networks, parks and resorts, studio entertainment, consumer products and interactive
media.  description of the business  media networks  the company operates the abc television network and ten owned television stations, as well as
the espn radio network and radio disney network (the radio networks) and 46 owned radio stations. both the television and radio networks have affiliated stations providing coverage to households throughout the united states. the company has cable
networks that are principally involved in the production and distribution of cable television programming, the licensing of programming in domestic and international markets, and investing in foreign television broadcasting, production, and
distribution entities. primary cable programming services that operate through consolidated subsidiaries are the espn-branded networks, disney channel worldwide, soapnet, disney xd and abc family. other programming services that operate through a
joint venture and are accounted for under the equity method include a&e television networks and lifetime entertainment services. the company also produces original television programming for network, first-run syndication, pay, and international
syndication markets, along with original animated television programming for network, pay, and international syndication markets. additionally, the company operates abc-, espn-, abc family- and soapnet-branded internet businesses.  on june12, 2007, the company completed the spin-off of its wholly owned subsidiary, abc radio holdings, inc., and its merger into a
subsidiary of citadel broadcasting corporation (citadel). prior to the spin-off, the company consolidated its abc radio business, consisting of 22 large-market radio stations and the abc radio network businesses, under abc radio holdings, inc. the
transaction did not include the companys espn radio or radio disney network and station businesses. additional information regarding this transaction is included in note 5.  parks and resorts  the company owns and operates the walt disney world
resort in florida and the disneyland resort in california. the walt disney world resort includes four theme parks (the magic kingdom, epcot, disneys hollywood studios, and disneys animal kingdom), 17 resort hotels, a retail, dining, and
entertainment complex, a sports complex, conference centers, campgrounds, golf courses, water parks, and other recreational facilities. the disneyland resort includes two theme parks (disneyland and disneys california adventure), three resort
hotels, and a retail, dining and entertainment complex. the company manages and has an effective 51% ownership interest in disneyland paris, which includes two theme parks (disneyland park and walt disney studios park), seven themed hotels, two
convention centers, a shopping, dining and entertainment complex, and a 27-hole golf facility. the company also manages and has a 47% ownership interest in hong kong disneyland resort, which includes one theme park and two resort hotels. the company
earns royalties on revenues generated by the tokyo disneyland resort, which includes two theme parks and three disney-branded hotels, and is owned and operated by an unrelated japanese corporation. the company also manages and markets vacation club
ownership interests through the disney vacation club, operates the disney cruise line out of port canaveral, florida, and adventures by disney. the companys walt disney imagineering unit designs and develops new theme park concepts and
attractions, as well as resort properties.  studio entertainment  the company produces and acquires live-action and animated motion pictures for worldwide distribution to the theatrical, home entertainment,
and television markets. the company distributes these products through its own distribution and marketing companies in the united states and foreign markets primarily under the walt disney pictures, touchstone pictures, miramax, pixar, and
disneynature banners, as well as dimension for titles released prior to september30, 2005. the company also produces stage plays, musical recordings and live entertainment events.
table of contents
consumer products  the company licenses the name walt disney, as well as the companys characters and visual and literary properties, to various manufacturers, retailers, show promoters, and publishers
throughout the world. the company also engages in retail and online distribution of products through the disney store and disneystore.com. the disney store is owned and operated in europe and north america and franchised in japan. the company
publishes entertainment and educational books and magazines for children and families.  disney interactive media group  the company creates and delivers disney-branded entertainment and lifestyle content across interactive media platforms. the primary operating
businesses are disney interactive studios, which produces video games for global distribution, and disney online, which produces web sites and online virtual worlds in the united states and internationally. the interactive media group also manages
disney-branded mobile phone initiatives.  segment information  the operating segments reported below are the segments of the company for which separate financial information is available and for which segment results are evaluated regularly by the chief executive
officer in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance.  segment operating results reflect earnings before
corporate and unallocated shared expenses, restructuring and impairment charges, other income (expense), net interest expense, income taxes, and minority interests. segment operating income includes equity in the income of investees. equity
investees consist primarily of aetn/lifetime, which is a cable business included in the media networks segment. corporate and unallocated shared expenses principally consist of corporate functions, executive management, and certain unallocated
administrative support functions.  equity in the income of investees by segment is as follows:
media networks (1)
$
$
$
studio entertainment
(4)
consumer products
interactive media
(3)
corporate
(12)
$
$
$
(1)
substantially all of these amounts relate to investments at cable networks.
table of contents
the following segment results include allocations of certain costs, including information
technology, pension, legal, and other shared services costs, which are allocated based on metrics designed to correlate with consumption. these allocations are agreed-upon amounts between the businesses and may differ from amounts that would be
negotiated in arms length transactions. in addition, all significant intersegment transactions have been eliminated except that studio entertainment revenues and operating income include an allocation of consumer products and interactive media
revenues, which is meant to reflect royalties on sales of merchandise based on certain studio film properties.
revenues
media networks
$
16,209
$
15,857
$
14,913
parks and resorts
10,667
11,504
10,626
studio entertainment
third parties
6,016
7,167
7,308
intersegment
6,136
7,348
7,491
consumer products
third parties
2,533
2,569
2,140
intersegment
(108)
(154)
(150)
2,425
2,415
1,990
interactive media
third parties
intersegment
(12)
(27)
(33)
total consolidated revenues
$
36,149
$
37,843
$
35,510
segment operating income (loss)
media networks
$
4,765
$
4,981
$
4,534
parks and resorts
1,418
1,897
1,710
studio entertainment
1,086
1,195
consumer products
interactive media
(295)
(258)
(291)
total segment operating income
$
6,672
$
8,484
$
7,837
reconciliation of segment operating income to income from continuing operations before income taxes and minority interests
segment operating income
$
6,672
$
8,484
$
7,837
corporate and unallocated shared expenses
(398)
(460)
(497)
restructuring and impairment charges
(492)
(39)
(26)
other income (expense)
(59)
1,004
net interest expense
(466)
(524)
(593)
income from continuing operations before income taxes and minority interests
$
5,658
$
7,402
$
7,725
table of contents
capital expenditures from continuing operations
media networks
cable networks
$
$
$
broadcasting
parks and resorts
domestic
1,039
international
studio entertainment
consumer products
interactive media
corporate
total capital expenditures from continuing operations
$
1,753
$
1,578
$
1,566
depreciation expense from continuing operations
media networks
$
$
$
parks and resorts
domestic
international
studio entertainment
consumer products
interactive media
corporate
total depreciation expense from continuing operations
$
1,580
$
1,527
$
1,459
identifiable assets (1)(2)
media networks
$
26,936
$
26,786
parks and resorts
16,945
16,916
studio entertainment
11,104
11,123
consumer products
1,278
1,393
interactive media
corporate (3)
5,866
5,292
total consolidated assets
$
63,117
$
62,497
supplemental revenue data
media networks
advertising (4)
$
6,624
$
7,197
$
7,112
affiliate fees
7,407
6,793
6,139
parks and resorts
merchandise, food and beverage
3,445
3,653
3,454
admissions
3,403
3,623
3,342
revenues
united states and canada
$
27,508
$
28,506
$
27,286
europe
6,012
6,805
5,898
asia pacific
1,860
1,811
1,732
latin america and other
$
36,149
$
37,843
$
35,510
segment operating income
united states and canada
$
4,923
$
6,500
$
6,052
europe
1,158
1,423
1,192
asia pacific
latin america and other
$
6,672
$
8,484
$
7,837
table of contents
long-lived assets (5)
united states and canada
$
43,570
$
43,521
europe
3,708
3,923
asia pacific
1,805
1,786
latin america and other
$
49,271
$
49,419
(1)
identifiable assets include amounts associated with equity method investments. equity method investments by segment are as follows:
media networks
$
2,166
$
1,861
studio entertainment
corporate
$
2,173
$
1,873
(2)
goodwill and
intangible assets by segment are as follows:
media networks
$
17,438
$
17,340
parks and resorts
studio entertainment
5,032
5,021
consumer products
interactive media
corporate
$
23,930
$
23,893
(3)
primarily deferred
tax assets, investments, fixed assets, and other assets.
(4)
advertising
revenue includes amounts reported in interactive media.
(5)
long-lived assets
include total assets less current assets, financial investments and derivatives recorded in other non-current assets.
summary of significant accounting policies  principles of consolidation  the consolidated financial statements of the company include the accounts of the walt disney company and its majority-owned and controlled
subsidiaries. intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. in december 1999, dvd financing, inc. (dfi), a subsidiary of disney vacation development, inc. and an indirect subsidiary of the company, completed a
receivable sale transaction that established a facility that permits dfi to sell receivables arising from the sale of vacation club memberships on a periodic basis. in connection with this facility, dfi prepares separate financial statements,
although its separate assets and liabilities are also consolidated in these financial statements. dfis ability to sell new receivables under this facility ended on december 4, 2008. (see note 16 for further discussion of this facility)
reporting period  the companys fiscal year ends on the saturday closest to september 30 and consists of fifty-two weeks with the exception that approximately every six years, we have a fifty-three week year. when a fifty-three week year occurs, the
company reports the additional week in the fourth quarter. fiscal 2009 is a fifty-three week year beginning on september 28, 2008 and ending on october 3, 2009.  reclassifications  certain reclassifications have been made in the fiscal
2008 and fiscal 2007 financial statements and notes to conform to the fiscal 2009 presentation.
table of contents
use of estimates  the preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial
statements and footnotes thereto. actual results may differ from those estimates.  revenue recognition  broadcast advertising revenues are recognized when commercials are aired. revenues from television subscription services related to the
companys primary cable programming services are recognized as services are provided. certain of the companys existing contracts with cable and satellite operators include annual live programming commitments. in these cases, recognition
of revenues subject to the commitments is deferred until the annual commitments are satisfied, which generally results in higher revenue recognition in the second half of the year.  revenues from advance theme park ticket sales are recognized when the tickets are used. for non-expiring, multi-day tickets, we recognize
revenue over a three-year time period based on estimated usage, which is derived from historical usage patterns.  revenues
from the theatrical distribution of motion pictures are recognized when motion pictures are exhibited. revenues from video and video game sales, net of anticipated returns and customer incentives, are recognized on the date that video units are made
available for sale by retailers. revenues from the licensing of feature films and television programming are recorded when the material is available for telecast by the licensee and when certain other conditions are met.  merchandise licensing advances and guarantee royalty payments are recognized based on the contractual royalty rate when the licensed product
is sold by the licensee. non-refundable advances and minimum guarantee royalty payments in excess of royalties earned are generally recognized as revenue at the end of the contract term.  revenues from our internet and mobile operations are recognized as services are rendered. advertising revenues at our internet operations
are recognized when advertisements are viewed online.  taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities
are presented in the consolidated statements of income on a net basis.  advertising expense  advertising costs are expensed as incurred. advertising expense for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $2.7 billion, $2.9 billion and $2.6
billion, respectively.  cash and cash equivalents  cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on hand and marketable securities with original maturities of three months or less.  investments  debt securities that the company has the positive intent and
ability to hold to maturity are classified as held-to-maturity and reported at amortized cost. debt securities not classified as held-to-maturity and marketable equity securities are classified as either trading or
available-for-sale. trading and available-for-sale securities are recorded at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in earnings or accumulated other comprehensive income/ (loss), respectively. all other equity securities
are accounted for using either the cost method or the equity method.  the company regularly reviews its investments to
determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost basis is other than temporary. if the decline in fair value is determined to be other than temporary, the cost basis of the investment is written down to fair value, and the amount of the
write-down is included in the consolidated statements of income.  translation policy  the u.s. dollar is the functional currency for the majority of our international operations. the local currency is the functional currency
for euro disney, hong kong disneyland, jetix and international locations of the disney stores.
table of contents
for u.s. dollar functional currency locations, foreign currency assets and liabilities are
remeasured into u.s. dollars at end-of-period exchange rates, except for nonmonetary balance sheet accounts, which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. revenue and expenses are remeasured at average exchange rates in effect during each
period, except for those expenses related to the non-monetary balance sheet amounts, which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. gains or losses from foreign currency remeasurement are included in income.  for local currency functional locations, assets and liabilities are translated at end-of-period rates while revenues and expenses are
translated at average rates in effect during the period. equity is translated at historical rates and the resulting cumulative translation adjustments are included as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income.  inventories  inventory
primarily includes vacation timeshare units, merchandise, materials, and supplies. carrying amounts of vacation ownership units are carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value. carrying amounts of merchandise, materials, and supplies
inventories are generally determined on a moving average cost basis and are stated at the lower of cost or market.  film and television
costs  film and television costs include capitalizable production costs, production overhead, interest, development costs,
and acquired production costs and are stated at the lower of cost, less accumulated amortization, or fair value. acquired programming costs for the companys television and cable networks are stated at the lower of cost, less accumulated
amortization, or net realizable value. acquired television broadcast program licenses and rights are recorded when the license period begins and the program is available for use. marketing, distribution, and general and administrative costs are
expensed as incurred.  film and television production, participation and residual costs are expensed based on the ratio of the
current periods revenues to estimated remaining total revenues (ultimate revenues) from all sources on an individual production basis. ultimate revenues for film productions include revenues that will be earned within ten years from the date
of the initial theatrical release. for television network series, we include revenues that will be earned within ten years from delivery of the first episode, or if still in production, five years from delivery of the most recent episode, if later.
for acquired film libraries, remaining revenues include amounts to be earned for up to twenty years from the date of acquisition. costs of film and television productions are subject to regular recoverability assessments which compare the estimated
fair values with the unamortized costs. the amount by which the unamortized costs of film and television productions exceed their estimated fair values is written off. film development costs for projects that have been abandoned or have not been set
for production within three years are generally written off.  we expense the cost of television broadcast rights for acquired
movies, series and other programs based on the number of times the program is expected to be aired or on a straight-line basis over the useful life, as appropriate. rights costs for multi-year sports programming arrangements are amortized based upon
the ratio of the current periods revenues to ultimate revenues (the projected revenue method) or on a straight-line basis over the contract period, as appropriate. ultimate revenues for multi-year sports programming rights include both
advertising revenues and an allocation of affiliate fees. if the annual contractual payments related to each season over the term of a multi-year sports programming arrangement approximate each seasons rights cost based on the projected
revenue method, we expense the related annual payments during the applicable season. individual programs are written-off when there are no plans to air or sublicense the program.  the net realizable value of network television broadcast program licenses and rights is reviewed using a daypart methodology. a daypart is
defined as an aggregation of programs broadcast during a particular time of day or programs of a similar type. the companys dayparts are early morning, daytime, late night, primetime, news, children, and sports (includes network and cable).
the net realizable values of other cable programming assets are reviewed on an aggregated basis for each cable channel.  internal-use
software costs  the company expenses costs incurred in the preliminary project stage of developing or acquiring internal
use software, such as research and feasibility studies, as well as costs incurred in the post-implementation/operational stage, such as maintenance and training. capitalization of software development costs occurs only after the
table of contents
preliminary-project stage is complete, management authorizes the project, and it is probable that the project will be completed and the software will be used for the function intended. as of
october 3, 2009 and september 27, 2008, capitalized software costs, net of accumulated depreciation, totaled $595 million and $526 million, respectively. the capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of
the software, ranging from 3-10 years.  software product development costs  software product development costs incurred prior to reaching technological feasibility are expensed. we have determined that technological
feasibility of the software is not established until substantially all product development is complete.  parks, resorts and other property
parks, resorts, and other property are carried at historical cost. depreciation is computed on the straight-line method
over estimated useful lives as follows:
attractions
25  40 years
buildings and improvements
20  40 years
leasehold improvements
life of lease or asset life if less
land improvements
20  40 years
furniture, fixtures and equipment
3  25 years
goodwill and other intangible assets  the company is required to test goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis and between annual
tests if current events or circumstances require an interim impairment assessment. goodwill is allocated to various reporting units, which are generally an operating segment or one reporting level below the operating segment. the company compares
the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying amount to determine if there is potential goodwill impairment. if the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent that the fair
value of the goodwill within the reporting unit is less than the carrying value of its goodwill.  to determine the fair value
of our reporting units, we generally use a present value (discounted cash flow) technique corroborated by market multiples when available and as appropriate. we apply what we believe to be the most appropriate valuation methodology for each of our
reporting units. we include in the projected cash flows an estimate of the revenue we believe the reporting unit would receive if the intellectual property developed by the reporting unit that is being used by other reporting units was licensed to
an unrelated third party at its fair market value. these amounts are not necessarily the same as those included in segment operating results.  in light of recent adverse economic conditions in the global economy, the companys long-term cash flow projections are subject to a greater degree of uncertainty than usual. if we had established
different reporting units or utilized different valuation methodologies or assumptions, the impairment test results could differ, and we could be required to record impairment charges. because of the way the accounting rules work, a relatively
modest reduction in our estimate of the fair value of our broadcasting reporting unit could result in a significant goodwill impairment charge.  the company is required to compare the fair values of other indefinite-lived intangible assets to their carrying amounts. if the carrying amount of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair
value, an impairment loss is recognized. fair values of other indefinite-lived intangible assets are determined based on discounted cash flows or appraised values, as appropriate.  during the current year, the company tested its goodwill and other intangible assets for impairment. the company recorded non-cash
impairment charges of $142 million for fcc radio licenses. during fiscal years 2008 and 2007, the company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $39 million and $26 million, respectively, related to fcc radio licenses. the fcc radio license
impairment charges reflected overall market declines in certain radio markets in which we operate. the fcc radio license and goodwill impairment charges, which were estimated using a discounted cash flow model, were recorded in restructuring
and impairment charges in the consolidated statements of income.
table of contents
amortizable intangible assets, the majority of which are copyrights, are generally amortized
on a straight-line basis over periods of up to 31 years.  risk management contracts  in the normal course of business, the company employs a variety of financial instruments to manage its exposure to fluctuations in interest
rates, foreign currency exchange rates, and investments in equity and debt securities, including interest rate and cross-currency swap agreements; forward, option and swaption contracts and interest rate caps.  the company formally documents all relationships between hedging instruments and hedged items, as well as its risk management objectives and
strategies for undertaking various hedge transactions. there are two types of derivatives into which the company enters: hedges of fair value exposure and hedges of cash flow exposure. hedges of fair value exposure are entered into in order to hedge
the fair value of a recognized asset, liability, or a firm commitment. hedges of cash flow exposure are entered into in order to hedge a forecasted transaction (e.g. forecasted revenue) or the variability of cash flows to be paid or received,
related to a recognized liability or asset (e.g. floating rate debt).  the company designates and assigns the financial
instruments as hedges of forecasted transactions, specific assets or specific liabilities. when hedged assets or liabilities are sold or extinguished or the forecasted transactions being hedged are no longer expected to occur, the company recognizes
the gain or loss on the designated hedging financial instruments.  option premiums and unrealized gains on forward contracts
and the accrued differential for interest rate and cross-currency swaps to be received under the agreements are recorded on the balance sheet as other assets. unrealized losses on forward contracts and the accrued differential for interest rate and
cross-currency swaps to be paid under the agreements are included in liabilities. realized gains and losses from hedges are classified in the income statement consistent with the accounting treatment of the items being hedged. the company accrues
the differential for interest rate and cross-currency swaps to be paid or received under the agreements as interest rates and exchange rates change as adjustments to interest expense over the lives of the swaps. gains and losses on the termination
of effective swap agreements, prior to their original maturity, are deferred and amortized to interest expense over the remaining term of the underlying hedged transactions.  the company enters into risk management contracts that are not designated as hedges and do not qualify for hedge accounting. these contracts
are intended to offset certain economic exposures of the company and are carried at market value with any changes in value recorded in earnings. cash flows from hedging activities are classified in the consolidated statements of cash flows under the
same category as the cash flows from the related assets, liabilities or forecasted transactions (see notes 9 and 17).  income taxes
the company accounts for current and deferred income taxes and when appropriate, deferred tax assets and liabilities are
recorded with respect to temporary differences in the accounting treatment of items for financial reporting purposes and for income tax purposes. where, based on the weight of all available evidence, it is more likely than not that some amount of
recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established for that amount that, in managements judgment, is sufficient to reduce the deferred tax asset to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
in july 2006, the fasb issued guidance which clarifies the accounting for income taxes by prescribing a minimum probability
threshold that a tax position must meet before a financial statement benefit is recognized. the minimum threshold is defined as a tax position that is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the applicable taxing authority,
including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. the tax benefit to be recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being
realized upon ultimate settlement. the company adopted this guidance on its income tax positions at the beginning of fiscal year 2008 which resulted in reductions of $148 million and $15 million to opening retained earnings and minority interests,
respectively.
table of contents
earnings per share  the company presents both basic and diluted earnings per share (eps) amounts. basic eps is calculated by dividing net income by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the year.
diluted eps is based upon the weighted average number of common and common equivalent shares outstanding during the year which is calculated using the treasury-stock method for equity-based awards and assumes conversion of the companys
convertible senior notes which were redeemed during fiscal 2008 (see note 12). common equivalent shares are excluded from the computation in periods for which they have an anti-dilutive effect. stock options for which the exercise price exceeds the
average market price over the period are anti-dilutive and, accordingly, are excluded from the calculation.  a reconciliation
of income from continuing operations and the weighted average number of common and common equivalent shares outstanding for calculating diluted earnings per share from continuing operations is as follows:
income from continuing operations
$
3,307
$
4,427
$
4,674
interest expense on convertible senior notes (net of tax)
$
3,307
$
4,439
$
4,695
weighted average number of common shares outstanding (basic)
1,856
1,890
2,004
weighted average dilutive impact of equity-based compensations awards
weighted average assumed conversion of convertible senior notes
weighted average number of common and common equivalent shares outstanding (diluted)
1,875
1,948
2,092
for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, options for 145million, 70million and
43million shares, respectively, were excluded from the diluted eps calculation because they were anti-dilutive.  subsequent events
the company evaluated subsequent events through december 2, 2009.
new accounting pronouncements  revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables  in october 2009, the financial accounting standards board (fasb) issued guidance on revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables effective
for the companys 2011 fiscal year, although early adoption is permitted. the guidance revises the criteria for separating, measuring, and allocating arrangement consideration to each deliverable in a multiple element arrangement. the guidance
requires companies to allocate revenue using the relative selling price of each deliverable, which must be estimated if the company does not have a history of selling the deliverable on a stand-alone basis or third-party evidence of selling price.
the company is assessing the potential effect of this guidance on its financial statements.  transfers and servicing of financial assets
in june2009, the fasb issued guidance on transfers and servicing of financial assets to eliminate the concept of a
qualifying special-purpose entity, change the requirements for off balance sheet accounting for financial assets including limiting the circumstances where off balance sheet treatment for a portion of a financial asset is allowable, and require
additional disclosures. the guidance is effective for the companys 2011 fiscal year. the company does not expect that the adoption of this guidance will have a material impact on its financial statements.  variable interest entities  in june 2009, the fasb issued guidance to revise the approach to determine when a variable interest entity (vie) should be consolidated. the new consolidation model for vies considers whether the company has the power to direct the
activities that most significantly impact the vies economic performance and shares in the significant risks and
table of contents
rewards of the entity. the guidance on vies requires companies to continually reassess vies to determine if consolidation is appropriate and provide additional disclosures. the guidance is
effective for the companys 2011 fiscal year. the company is assessing the potential effect of this guidance will have,on its financial statements.  collaborative arrangements  in december 2007, the fasb issued guidance that
defines collaborative arrangements and establishes accounting and reporting requirements for such arrangements. a collaborative arrangement is a contractual arrangement that involves a joint operating activity, for example an agreement to co-produce
and distribute a motion picture with another studio. the guidance is effective for the companys 2010 fiscal year. the company does not expect that the adoption of the guidance on collaborative arrangements will have a material impact on its
financial statements.  business combinations  in december 2007, the fasb issued guidance that establishes principles and requirements for determining how a company recognizes and measures the fair value of certain assets and liabilities acquired in a
business combination, including noncontrolling interests, contingent consideration, and certain acquired contingencies. the guidance on business combinations also requires acquisition-related transaction expenses and restructuring costs be expensed
as incurred rather than capitalized. this guidance will be applicable prospectively to business combinations beginning in the companys 2010 fiscal year.  noncontrolling interest (minority interest)  in
december 2007, the fasb issued guidance on the accounting and reporting for a noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary. upon adoption of this guidance, the company will be required to report its noncontrolling interests as a separate component of
shareholders equity. the company will also be required to present net income attributable to the noncontrolling interests and net income attributable to the shareholders of the company separately in its consolidated statements of income.
currently, noncontrolling interests are reported between liabilities and shareholders equity in the companys statement of financial position and the related income attributable to non-controlling interests is reflected as an expense in
arriving at net income. the guidance is effective for the companys 2010 fiscal year and requires retroactive adoption of the presentation and disclosure requirements for existing non-controlling interests. all other requirements are to be
applied prospectively.  employee compensation  retirement benefits  in september 2006, the fasb issued guidance that requires recognition of the overfunded or underfunded status of defined benefit pension and
other postretirement plans as an asset or liability in the statement of financial position and changes in that funded status to be recognized in comprehensive income in the year in which the changes occur. the guidance on retirement benefits also
requires measurement of the funded status of a plan as of the end of the fiscal year. the company adopted the recognition provision in fiscal year 2007 which resulted in a $261 million charge to accumulated other comprehensive income. the company
adopted the measurement date provision by remeasuring plan assets and benefit obligations at the beginning of fiscal 2009. adoption of the measurement date provisions resulted in a reduction of $35 million to retained earnings and a $100 million
benefit to accumulated other comprehensive income.  key assumptions used for the measurement of pension and postretirement
medical plans at the beginning of fiscal 2009 were 7.80% for the discount rate, 7.50% for the rate of return on plan assets, and 5.00% for salary increases. based on this measurement of plan assets and benefit obligations, pension and postretirement
medical costs decreased to approximately $214 million for fiscal 2009 compared to $255 million for fiscal 2008. the decrease in pension and postretirement medical expense was primarily due to an increase in the discount rate used to measure the
present value of plan obligations.  the company remeasured plan assets and benefit obligations at october3, 2009 in
accordance with new guidance on accounting for retirement plans. key assumptions for the measurement at october3, 2009 were 5.75% for the discount rate, 7.75% for the rate of return on plan assets, and 4.50% for salary increases. based on the
measurement at october3, 2009, the company recorded an increase in unrecognized pension and postretirement medical expense, which totals $2.8 billion ($1.8 billion after-tax) as of october 3, 2009.  income tax  in july 2006,
the fasb issued guidance which clarifies the accounting for income taxes by prescribing a minimum probability threshold that a tax position must meet before a financial statement benefit is recognized. the minimum threshold is defined as a tax
position that is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the
table of contents
applicable taxing authority, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. the tax benefit to be recognized is measured as
the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. the company adopted the guidance on income taxes at the beginning of fiscal year 2008. applying the guidance on income taxes to all
tax positions upon adoption resulted in reductions of $148 million and $15 million to opening retained earnings and minority interests, respectively.
acquisitions
a&e / lifetime  on september 15, 2009, the company and the hearst corporation (hearst) both contributed their 50% interests in lifetime entertainment services llc (lifetime) to a&e television networks, llc (aetn) in
exchange for an increased interest in aetn. prior to this transaction, the company and hearst each held 37.5% of aetn while nbc universal (nbcu) held 25%. the company accounted for the transaction as a sale of a portion of its interest in lifetime
which resulted in a $228 million non-cash pre-tax gain ($142 million after-tax) reflecting the difference between the companys carrying amount of the lifetime interest sold and the fair value of the incremental aetn interest received.
following the transaction the companys ownership interest in the combined aetn/lifetime is approximately 42%. under the terms of the agreement, nbcu may elect or be required to exit the combined aetn/lifetime over a period of up to 15 years,
in which event the company and hearst would each own 50%. the company will account for its interest in the combined aetn/lifetime as an equity method investment consistent with how it previously accounted for aetn and lifetime.  marvel  on august31,
2009, the company announced an agreement to acquire marvel entertainment, inc. (marvel) in a cash and stock transaction. under the terms of the agreement marvel shareholders would receive $30 per share in cash and 0.7452 disney shares for each
marvel share they own. at closing, the amount of cash and stock will be adjusted if necessary so that the total value of the disney stock issued as merger consideration based on its trading value at that time is not less than 40% of the total merger
consideration. based upon disneys stock price as of november20, 2009, the acquisition purchase price would be approximately $4 billion. the acquisition is subject to the effectiveness of a registration statement with respect to disney
shares to be issued in the transaction and other customary closing conditions. the acquisition is also subject to the approval of marvel shareholders.  jetix europe  in december 2008, the company acquired an additional 26% interest in jetix europe n.v., a
publicly traded pan-european kids entertainment company, for approximately $354 million (bringing our total ownership interest to over 99%). the company intends to acquire the remaining outstanding shares through statutory buy-out proceedings.
utv  on
may9, 2008, the company acquired a 24% interest (bringing its fully undiluted interest to 37%) in utv software communications limited (utv), a media company headquartered and publicly traded in india, for approximately $197 million.in
accordance with indian securities regulations, the company was required to make an open tender offer to purchase up to an additional 23% of utvs publicly traded voting shares for a price equivalent to the may9th, 2008 indian rupee
purchase price. in november 2008, the company completed the open offer and acquired an incremental 23% of utvs voting shares for approximately $138 million bringing its undiluted interest to 60%. due to the change in the exchange rate between
the us dollar and the indian rupee from may to november, the us dollar price per share was lower in november than in may. utvs founder has a four year option to buy all or a portion of the shares acquired by the company during the open offer
period at a price no less than the companys open offer price. if the trading price upon exercise of the option exceeds the price paid by the company, then the option price is capped at the companys open offer price plus a 10% annual
return. the company does not have the right to vote the shares subject to the option until the expiration of the option and accordingly the companys ownership interest in voting shares is 48%. in addition to the acquisition of utv, on
august5, 2008, the company invested $28 million in a utv subsidiary, utv global broadcasting limited (along with utv, the utv group). the companys investment in the utv group is accounted for under the equity method.
although utvs operating performance to date has generally been consistent with our expectations, in light of recent
economic conditions we have tempered our future expectations. based on the companys internal valuation of the utv business, which was estimated using a discounted cash flow model, we recorded non-cash impairment charges totaling $65 million in
fiscal 2009. the companys carrying value of its investment in the utv group of $298
table of contents
million significantly exceeds the current trading value, and the company will continue to monitor its investment in the utv group. utv has recently announced that it is considering raising
additional capital which could consist of equity shares of utv stock, debentures or foreign currency convertible bonds. if utv issued additional shares, depending upon the price of the issuance, an incremental impairment of our investment in utv
group could be required.  the disney stores north america  on april30, 2008, the company acquired certain assets of the disney stores north america for approximately $64 million in cash from, and terminated its long-term licensing arrangement for the disney
stores with, the childrens place, the former licensee. the company acquired the inventory, leasehold improvements, and certain fixed assets of, and assumed the leases on 229 stores. the company conducted the wind-down and closure of an
additional 88 stores but did not assume the leases on these stores.  in connection with the acquisition, the company waived
its rights to certain claims against the childrens place and in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance recorded an $18 million non-cash gain for the estimated fair value of the claims. the gain is classified in other income
(expense) in the consolidated statement of income.  club penguin  on august1, 2007, the company acquired all of the outstanding shares of club penguin entertainment, inc. (club penguin), a canadian
company that operates clubpenguin.com, an online virtual world for children. the purchase price included upfront cash consideration of approximately $350 million and additional consideration of up to $350 million payable if club penguin achieved
predefined earnings targets in calendar years 2008 and 2009. there have been no additional payments of consideration for club penguin. remaining additional consideration of up to $175 million is potentially payable based on calendar year 2009
results.  nasn  on february1, 2007, the company acquired all the outstanding shares of nasn, an irish company that operates cable television networks in europe dedicated to north american sporting events and related programming, for consideration
valued at $112 million consisting of cash and assumption of debt. in february, 2009, nasn was rebranded as espn america.  the
changes in the carrying amount of goodwill for the years ended october3, 2009 and september27, 2008 are as follows:
medianetworks
parksandresorts
studioentertainment
consumerproducts
interactivemedia
total
balance at september29, 2007
$
15,456
$
$
4,788
$
$
$
21,399
acquisitions
other, net
(1)
(37)
(2)
(25)
balance at september27, 2008
$
15,500
$
$
4,751
$
$
$
21,465
acquisitions
impairments
(29)
(29)
other, net
(14)
(14)
(1)
(2)
(31)
balance at october3, 2009
$
15,744
$
$
4,737
$
$
$
21,683
dispositions and other income (expense)  abc radio transaction  on june12, 2007, the company completed the spin-off of its wholly-owned subsidiary, abc radio holdings, inc., and its merger into a subsidiary of citadel broadcasting corporation (citadel). prior to
the spin-off, the company consolidated its abc radio business, consisting of 22 large-market radio stations and the abc radio network businesses, under abc radio holdings, inc. the transaction did not include the companys espn radio or radio
disney network and station businesses.  as a result of the spin-off and merger, company shareholders received approximately
0.0768 shares of citadel common stock in exchange for each share of disney common stock held as of june6, 2007. as part of the transaction, the company retained $1.35 billion of cash, representing the proceeds from debt raised by abc radio
holdings, inc. prior to the spin-off. this debt and the assets and liabilities of the abc radio business were removed from the companys balance sheet as a distribution at book value. consequently, there was no gain or loss recorded and the
negative net book value of $132 million was credited to retained earnings.
table of contents
results of the abc radio business have been reported as discontinued operations for all
periods.  summarized financial information for the discontinued abc radio business through the date of the spin-off is as
follows (in millions):  income statement data:
revenues
$
income from discontinued operations before income taxes
$
other dispositions  the following dispositions occurred during fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007:
on december22, 2008, the company sold its investment in two pay television services in latin america for approximately $185 million, resulting in
a pre-tax gain of $114 million.
the movies.com business was sold for $17 million on june18, 2008, resulting in a pre-tax gain of $14 million.
the companys 39.5% interest in e! entertainment television was sold for $1.23 billion on november21, 2006, resulting in a pre-tax gain of
$780 million ($487 million after-tax).
the companys 50% interest in us weekly was sold for $300 million on october2, 2006, resulting in a pre-tax gain of $272 million ($170
million after-tax).  these gains are reported in other income (expense) in the consolidated
statements of income.  other income (expense)  other income (expense) is as follows:
gain on lifetime/aetn transaction
$
$
$
gain on sale of investment in two pay television services in latin america
gain related to the acquisition of the disney stores north america
gain on sale of movies.com
bad debt charge for lehman brothers receivable
(91)
gain on sale of equity investment in e!
gain on sale of equity investment in us weekly
equity-based compensation plan modification charge
(48)
other income (expense)
$
$
(59)
$
1,004
investments
investments consist of the following:
october3,2009
september27,2008
investments, equity basis (1)
$
2,173
$
1,873
investments, other
investment in aircraft leveraged leases
$
2,554
$
2,249
(1)
equity investments consist of investments in companies over which the company has significant influence but not the majority of the equity or risks and
rewards.
table of contents
investments, equity basis  a summary of combined financial information for equity investments, which primarily includes cable investments such as aetn /lifetime, is as
follows:
results of operations:
revenues
$
4,656
$
4,981
$
4,351
net income
$
1,346
$
1,455
$
1,137
october3,2009
september27,2008
balance sheet
current assets
$
2,928
$
3,230
non-current assets
5,561
1,653
$
8,489
$
4,883
current liabilities
$
1,369
$
1,403
non-current liabilities
1,002
1,191
shareholders equity
6,118
2,289
$
8,489
$
4,883
investments, other  as of october3, 2009 and september27, 2008, the company held $78 million and $72 million, respectively, of securities classified
as available-for-sale and $263 million and $262 million, respectively, of non-publicly traded cost-method investments.  in
2009, 2008 and 2007, the company had no significant gains or losses on available-for-sale securities.  in 2009, 2008 and 2007,
the company recorded non-cash charges of $86 million (principally related to our investment in utv group), $26 million and $18 million, respectively, to reflect other-than-temporary losses in value of certain investments.
table of contents
euro disney and hong kong disneyland  the company has a 51% effective ownership interest in the operations of euro disney and a 47%
ownership interest in the operations of hong kong disneyland which are both variable interest entities and are consolidated in the companys financial statements.  the following table presents a condensed consolidating balance sheet for the company as of october3, 2009, reflecting the impact of consolidating the balance sheets of euro disney and hong kong
disneyland.
beforeeurodisneyandhongkongdisneylandconsolidation
eurodisney,hong kongdisneylandandadjustments
total
cash and cash equivalents
$
2,811
$
$
3,417
other current assets
8,218
8,472
total current assets
11,029
11,889
investments
3,600
(1,046)
2,554
fixed assets
13,080
4,517
17,597
other assets
31,009
31,077
total assets
$
58,718
$
4,399
$
63,117
current portion of borrowings
$
1,075
$
$
1,206
other current liabilities
7,178
7,728
total current liabilities
8,253
8,934
borrowings
8,758
2,737
11,495
deferred income taxes and other long-term liabilities
7,084
7,263
minority interests
1,691
shareholders equity
33,734
33,734
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
58,718
$
4,399
$
63,117
the following table presents a condensed consolidating income statement of the
company for the year ended october3, 2009, reflecting the impact of consolidating the income statements of euro disney and hong kong disneyland.
beforeeurodisneyandhongkongdisneylandconsolidation(1)
eurodisney,hong kongdisneylandandadjustments
total
revenues
$
34,174
$
1,975
$
36,149
cost and expenses
(28,486)
(1,966)
(30,452)
restructuring and impairment charges
(492)
(492)
other expense
net interest expense
(324)
(142)
(466)
equity in the income of investees
income (loss) before income taxes and minority interests
5,737
(79)
5,658
income taxes
(2,049)
(2,049)
minority interests
(381)
(302)
net income
$
3,307
$
$
3,307
(1)
these amounts include euro disney and hong kong disneyland under the equity method of accounting. as such, royalty and management fee income from these
operations is included in revenues and our share of their net income/(loss) is included in equity in the income of investees.
table of contents
the following table presents a condensed consolidating cash flow statement of the company
for the year ended october3, 2009, reflecting the impact of consolidating the cash flow statements of euro disney and hong kong disneyland.
beforeeurodisneyandhongkongdisneylandconsolidation
eurodisney,hong kongdisneylandandadjustments
total
cash provided by operations
$
4,896
$
$
5,064
investments in parks, resorts, and other property
(1,610)
(143)
(1,753)
other investing activities
(726)
(343)
cash used in financing activities
(2,057)
(495)
(2,552)
increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(87)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
2,308
3,001
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
2,811
$
$
3,417
euro disney financial restructuring  effective october1, 2004, euro disney, the company, and euro disneys lenders finalized a memorandum of agreement (moa) related to
the financial restructuring of euro disney (the 2005 financial restructuring) which provided for new financing as well as the restructuring of euro disneys existing financing at that time. the transactions contemplated by the moa were fully
implemented on february23, 2005 with the completion of a 253million equity rights offering in which the company invested 100 million. the moa included provisions for deferral of certain royalties and management fees payable
by euro disney to the company as follows:
royalties and management fees for fiscal 2005 through fiscal 2009, totaling 125million, payable to the company have been deferred and
converted into subordinated long-term borrowings
royalties and management fees for fiscal 2007 through fiscal 2014, of up to 25million per year, are subject to conditional deferral and
conversion into subordinated long-term borrowings if operating results do not achieve specified levels. royalties and management fees for fiscal 2008 and 2007, subject to conditional deferral, were not deferred and have been paid. based on operating
results and subject to third-party confirmation, the company will defer 25million of royalties and management fees subject to conditional deferral for fiscal 2009  certain indirect, wholly-owned subsidiaries of the walt disney company have liability as current or former general partners of disney s.c.a.
in addition to their equity interest in disney s.c.a., certain of these subsidiaries of the company have been capitalized with interest-bearing demand notes with an aggregate face value of 200 million. in addition, interest of
35million has accrued on the notes from the date of issuance and has been added to the amount owed.  hong kong disneyland
capital realignment  in july 2009, the company entered into a capital realignment and expansion plan for hong kong
disneyland (hkdl) with the government of the hong kong special administrative region (hksar), hong kong disneylands majority shareholder. key provisions of the plan include:
the company converted its $354 million term and revolving credit facility loan to hkdl into equity during fiscal 2009. this was accompanied by
conversion of an equal amount of the hksar loan to hkdl into equity
the company will make approximately $0.45 billion of equity contributions over approximately five years to fund an expansion of hkdl and other
financial needs during this period. the actual amount of equity contributions by the company may differ depending on the actual final cost of the expansion and operating results of hkdl during the relevant timeframe. the hksar will convert an
additional amount of its loan to hkdl equal to these contributions into equity, subject to a maximum conversion amount that would leave approximately $128 million (hk $1.0 billion) of the hksar loan to hkdl outstanding. at october3, 2009, the
hksar loan to hkdl was $524 million. during fiscal 2009, the company made equity contributions totaling $40 million in addition to the conversion of its $354 million loan to hkdl into equity
table of contents
as a result of the above arrangement, the companys interest in hkdl increased from 43%
to 47% during fiscal 2009 and is projected to increase to approximately 48%, although the companys ending ownership will depend on the aggregate amount of equity contributions made by the company pursuant to the expansion plan.
film and television costs
film and television costs are as follows:
october3,2009
september27,2008
theatrical film costs
released, less amortization
$
1,513
$
1,444
completed, not released
in-process
1,516
1,430
in development or pre-production
3,544
3,373
television costs
released, less amortization
completed, not released
in-process
in development or pre-production
1,174
1,412
television broadcast rights
1,038
1,150
5,756
5,935
less current portion
non-current portion
$
5,125
$
5,394
based on managements total gross revenue estimates as of october3, 2009,
approximately 84% of unamortized film and television costs for released productions (excluding amounts allocated to acquired film and television libraries) are expected to be amortized during the next three years. approximately $632 million of
accrued participation and residual liabilities will be paid in fiscal year 2010. the company expects to amortize, based on current estimates, approximately $1.5 billion in capitalized film and television production costs during fiscal 2010.
at october3, 2009, acquired film and television libraries have remaining unamortized costs of $325 million, which are
generally amortized straight-line over a weighted-average remaining period of approximately 11 years.
table of contents
borrowings
the companys borrowings at october3, 2009 and september27, 2008, including the impact of
interest rate swaps designated as hedges, are summarized below:
statedinterestrate (1)
interestrateandcross-currencyswaps(2)
effectiveinterestrate (3)
swapmaturities
payfloating
payfixed
commercial paper borrowings
$
$
1,985
$
$
u.s. medium-term notes
7,618
7,005
5.19%
1,400
3.67%
2010-2018
european medium-term notes
2.89%
0.60%
2010-2013
other foreign currency denominated debt
0.75%
0.70%
capital cities/abc debt
8.75%
8.37%
film financing
other (4)
9,833
10,933
4.34%
2,651
3.03%
euro disney (ed) and hong kong
disneyland (hkdl):
ed  cdc loans
1,480
1,469
5.03%
5.12%
ed  credit facilities& other
3.75%
6.70%
ed  other advances
3.03%
3.21%
hkdl  senior and other borrowings
1,249
3.34%
2.93%
2,868
3,706
4.29%
4.58%
total borrowings
12,701
14,639
4.33%
2,651
3.38%
less current portion
1,206
3,529
1.26%
0.99%
total long-term borrowings
$
11,495
$
11,110
$
2,513
$
(1)
the stated interest rate represents the weighted-average coupon rate for each category of borrowings. for floating rate borrowings, interest rates are
based upon the rates at october3, 2009; these rates are not necessarily an indication of future interest rates.
(2)
amounts represent notional values of interest rate and cross-currency swaps as of october3, 2009.
(3)
the effective interest rate includes the impact of existing and terminated interest rate and cross-currency swaps on the stated rate of interest and
reflects the estimated market interest rate for certain euro disney borrowings as of the time that they were modified during the 2005 restructuring. other adjustments to the stated interest rate such as purchase accounting adjustments and debt
issuance costs did not have a material impact on the overall effective interest rate.
(4)
includes market value adjustments for debt with qualifying hedges totaling $291 million and $202 million at october3, 2009 and september27,
2008, respectively.  commercial paper  at october3, 2009, the company did not have commercial paper debt outstanding. the company had bank facilities totaling $4.5 billion to support its commercial paper borrowings, with half of the
facilities scheduled to expire in february 2010 and the other half in february 2011. these bank facilities allow for borrowings at libor-based rates plus a spread, which depends on the companys public debt rating and can range from 0.175% to
0.75%. the company also has the ability to issue up to $800 million of letters of credit under the facility expiring in 2011, which if utilized, reduces available borrowing under this facility. as of october3, 2009, $326 million of letters of
credit had been issued, of which $237 million was issued under this facility, leaving total available borrowing capacity of nearly $4.2 billion under these bank facilities. the companys bank facilities contain only one financial covenant,
relating to interest coverage, which the company met on october3, 2009 by a significant margin. the companys bank facilities also specifically exclude certain entities, including euro disney and hong kong disneyland, from any
representations, covenants, or events of default. as of october3, 2009, the company had not borrowed against the facilities.  shelf
registration statement  at october3, 2009, the company had a shelf registration statement which allows the company to
issue various types of debt instruments, such as fixed or floating rate notes, u.s. dollar or foreign currency denominated notes, redeemable notes, global notes, and dual currency or other indexed notes. issuances under the shelf registration will
require the filing of a prospectus supplement identifying the amount and terms of the securities to be issued. our ability to issue debt is subject to market conditions and other factors impacting our borrowing capacity.
table of contents
u.s. medium-term note program  at october3, 2009, the total debt outstanding under u.s. medium-term note programs was $7.6 billion. the maturities of current
outstanding borrowings range from 1 to 84 years and stated interest rates range from 0% to 7.55%.  european medium-term note program
at october3, 2009, the company had a european medium-term note program for the issuance of various types of debt
instruments such as fixed or floating rate notes, u.s. dollar or foreign currency denominated notes, redeemable notes and index linked or dual currency notes. the size of the program is $4 billion. the remaining capacity under the program is $3.7
billion, subject to market conditions and other factors impacting our borrowing capacity. the remaining capacity under the program replenishes as outstanding debt under the program matures. at october3, 2009, the total debt outstanding under
the program was $347 million. the maturities of outstanding borrowings range from 1 to 4 years, and stated interest rates range from 0.85% to 4.90%. the company has outstanding borrowings under the program denominated in u.s. dollars and japanese
yen (jpy).  other foreign currency denominated debt  in connection with the acquisition of club penguin entertainment, inc. in july 2007, the company executed a credit agreement denominated in canadian (cad) dollars and borrowed cad$328 million ($303
million at october3, 2009 exchange rates). the loan bears interest at cad libor plus 0.225% (0.72% at october3, 2009) and matures in 2013.  in july 2008, the company executed a loan agreement denominated in jpy and borrowed jpy54 billion ($601 million at october3, 2009 exchange rates). the loan bears interest at japanese libor plus
0.42% (0.77% at october3, 2009) and matures in 2013.  capital cities/abc debt  in connection with the capital cities/abc, inc. acquisition in 1996, the company assumed various debt previously issued by capital
cities/abc, inc. at october3, 2009, the outstanding balance was $116 million, matures in 2021 and has a stated interest rate of 8.75%.  film financing  in august 2005, the company entered into a film financing arrangement with a group of investors
to fund up to approximately $500 million for 40% of the production and marketing costs of a slate of up to thirty-two live-action films, excluding certain titles such as the chronicles of narnia series and, in general, sequels to previous
films (including the pirates of the caribbean sequels) not included in the slate, in return for approximately 40% of the future net cash flows generated by these films. by entering into this transaction, the company is able to share the risks
and rewards of the performance of its live-action film production and distribution activity with outside investors. as of october3, 2009, the investors have participated in the funding of thirty-two films. the cumulative investment in the
slate by the investors, net of the cash flows generated by the slate that are returned to the investors, is classified as borrowings. interest expense recognized from these borrowings is variable and is determined using the effective interest method
based on the projected profitability of the film slate.  the last film of the slate was completed in fiscal 2009. the company
has the option at 5, 10 and 15 years from inception of the film financing arrangement to buy the investors remaining interest in the slate at a price that is based on the then remaining projected future cash flows that the investors would
receive from the slate. as of october3, 2009, borrowings under this arrangement totaled $350 million.  euro disney borrowings
october3,2009
september27,2008
cdc senior debt
$
$
cdc subordinated debt  original and 1994 financing
cdc subordinated debt  walt disney studios park financing
cdc loans
1,480
1,469
credit facilities and other
other advances
$
2,344
$
2,457
table of contents
euro disney  caisse des dpts et consignations (cdc) loans.
pursuant to euro disneys original financing and the terms of a 1994 financial restructuring, euro disney borrowed funds from the cdc. as of october3, 2009, these borrowings consisted of approximately 240million ($349 million
at october3, 2009 exchange rates) of senior debt and 276million ($400 million at october3, 2009 exchange rates) of subordinated debt. the senior debt is collateralized primarily by the disneyland park, certain hotels, and
land assets of disneyland paris with a net book value of approximately 1.3 billion ($1.9 billion at october3, 2009 exchange rates), whereas the subordinated debt is unsecured. interest on the senior and subordinated debt is payable
semiannually. cdc loans of 473million ($686 million at october3, 2009 exchange rates) bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.15%. the remaining cdc loans of 43million ($63 million at october3, 2009 exchange rates)
bear interest at a fixed rate of 6.15%. the loans mature from fiscal year 2010 to fiscal year 2024.  euro disney also executed
a credit agreement with the cdc to finance a portion of the construction costs of walt disney studios park. as of october3, 2009, approximately 503million ($731 million at october3, 2009 exchange rates) of subordinated loans
were outstanding under this agreement. the loans bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.15%per annum. the loans mature between fiscal years 2015 and 2028.  pursuant to the 2005 financial restructuring, the cdc agreed to conditionally defer and convert to subordinated long-term borrowings, if operating results do not achieve specified levels, interest
payments up to a maximum amount of 20million ($29 million at october3, 2009 exchange rates) per year for fiscal year 2005 through fiscal year 2012 and 23million ($33 million at october3, 2009 exchange rates) for
each of the fiscal years 2013 and 2014. euro disney has deferred 20million of interest originally payable for each of fiscal year 2005 and 2006 as well as 7million of accrued interest (collectively 47 million). euro
disney did not defer any cdc interest for fiscal years 2007 and 2008. euro disney deferred 15million ($22 million at october3, 2009 exchange rates) of interest in fiscal 2009 and will defer the remaining 5million ($7
million at october3, 2009 exchange rates) in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. this deferral is subject to third party confirmation of euro disneys operating results.  euro disney  credit facilities and other. pursuant to euro disneys original financing with a syndicate of international
banks and the terms of a 1994 financial restructuring, euro disney borrowed funds which are collateralized primarily by the disneyland park, the hotels, and land assets of disneyland paris with a net book value of approximately 1.3 billion
($1.9 billion at october3, 2009 exchange rates). at october3, 2009, the total balance outstanding was 249million ($362 million at october3, 2009 exchange rate). the loans mature between fiscal years 2010 and 2013.
euro disney  other advances. advances of 331million ($481 million at october3, 2009 exchange
rates) are collateralized by certain hotel assets and bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.0%. the remaining advances of 15million ($21 million at october3, 2009 exchange rate) are collateralized by certain hotel assets and bear
interest at euribor plus 3% (3.75% at october3, 2009). the advances are expected to mature between fiscal years 2010 and 2017.  euro disney has covenants under its debt agreements that limit its investment and financing activities and require it to meet certain annual financial performance covenants. subject to final third-party review as provided in its debt
agreements, euro disney believes that it has complied with its financial performance covenants for fiscal year 2009.
hong kong disneyland borrowings
october3,2009
september27,2008
term loan facility
$
$
revolving credit facility
senior loans
other borrowings
$
$
1,249
hong kong disneyland  senior loans. at the beginning of fiscal 2009, the
company entered into a term loan and revolving credit facility agreement with hong kong disneyland pursuant to which hong kong disneyland borrowed hk$2.3 billion (approximately $292 million) under a term loan and hk$700 million (approximately $90
million) under
table of contents
a hk$1.0 billion ($129 million) revolving credit facility. these funds were used to repay hong kong disneylands commercial term loan and revolving credit facility along with related accrued
interest. all outstanding amounts under this term loan and revolving credit facility to hong kong disneyland were subsequently converted to equity (see hong kong disneyland capital realignment plan below) and an undrawn revolving facility of hk$300
million (approximately $39 million) remained in place as of october3, 2009.  hong kong disneyland  other
borrowings. hong kong disneyland has an unsecured loan facility of hk$4.1 billion ($524 million at october3, 2009 exchange rates) from the hksar that is scheduled to mature on dates through september12, 2030. the interest rate on
this loan is subject to biannual revisions, but is capped at an annual rate of 6.75% (until march12, 2014), 7.625% (until march12, 2022) and 8.50% (until september12, 2030). as of october3, 2009, the rate on the loans was
3.34%.  hong kong disneyland capital realignment plan  in july 2009, the company entered into a capital realignment and expansion plan (the plan) for hong kong disneyland with the hksar. pursuant to the plan, the company converted its $354 million term and
revolving credit facility loan to hong kong disneyland into equity during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. this was accompanied by conversion of an equal amount of the hksar loan to hong kong disneyland into equity. see note 7 for further details
of the plan.  total borrowings excluding market value adjustments, have the following scheduled maturities:
beforeeurodisneyand hong kongdisneylandconsolidation
eurodisneyandhongkongdisneyland
total
$
1,055
$
$
1,186
1,120
1,295
1,262
1,485
1,734
1,930
1,451
1,507
thereafter
2,920
2,087
5,007
$
9,542
$
2,868
$
12,410
the company capitalizes interest on assets constructed for its parks, resorts, and
other property and on theatrical productions. in 2009, 2008 and 2007, total interest capitalized was $57 million, $62 million, and $37 million, respectively. interest expense, net of capitalized interest, for 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $588 million,
$712 million and $746 million.
table of contents
income taxes
income from continuing operations before income taxes and minority interests
domestic (including u.s. exports)
$
5,472
$
6,692
$
7,344
foreign subsidiaries
$
5,658
$
7,402
$
7,725
income tax expense / (benefit)
current
federal
$
1,278
$
2,072
$
2,368
state
foreign
1,785
2,800
3,001
deferred
federal
(95)
(118)
state
(32)
(32)
(9)
(127)
(127)
$
2,049
$
2,673
$
2,874
october3,2009
september27,2008
components of deferred tax assets and liabilities
deferred tax assets
accrued liabilities
$
(2,083)
$
(1,354)
foreign subsidiaries
(626)
(569)
equity-based compensation
(409)
(371)
minority interest net operating losses
(328)
(316)
total deferred tax assets
(3,446)
(2,610)
deferred tax liabilities
depreciable, amortizable and other property
3,238
3,167
licensing revenues
leveraged leases
other, net
total deferred tax liabilities
3,737
3,566
net deferred tax liability before valuation allowance
valuation allowance
net deferred tax liability
$
$
1,326
the valuation allowance principally relates to a $328 million deferred tax asset for
the minority interest share of operating losses at euro disney. the ultimate utilizationof the minority interest share of the net operating losses, which have an indefinite carryforward period, would not have an impact on the company's
consolidated net income as any income tax benefit would be offset by a charge to minority interest in the income statement.  as of october3, 2009, the company had undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries of approximately $124 million, for which deferred taxes have not been provided. the company intends to reinvest these earnings for the foreseeable
future. if these amounts were distributed to the united states, in the form of dividends or otherwise, the company would be subject to additional u.s. income taxes. determination of the amount of unrecognized deferred income tax liabilities on these
earnings is not practicable because such liability, if any, is dependent on circumstances existing if and when remittance was to occur.
table of contents
a reconciliation of the effective income tax rate to the federal rate is as follows:
federal income tax rate
35.0%
35.0%
35.0%
state taxes, net of federal benefit
2.6
3.0
2.8
domestic production activity deduction
(1.8)
(1.3)
(0.5)
other, including tax reserves and related interest
0.4
(0.6)
(0.1)
36.2%
36.1%
37.2%
the american jobs creation act of 2004 made a number of changes to the income
tax laws including the creation of a deduction for qualifying domestic production activities. the deduction equals three percent of qualifying net income for fiscal 2007, six percent for fiscal 2008 through 2010, and nine percent for fiscal 2011 and
thereafter. our tax provisions for fiscal years 2009, 2008, and 2007 reflect benefits of $100 million, $97 million and $41 million, respectively, resulting from this deduction.  the company adopted new accounting guidance for income taxes at the beginning of fiscal year 2008. see note 2 for the impact of adopting
this guidance.  a reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits, excluding the related
accrual for interest, is as follows:
balance at the beginning of the year
$
$
increases for current year tax positions
increases for prior year tax positions
decreases in prior year tax positions
(7)
(189)
settlements with taxing authorities
(42)
(106)
balance at the end of the year
$
$
the year end 2009 and 2008 balances include $367 million and $353 million,
respectively, that if recognized, would reduce our income tax expense and effective tax rate after giving effect to offsetting benefits from other tax jurisdictions.  as of year end 2009 and 2008, the company had $142 million and $127 million, respectively, in accrued interest related to unrecognized tax benefits. during 2009 and 2008, the company accrued additional
interest of $27 million and $47 million, respectively, and recorded reductions in accrued interest of $12 million and $57 million, respectively, as a result of audit settlements and other prior-year adjustments. the companys policy is to
report interest and penalties as a component of income tax expense.  during the current year, the internal revenue service
commenced a limited issue focused examination with respect to the companys federal income tax returns filed for its fiscal years 2005 through 2007. the company is also subject to state and local and foreign tax audits. in the current year, the
california examination of fiscal years 2004 and 2005 was completed. the company is no longer subject to examination in any of its major state or foreign tax jurisdictions for years prior to 2002.  in the next twelve months, it is reasonably possible that our unrecognized tax benefits could change due to payments for or resolution of
open tax matters for post-2002 years. these resolutions and payments would reduce our unrecognized tax benefits by $109 million.  in fiscal 2009, income tax benefits attributable to equity-based compensation transactions were less than the amounts recorded based on grant date fair value. accordingly, a shortfall of $26 million was charged to shareholders equity.
in fiscal years 2008 and 2007, income tax benefits attributable to equity-based compensation transactions exceeded amounts recorded at grant date and accordingly were credited to shareholders equity and totaled $45 million and $123 million,
respectively .
table of contents
pension and other benefit programs  the company maintains pension and postretirement medical benefit plans covering most of its
employees not covered by union or industry-wide plans. employees hired after january1, 1994 and employees generally hired after january1, 1987 for certain of our media businesses are not eligible for postretirement medical benefits. with
respect to its qualified defined benefit pension plans, the companys policy is to fund, at a minimum, the amount necessary on an actuarial basis to provide for benefits in accordance with the requirements of the employee retirement income
security act of 1974, as amended by the pension protection act of 2006 (ppa). pension benefits are generally based on years of service and/or compensation.  the company adopted new accounting guidance on retirement benefits that requires measurement of plan funded status as of the end of the fiscal year. previously, the measurement date for the plans was
june30. upon adoption, the company remeasured plan assets and benefit obligations at the end of fiscal 2008 which resulted in a reduction of $35 million to retained earnings and a $100 million benefit to accumulated other comprehensive income
at the beginning of fiscal 2009. net periodic benefit cost for fiscal 2009 was based on this remeasurement of plan assets and benefit obligations. the amounts in the tables below for fiscal 2009 reflect an october3, 2009 measurement date
whereas the amounts for fiscal 2008 reflect the june30, 2008 measurement date.  the following chart summarizes the
benefit obligations, assets, funded status and balance sheet impacts associated with the pension and postretirement medical benefit plans based upon the actuarial valuations prepared as of october 3, 2009 and june 30, 2008 (the plan measurement
dates).
pension plans
postretirementmedicalplans
october3,2009
september27,2008
october3,2009
september27,2008
projected benefit obligations
beginning obligations
$
(5,249)
$
(5,242)
$
(1,030)
$(1,011)
adoption of new measurement date
service cost
(164)
(187)
(17)
(22)
interest cost
(363)
(325)
(71)
(63)
actuarial (loss) / gain
(1,835)
(235)
plan amendments and other
(8)
(14)
benefits paid
ending obligations
$
(6,992)
$
(5,249)
$
(1,227)
$
(1,030)
fair value of plans' assets
beginning fair value
$
4,955
$
5,160
$
$
adoption of new measurement date
(420)
(33)
actual return on plan assets
(39)
(9)
(7)
contributions
benefits paid
(175)
(159)
(24)
(26)
expenses
(20)
(24)
ending fair value
$
4,833
$
4,955
$
$
underfunded status of the plans
$
(2,159)
$
(294)
$
(930)
$
(679)
contributions after plan measurement date
n/a
n/a
net balance sheet liability
$
(2,159)
$
(290)
$
(930)
$
(676)
amounts recognized in the balance sheet
non-current assets
$
$
$
$
current liabilities
(14)
(10)
(14)
(14)
non-current liabilities
(2,153)
(495)
(916)
(662)
$
(2,159)
$
(290)
$
(930)
$
(676)
table of contents
the components of net periodic benefit cost and key assumptions are as follows:
pension plans
postretirementmedicalplans
service costs
$
$
$
$
$
$
interest costs
expected return on plan assets
(370)
(356)
(302)
(26)
(25)
(21)
amortization of prior year service costs
(2)
(1)
(1)
recognized net actuarial (gain)/loss
(9)
(8)
special termination benefits
net periodic benefit cost
$
$
$
$
$
$
assumptions:
discount rate
5.75%
7.00%
6.35%
5.75%
7.00%
6.35%
rate of return on plan assets
7.75%
7.50%
7.50%
7.75%
7.50%
7.50%
salary increases
4.50%
5.00%
4.00%
n/a
n/a
n/a
year 1 increase in cost of benefits
n/a
n/a
n/a
8.50%
9.00%
9.00%
rate of increase to which the cost of benefits is assumed to decline (the ultimate trend rate)
n/a
n/a
n/a
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate
n/a
n/a
n/a
net periodic benefit cost is based on assumptions determined at the prior-year end
measurement date.  accumulated other comprehensive loss, before tax, as of october3, 2009 consists of the following
amounts that have not yet been recognized in net periodic benefit cost:
pensionplans
postretirementmedical plans
total
unrecognized prior service credit / (cost)
$
(73)
$
$
(62)
unrecognized net actuarial loss
(2,542)
(180)
(2,722)
total amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive loss
(2,615)
(169)
(2,784)
prepaid / (accrued) pension cost
(761)
(305)
net balance sheet liability
$
(2,159)
$
(930)
$
(3,089)
amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive loss, before tax, as of
october3, 2009 that are expected to be recognized as components of net periodic benefit cost during fiscal 2010 are:
pensionplans
postretirementmedical plans
total
prior service credit / (cost)
$
(14)
$
$
(12)
net actuarial loss
(155)
(7)
(162)
total
$
(169)
$
(5)
$
(174)
plan funded status  at october3, 2009, the company had pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations exceeding the fair value of plan assets. the
projected benefit obligation, accumulated benefit obligation and aggregate fair value of plan assets for pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations in excess of plan assets were $6.3 billion, $5.7 billion and $4.1 billion, respectively, as
of october3, 2009 and $397 million, $332 million and $0 million as of september27, 2008, respectively.  for
pension plans with projected benefit obligations in excess of plan assets, the projected benefit obligation and aggregate fair value of plan assets were $6.3 billion and $4.2 billion, respectively, as of october3, 2009 and $3.9 billion and
$3.4 billion as of september27, 2008, respectively.
table of contents
the companys total accumulated pension benefit obligations at october3, 2009 and
september27, 2008 were $6.4 billion and $4.8 billion, respectively, of which 97% for both years was vested.  the
accumulated postretirement medical benefit obligations and fair value of plan assets for postretirement medical plans with accumulated postretirement medical benefit obligations in excess of plan assets were $1.2 billion and $297 million,
respectively, at october3, 2009 and $1.0 billion and $351 million, respectively, at september27, 2008.  plan assets
a significant portion of the assets of the companys defined benefit plans are managed on a commingled basis in a third
party master trust. the investment policy and allocation of the assets in the master trust were approved by the companys investment and administrative committee which has oversight responsibility for the companys retirement plans. the
investment policy ranges for the major asset classes are as follows:
asset
class
minimum
maximum
equity securities
%
%
debt securities
%
%
alternative investments
%
%
cash
%
%
alternative investments principally include venture capital, private equity and real
estate partnerships.  the companys defined benefit plans asset mix (including assets held outside of the master trust)
at the plan measurement dates for each fiscal year end is as follows:
asset
class
equity securities (1)
44%
47%
debt securities
38%
35%
alternative investments
17%
16%
cash
1%
2%
total
100%
100%
(1)
equity securities include 2.8million shares of company common stock valued at $77 million (2% of total plan assets) and $92 million (2% of total
plan assets) at 2009 and 2008, respectively.  plan contributions  during fiscal 2009, the company made contributions to its pension and postretirement medical plans totaling $473 million, which included
discretionary contributions above the minimum requirements for pension plans. the company expects pension and postretirement medical plan contributions in fiscal 2010 to range from $350 million to $450 million which is expected to include
discretionary contributions above the minimum requirements. final minimum funding requirements for fiscal 2010 will be determined based on our january1, 2010 funding actuarial valuation which will be available late fiscal 2010.  estimated future benefit payments  the following table presents estimated future benefit payments for the next ten fiscal years:
pensionplans
postretirementmedicalplans(1)
$
$
2015  2019
1,968
(1)
estimated future
benefit payments are net of expected medicare subsidy receipts of $68 million.
table of contents
assumptions  actuarial assumptions, such as the discount rate, long-term rate of return on plan assets and the healthcare cost trend rate, have a significant effect on the amounts reported for net periodic benefit
cost as well as the related benefit obligations.  discount rate  the assumed discount rate for pension and
postretirement medical plans reflects the market rates for high-quality corporate bonds currently available. the companys discount rate was determined by considering the average of pension yield curves constructed of a large population of high
quality corporate bonds. the resulting discount rate reflects the matching of plan liability cash flows to the yield curves.  long-term rate of return on plan assets  the long-term rate of return on plan assets represents an estimate of long-term returns on an investment portfolio consisting of a mixture of equities, fixed income and alternative
investments. when determining the long-term rate of return on plan assets, the company considers long-term rates of return on the asset classes (both historical and forecasted) in which the company expects the pension funds to be invested. the
following long-term rates of return by asset class were considered in setting the long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption:
equity securities
9%11%
debt securities
4%8%
alternative investments
8%20%
healthcare cost trend rate  the company reviews external data and its
own historical trends for healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates for the postretirement medical benefit plans. for the 2009 actuarial valuation, we assumed an 8.5% annual rate of increase in the per capita cost of covered
healthcare claims with the rate decreasing in even increments over ten years until reaching 5.0%.  sensitivity  a
one percentage point (ppt) change in the key assumptions would have had the following effects on the projected benefit obligations as of october3, 2009 and on cost for fiscal 2010:
pension and postretirement medical plans
postretirement medical plans
discount rate
expectedlong-termrate of returnon assets
assumed healthcarecosttrend rate
increase/(decrease)
net periodicpension andpostretirementmedical cost
projectedbenefitobligations
net periodicpension andpostretirementcost
net periodicpostretirementmedical cost
projectedbenefitobligations
1 ppt decrease
$
$
1,328
$
(24)
(175)
1 ppt increase
(149)
(1,140)
(57)
multi-employer plans  the company participates in various multi-employer pension plans under union and industry-wide agreements. in 2009, 2008 and 2007, the
contributions to these plans, which are expensed as incurred, were $52 million, $56 million and $54 million, respectively.  defined
contribution plans  the company has savings and investment plans that allow eligible employees to allocate up to 20% of
their salary through payroll deductions depending on the plan in which the employee participates. the company matches 50% of the employees pre-tax contribution up to plan limits. in 2009, 2008 and 2007, the costs of these plans were $51
million, $52 million and $42 million, respectively.
table of contents
shareholders equity
as of the filing date of this report, the board of directors had not yet declared a dividend related to
fiscal 2009. the company paid a $648 million dividend ($0.35 per share) during the second quarter of fiscal 2009 related to fiscal 2008. the company paid a $664 million dividend ($0.35 per share) during the second quarter of fiscal 2008 related to
fiscal 2007. the company paid a $637 million dividend ($0.31 per share) during the second quarter of fiscal 2007 related to fiscal 2006.  during fiscal 2009, the company repurchased 5million shares of disney common stock for $138 million. during fiscal 2008, the company repurchased 139million shares of disney common stock for
$4.5 billion. during fiscal 2007, the company repurchased 202million shares of disney common stock for $6.9 billion. on may1, 2007, the board of directors of the company increased the share repurchase authorization to a total of
400million shares. as of october3, 2009, the company had remaining authorization in place to repurchase 179million additional shares. the repurchase program does not have an expiration date.  in april 2008, the company redeemed $1.3 billion of convertible senior notes. pursuant to the redemption, substantially all of the notes
were converted into 45million shares of the companys common stock.  the par value of the companys
outstanding common stock totaled approximately $26 million.  the company also has 1.0 billion shares of internet group stock
at $.01 par value authorized. no shares are issued and outstanding.  accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss), net of tax(1), is as follows:
october3,2009
september27,2008
market value adjustments for hedges and investments
$
$
foreign currency translation and other
unrecognized pension and postretirement medical expense
(1,767)
(296)
accumulated other comprehensive loss (1)
$
(1,644)
$
(81)
(1)
accumulated other comprehensive income(loss) and components of other comprehensive income(loss) are recorded net of tax using a 37% estimated statutory
tax rate.
equity-based compensation
under various plans, the company may grant stock options and other equity-based awards to executive,
management, and creative personnel. the companys approach to long-term incentive compensation contemplates awards of stock options and restricted stock units (rsus). certain rsus awarded to senior executives vest based upon the achievement of
market and/or performance conditions (performance rsus).  stock options are generally granted at exercise prices equal to or
exceeding the market price at the date of grant. effective in january 2003, options became exercisable ratably over a four-year period from the grant date, while options granted prior to january 2003 generally vest ratably over five years. effective
in the second quarter of 2005, options granted generally expire seven years after the grant date, while options granted prior to the second quarter of 2005 generally expire ten years after the grant date. at the discretion of the compensation
committee of the companys board of directors, options can occasionally extend up to 15 years after date of grant. effective in january 2009, rsus (excluding performance rsus) vest ratably over a four-year period from the date of grant, while
rsus granted prior to january 2009 and performance rsus generally vest 50% on each of the second and fourth anniversaries of the grant date. stock options and rsus are generally forfeited by employees who terminate prior to vesting. shares available
for future option and rsu grants at october3, 2009 totaled 83 million. starting march 2009 for our primary plan, each share granted subject to a stock option award reduces the number of shares available by one share while each share granted
subject to a rsu award reduces the number of shares available by two shares. the company satisfies stock option exercises and vesting of rsus with newly issued shares.
table of contents
each year, during the second quarter, the company awards stock options and restricted stock
units to a broad-based group of management and creative personnel (the annual grant). the fair value of options is estimated based on the binomial valuation model. the binomial valuation model takes into account variables such as volatility,
dividend yield, and the risk-free interest rate. the binomial valuation model also considers the expected exercise multiple (the multiple of exercise price to grant price at which exercises are expected to occur on average) and the termination rate
(the probability of a vested option being cancelled due to the termination of the option holder) in computing the value of the option.  in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, the weighted average assumptions used in the option-valuation model were as follows:
risk-free interest rate
2.0%
3.6%
4.5%
expected volatility
47%
29%
26%
dividend yield
1.19%
1.02%
0.79%
termination rate
7.5%
7.5%
7.4%
exercise multiple
1.39
1.39
1.38
although the initial fair value of stock options is not adjusted after the grant
date, changes in the companys assumptions may change the value of, and therefore the expense related to, future stock option grants. the assumptions that cause the greatest variation in fair value in the binomial valuation model are the
expected volatility and expected exercise multiple. increases or decreases in either the expected volatility or expected exercise multiple will cause the binomial option value to increase or decrease, respectively.  the volatility assumption considers both historical and implied volatility and may be impacted by the companys performance as well as
changes in economic and market conditions.  compensation expense for rsus (excluding performance rsus) and stock options is
recognized ratably over the vesting period of the award. compensation expense for rsus is based upon the market price of the shares underlying the awards on the grant date. compensation expense for performance rsus reflects the estimated probability
that the market and/or performance conditions will be met and is recognized ratably over the service period of the award.  the
impact of stock options and rsus on income for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 was as follows:
stock option compensation expense
$
$
$
rsu compensation expense
equity-based compensation plan modification charge (1)
total equity-based compensation expense (2)
tax impact
(169)
(149)
(155)
reduction in net income
$
$
$
tax benefit reported in cash flow from continuing financing activities
$
$
$
(1)
in anticipation of the abc radio transaction, the company needed to determine whether employee equity-based compensation awards would be adjusted for
the dilutive impact of the transaction on outstanding employee awards. certain of the companys plans required such adjustments to be made on an equitable basis. all other plans permitted such adjustments to be made. in order to treat all
employees consistently with respect to the abc radio transaction (and other similar future transactions), the company amended the plans such that all plans require equitable adjustments for such transactions. in connection with these amendments, the
company was required to record a non-cash charge of $48 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2007 representing the estimated fair value of this modification with respect to vested equity-based employee compensation awards.
table of contents
(2)
equity-based compensation expense is net of capitalized equity-based compensation and includes amortization of previously capitalized equity-based
compensation costs. capitalized equity-based compensation totaled $13 million, $55 million and $103 million in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.  the following table summarizes information about stock option transactions (shares in millions):
shares
weightedaverageexerciseprice
shares
weightedaverageexerciseprice
shares
weightedaverageexerciseprice
outstanding at beginning of year
$
28.37
$
27.36
$
25.85
awards forfeited
(3)
29.69
(4)
29.49
(5)
27.71
awards granted
21.29
30.12
34.22
awards exercised
(7)
17.66
(27)
21.79
(53)
24.52
awards expired/cancelled
(8)
34.23
(5)
44.12
(2)
56.00
outstanding at end of year
26.79
28.37
27.36
exercisable at end of year
26.62
27.72
27.07
the following tables summarize information about stock options vested and expected to
vest at october3, 2009 (shares in millions):
vested
range of exercise prices
numberofoptions
weightedaverageexerciseprice
weightedaverageremainingyearsofcontractuallife
$ 0  $ 15
10.38
2.6
$ 16  $ 20
18.25
4.4
$ 21  $ 25
23.81
3.3
$ 26  $ 30
29.04
2.9
$ 31  $ 35
33.65
2.5
$ 36  $ 40
39.85
0.7
$ 41  $ 45
42.21
1.0
$ 46  $185
117.30
0.4
expected to vest
range of exercise prices
numberofoptions(1)
weightedaverageexerciseprice
weightedaverageremainingyearsofcontractuallife
$ 0  $ 15
13.37
3.8
$ 16  $ 20
20.68
6.3
$ 21  $ 25
24.43
3.7
$ 26  $ 30
29.26
5.6
$ 31  $ 35
33.94
4.5
(1)
number of options
expected to vest is total unvested options less estimated forfeitures.
table of contents
the following table summarizes information about rsu transactions (shares in millions):
units
weightedaveragegrant-datefair value
units
weightedaveragegrant-datefair value
units
weightedaveragegrant-datefairvalue
unvested at beginning of year
$
29.95
$
29.01
$
25.74
granted
20.89
29.92
34.22
vested
(8)
31.20
(7)
26.45
(6)
26.20
forfeited
(2)
26.61
(3)
29.69
(2)
27.78
unvested at end of year
25.82
29.95
29.01
rsu grants include 3.0million shares, 2.3million shares and
1.4million shares of performance rsus in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. approximately 7.4million shares of the unvested rsus as of october3, 2009 are performance rsus.  the weighted average grant-date fair values of options granted during 2009, 2008 and 2007 were $7.43, $8.25 and $9.27, respectively. the
total intrinsic value (market value on date of exercise less exercise price) of options exercised and rsus vested during 2009, 2008 and 2007 totaled $252 million, $529 million, and $735 million, respectively. the aggregate intrinsic values of stock
options vested and expected to vest at october3, 2009 were $306 million and $100million, respectively.  as of
october3, 2009, there was $315 million of unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested stock options and $446 million related to unvested rsus. that cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.7 years for stock
options and 1.9 years for rsus.  cash received from option exercises for 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $119 million, $591 million
and $1.3 billion, respectively. tax benefits realized from tax deductions associated with option exercises and rsu activity for 2009, 2008 and 2007 totaled $90 million, $183 million and $267 million, respectively.
table of contents
detail of certain balance sheet accounts
october3,2009
september27,2008
current receivables
accounts receivable
$
4,794
$
5,207
other
allowance for doubtful accounts
(336)
(248)
$
4,854
$
5,373
other current assets
prepaid expenses
$
$
other
$
$
parks, resorts and other property, at cost
attractions, buildings and improvements
$
15,929
$
15,444
leasehold improvements
furniture, fixtures and equipment
12,228
11,739
land improvements
3,625
3,757
32,475
31,493
accumulated depreciation
(17,395)
(16,310)
projects in progress
1,350
1,169
land
1,167
1,180
$
17,597
$
17,532
intangible assets
copyrights
$
$
other amortizable intangible assets
accumulated amortization
(249)
(198)
net amortizable intangible assets
fcc licenses
trademarks
1,109
1,109
other indefinite lived intangible assets
$
2,247
$
2,428
other non-current assets
receivables
$
1,225
$
pension related assets
prepaid expenses
other
$
2,022
$
1,763
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
accounts payable
$
4,002
$
4,355
payroll and employee benefits
1,259
1,376
other
$
5,616
$
5,980
other long-term liabilities
deferred revenues
$
$
capital lease obligations
program licenses and rights
participation and residual liabilities
pension and postretirement medical plan liabilities
3,069
1,157
other (1)
1,231
1,460
$
5,444
$
3,779
(1)
includes unrecognized tax benefits.
table of contents
commitments and contingencies  commitments  the company has various contractual commitments for broadcast rights for sports, feature films and other programming, aggregating approximately $21.2 billion, including approximately $0.9 billion for
available programming as of october3, 2009, and approximately $18.0 billion related to sports programming rights, primarily nfl, college football (including college bowl games) and basketball conferences, nba, nascar, and mlb.  the company has entered into operating leases for various real estate and equipment needs, including retail outlets and distribution centers
for consumer products, broadcast equipment, and office space for general and administrative purposes. rental expense for the operating leases during 2009, 2008, and 2007, including common-area maintenance and contingent rentals, was $615 million,
$550 million, and $482 million, respectively.  the company also has contractual commitments for the construction of two new
cruise ships, creative talent and employment agreements and unrecognized tax benefits. creative talent and employment agreements include obligations to actors, producers, sports personnel, television and radio personalities, and executives.
contractual commitments for broadcast programming rights, future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating
leases, and creative talent and other commitments totaled $28.1 billion at october3, 2009, payable as follows:
broadcastprogramming
operatingleases
other
total
$
5,023
$
$
1,250
$
6,694
3,437
1,357
5,160
3,255
1,147
4,720
3,226
3,663
2,683
2,997
thereafter
3,583
4,841
$
21,207
$
2,036
$
4,832
$
28,075
the company has non-cancelable capital leases, primarily for land and broadcast
equipment, which had gross carrying values of $402 million and $423 million at october3, 2009 and september27, 2008, respectively. accumulated amortization related to these capital leases totaled $95 million and $114 million at
october3, 2009 and september27, 2008, respectively. future payments under these leases as of october3, 2009 are as follows:
$
thereafter
total minimum obligations
$
less amount representing interest
(548)
present value of net minimum obligations
less current portion
(16)
long-term portion
$
contractual guarantees  the company has guaranteed bond issuances by the anaheim public authority that were used by the city of anaheim to finance construction of
infrastructure and a public parking facility adjacent to the disneyland resort. revenues from sales, occupancy and property taxes from the disneyland resort and non-disney hotels are used by the city of anaheim to repay the bonds. in the event of a
debt service shortfall, the company will be responsible to fund
table of contents
the shortfall. as of october3, 2009, the remaining debt service obligation guaranteed by the company was $373million, of which $96 million was principal. to the extent that tax
revenues exceed the debt service payments in subsequent periods, the company would be reimbursed for any previously funded shortfalls. to date, tax revenues have exceeded the debt service payments for anaheim bonds.  espn star sports, a joint-venture in which espn owns a 50% equity interest, has an agreement for global programming rights to international
cricket council events from 2007 through 2015. under the terms of the agreement, espn and the other joint-venture partner have jointly guaranteed the programming rights obligation of approximately $0.9 billion over the remaining term of the
agreement.  accounts receivable risk  in light of the recent turmoil in the domestic and global economy, our estimates and judgments with respect to the collectibility of our receivables have become subject to greater uncertainty than in more
stable periods.  legal matters  milne and disney enterprises, inc. v. stephen slesinger, inc. on november5, 2002, clare milne, the granddaughter of a. a. milne, author of the winnie the pooh books, and the companys
subsidiary disney enterprises, inc. (dei) filed a complaint against stephen slesinger, inc. (ssi) in the united states district court for the central district of california. on november4, 2002, ms.milne served notices to ssi and dei
terminating a. a. milnes prior grant of rights to winnie the pooh, effective november5, 2004, and granted all of those rights to dei. in their lawsuit, ms.milne and dei sought a declaratory judgment, under united states copyright
law, that ms.milnes termination notices were valid; that ssis rights to winnie the pooh in the united states terminated effective november5, 2004; that upon termination of ssis rights in the united states, the 1983
licensing agreement that is the subject of the stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney company lawsuit (the state court action) terminated by operation of law; and that, as of november5, 2004, ssi was entitled to no
further royalties for uses of winnie the pooh. ssi filed (a)an answer denying the material allegations of the complaint and (b)counterclaims seeking a declaration that (i)ms.milnes grant of rights to dei is void and
unenforceable and (ii)dei remains obligated to pay ssi royalties under the 1983 licensing agreement. the district court ruled that milnes termination notices were invalid. the court of appeals for the ninth circuit affirmed, and on
june26, 2006, the united states supreme court denied milnes petition for a writ of certiorari. on august1, 2003, ssi filed an amended answer and counterclaims and a third-party complaint against harriet hunt (heir to e. h. shepard,
illustrator of the original winnie the pooh stories), who had served a notice of termination and a grant of rights similar to ms.milnes, and asserted counterclaims against the company allegedly arising from the milne and hunt
terminations and the grant of rights to dei for (a)unlawful and unfair business practices; and (b)breach of the 1983 licensing agreement.  on october19, 2006, the parties stipulated to ssi's filing its fourth amended answer and counterclaims (fourth amended answer) seeking (a)to invalidate the hunt termination notice, (b)to
terminate the company's rights vis--vis ssi, and (c)damages in excess of two billion dollars, among other relief. that stipulation also provided that hunt and the company need not respond to the fourth amended answer until the
conclusion of two events: the state court appeal in stephen slesinger, inc. v. the walt disney company, and the trial in the district court on the validity of the hunt termination notice. ssi then sought to withdraw both the fourth amended
answer and its stipulation, but on november3, 2006, the district court denied that request. ssis motion for summary judgment on the validity of hunts 2002 attempt to recapture e. h. shepards rights was granted on
february15, 2007, and thereafter, on march27, 2007, the district court dismissed as moot all claims against hunt and three of ssis counterclaims against the company related to the companys agreements with milne and hunt
concerning the termination and disposition of their rights. on january3, 2008, the california supreme court denied ssis petition for review in the state court action, whereupon on april21, 2008, the company moved for summary
judgment on all of ssi's claims in the district court action. on june3, 2008, the district court ordered further briefing on the issue of whether ssis misconduct in the state court action warrants dismissal of all of its claims in the
district court, and then on july29, 2008, the district court referred the summary judgment motion to a special master, who rendered a sealed recommendation on march26, 2009. on may19, 2009, the district court granted the
companys motion for summary judgment and dismissed without prejudice ssis four contract and fraud counterclaims and invited the parties to file summary judgment motions on the remaining infringement and unfair competition claims. on
september25, 2009, the district court granted the companys motion for summary judgment on ssis remaining claims and on october21, 2009, ssi and the company filed applications for attorneys fees. on november5,
2009, ssi appealed from the district courts judgment to the court of appeals for the ninth circuit.
table of contents
relatedly, on december4, 2006,august22,
2007,february8,april18,august27 and october31, 2008, and february17,july27, and november17, 2009, ssi initiated proceedings in the united states patent and trademark office (pto)
seeking cancellation of certain winnie the pooh trademark registrations and opposing applications for other winnie the pooh trademarks. prior to july27, the pto had already suspended the then-pending proceedings on the grounds that the relief
sought is effectively duplicative of that sought in the fourth amended answer. on october8, 2009, the company advised the pto of the district courts grant of summary judgment against ssi, and requested dismissal of all of ssis
pending proceedings. also, on april18,october16 and october27, 2008 and july28, 2009, ssi initiated actions before the canadian intellectual property office (cipo) opposing applications for certain winnie
the pooh trademarks. on september4, 2008, and february12 and march10, 2009, the company filed answers to the actions before the cipo, denying ssis claims.  the company, together with, in some instances, certain of its directors and officers, is a defendant or codefendant in various other legal
actions involving copyright, breach of contract and various other claims incident to the conduct of its businesses. management does not expect the company to suffer any material liability by reason of such actions.
fair value measurement
in september 2006, the fasbissued guidance on fair value measurements which provides a common definition
of fair value and establishes a framework to make the measurement of fair value in generally accepted accounting principles more consistent and comparable. this guidance also requires expanded disclosures to provide information about the extent to
which fair value is used to measure assets and liabilities, the methods and assumptions used to measure fair value, and the effect of fair value measures on earnings.  the company adopted the guidance at the beginning of fiscal 2009 for fair value measurements of financial assets and liabilities and fair value measurements of non-financial assets and liabilities made on
a recurring basis. in february 2008, the fasb updated the guidance, which delays the effective date for all nonrecurring fair value measurements of nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities until the companys 2010 fiscal year. the
company does not expect the adoption of the guidance for nonrecurring fair value measurements of nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities will have a material impact on its financial statements.  fair value is defined as the amount that would be received for selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants and requires that assets and liabilities carried at fair value be classified and disclosed in the following three categories:
level 1  quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets
level 2  quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not
active; and model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs and significant value drivers are observable in active markets
level 3  valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable
the companys assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis are summarized in the
following table by the type of inputs applicable to the fair value measurements.
fair value measurements at october3, 2009
description
level1
level2
level3
total
assets
investments
$
$
$
$
derivatives (1)
residual interests
liabilities
derivatives (1)
(297)
(297)
other
(13)
(13)
total
$
$
$
$
table of contents
(1)
the company enters into master netting arrangements by counterparty with respect to certain derivative contracts. contracts in a liability position
totaling $170 million have been netted against contracts in an asset position in the condensed consolidated balance sheet.  the fair value of level 2 investments is primarily determined by reference to market prices based on recent trading activity and other relevant information including pricing for similar securities as
determined by third-party pricing services.  the fair values of level 2 derivatives, which consist of interest rate and
foreign currency hedges, are primarily determined based on the present value of future cash flows using internal models that use observable inputs such as interest rates, yield curves and foreign currency exchange rates. counterparty credit risk,
which is mitigated by master netting agreements and collateral posting arrangements with certain counterparties, did not have a material impact on derivative fair value estimates.  level 3 residual interests consist of our residual interests in securitized vacation ownership mortgage receivables and are valued using a
discounted cash flow model that considers estimated interest rates, discount rates, prepayment, and defaults. there were no material changes in the residual interests in fiscal 2009.  fair value of financial instruments  in addition to the financial
instruments listed above, the companys financial instruments also include cash, cash equivalents, receivables, accounts payable and borrowings.  the fair values of cash and cash equivalents, receivables and accounts payable approximated the carrying values. the estimated year end fair values of other financial instruments subject to fair value
disclosures, determined based on broker quotes or quoted market prices or interest rates for the same or similar instruments and the related carrying amounts are as follows:
asset/(liability)
carryingamount
fair value
carryingamount
fair value
investments
$
$
$
$
borrowings
(12,701)
(12,643)
(14,639)
(14,848)
derivative contracts
transfers of financial assets  in december 2008, the fasb issued guidance to expand disclosure about transfers of financial assets.  through december4, 2008, the company sold mortgage receivables arising from the sales of its vacation ownership units under a facility
that expired on december4, 2008 and was not renewed.the company sold $17million and $147 million of mortgage receivables during the years ended october3, 2009, and september27, 2008, respectively, which resulted in
gains totaling $4 million and $32 million for fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2008, respectively.  the company continues to service the
sold receivables and has a residual interest in those receivables. as of october3, 2009, the outstanding principal amount for sold mortgage receivables was $399 million and the carrying value of the companys residual interest, which is
recorded in other long-term assets, was $64 million.  the company repurchases defaulted mortgage receivables at their
outstanding balance. the company did not make material repurchases in the years ended october3, 2009 or september27, 2008. the company generally has been able to sell the repurchased vacation ownership units for amounts that exceed the
amounts at which they were repurchased.  the company also provides credit support for the outstanding balance of the sold
mortgage receivables which the mortgage receivable acquirer may draw on in the event of losses under the facility. during fiscal 2009, the company amended certain terms of its agreement with the mortgage receivable acquirer including a provision for
the company to provide support for up to 70% of the outstanding balance of sold mortgage receivables. the company maintains a reserve for estimated credit losses related to these receivables.
table of contents
credit concentrations  the company continually monitors its positions with, and the credit quality of, the financial institutions that are counterparties to its financial instruments and does not anticipate nonperformance by
the counterparties. in 2008, lehman brothers commercial corporation defaulted on a $91 million trade settlement. the company is pursuing collection of this amount, but has fully reserved the amount.  the company does not expect that it would realize a material loss, based on the fair value of its derivative financial instruments as of
october3, 2009, in the event of nonperformance by any single derivative counterparty. the company enters into transactions only with derivative counterparties that have a credit rating of a- or better. the companys current policy
regarding agreements with derivative counterparties is generally to require collateral in the event credit ratings fall below a- or in the event aggregate exposures exceed limits as defined by contract. in addition, the company limits the amount of
investment credit exposure with any one institution.  the company does not have material cash and cash equivalent balances
with financial institutions that have a credit rating of less than a-. as of october3, 2009, the companys balances that exceeded 10% of cash and cash equivalents with individual financial institutions were 38% compared to 63% as of
september27, 2008.  the companys trade receivables and financial investments do not represent a significant
concentration of credit risk at october3, 2009 due to the wide variety of customers and markets into which the companys products are sold, their dispersion across geographic areas, and the diversification of the companys portfolio
among issuers.
derivative instruments
the company manages its exposure to various risks relating to its ongoing business operations according to a
risk management policy. the primary risks managed with derivative instruments are interest rate risk and foreign exchange risk.  the following table summarizes the gross fair value of the companys derivative positions as of october3, 2009:
currentassets
otherassets
otheraccruedliabilities
otherlong-termliabilities
derivatives designated as hedges
$
$
(115)
(55)
derivatives not designated as hedges
(72)
(55)
gross fair value of derivatives
(187)
(110)
counterparty netting
(98)
(72)
total derivatives (1)
$
$
(84)
(43)
(1)
refer to note 16 for further information on derivative fair values and counterparty netting.  interest rate risk management  the company is exposed to the impact of interest rate changes primarily through its borrowing activities. the companys objective is to mitigate the impact of interest rate changes on earnings and cash flows and on the market value of
its investments and borrowings. in accordance with its policy, the company targets its fixed-rate debt as a percentage of its net debt between a minimum and maximum percentage. the company typically uses pay-floating and pay-fixed interest rate
swaps to facilitate its interest rate management activities.  the company designates pay-floating interest rate swaps as fair
value hedges of fixed-rate borrowings effectively converting fixed-rate borrowings to variable rate borrowings indexed to libor. as of october3, 2009 and september27, 2008, the total notional amount of the companys pay-floating
interest rate swaps was $1.6 billion. during fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2008, $105 million and $68 million in gains, respectively, from mark to market adjustments on pay-floating swaps and an offsetting $105 million and $68 million in losses,
respectively, from mark to market adjustments on hedged borrowings were included in net interest expense in the consolidated statements of income, respectively.
table of contents
the company designates pay-fixed interest rate swaps as cash flow hedges of interest
payments on floating-rate borrowings. pay-fixed swaps effectively convert floating rate borrowings to fixed-rate borrowings. the unrealized gains or losses from these cash flow hedges are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive income (aoci) and
recognized as the interest payments occur. the notional amount of these contracts at october3, 2009 and september27, 2008 and the gains or losses recognized in income for the years then ended were not material.  foreign exchange risk management  the company transacts business globally and is subject to risks associated with changing foreign currency exchange rates. the companys objective is to reduce earnings and cash flow fluctuations associated with foreign currency
exchange rate changes enabling management to focus on core business issues and challenges.  the company enters into option and
forward contracts that change in value as foreign currency exchange rates change to protect the value of its existing foreign currency assets, liabilities, firm commitments and forecasted but not firmly committed foreign currency transactions. in
accordance with policy, the company hedges its forecasted foreign currency transactions for periods generally not to exceed five years within an established minimum and maximum range of annual exposure. the gains and losses on these contracts offset
changes in the u.s. dollar equivalent value of the related forecasted transaction, asset, liability or firm commitment. the principal currencies hedged are the euro, british pound, japanese yen and canadian dollar. cross-currency swaps are used to
effectively convert foreign currency-denominated borrowings into u.s. dollar denominated borrowings.  the company designates
foreign exchange forward and option contracts as cash flow hedges of firmly committed and forecasted foreign currency transactions. as of october3, 2009 and september27, 2008, the total notional amount of the companys net foreign
exchange cash flow hedges was $2.8 billion and $2.3 billion, respectively. mark to market gains and losses on these contracts are deferred in aoci and are recognized in earnings when the hedged transactions occur, offsetting changes in the value of
the foreign currency transactions. the company recognized gains of $81 million and losses of $12 million in aoci on foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges for the years ended october3, 2009 and september27, 2008,
respectively. gains of $183 million and losses of $200 million were reclassified from aoci into revenue and costs and expenses for fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2008, respectively. gains and losses recognized related to ineffectiveness for the years ended
october3, 2009 and september27, 2008 were not material. deferred losses recorded in aoci for contracts that will mature in the next twelve months totaled $32 million.  foreign exchange risk management contracts with respect to foreign currency assets and liabilities are not designated as hedges and do not
qualify for hedge accounting. the notional amount of these foreign exchange contracts at october3, 2009 was $2.1 billion. for the year ended october3, 2009, the company recognized a net gain of $140 million in costs and expenses on these
foreign exchange contracts which generally offset the recognition of the related economic exposures.  risk management  other
derivatives not designated as hedges  the company enters into certain other risk management contracts that are not
designated as hedges and do not qualify for hedge accounting. these contracts, which include pay fixed interest rate swaps, commodity swap contracts and credit default swaps, are intended to offset economic exposures of the company and are carried
at market value with any changes in value recorded in earnings.  the notional amount of these contracts at october3,
2009 and september27, 2008 was $253 million and $266million, respectively. the gains or losses recognized in income for fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2008 were not material.  contingent features  the companys derivative financial instruments
may require the company to post collateral in the event that a net liability position with a counterparty exceeds limits defined by contract and varying with disneys credit rating. if the companys credit ratings were to fall below
investment grade, certain counterparties would have the right to terminate our derivative contracts, which could lead to a net payment to or from the company for the aggregate net value by counterparty of our derivative contracts. the aggregate fair
value of all derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features that are in a net liability position by counterparty on october3, 2009 was not material.
table of contents
restructuring and impairment charges  the company recorded charges totaling $492 million during fiscal 2009 which included
impairment charges of $279 million and restructuring costs of $213 million. the most significant of the impairment charges was $142 million related to fcc radio licenses and $65 million related to our investment in utv group. the company recognized
restructuring costs for severance and other related costs as a result of various ongoing organizational and cost structure initiatives across our businesses based primarily on our existing severance plans or statutory requirements. restructuring and
impairment charges for fiscal years 2008 and 2007 consisted of impairment charges of $39 million and $26 million, respectively, related to fcc radio licenses.
table of contents
quarterly financial summary  (in millions, except per share data)
(unaudited)
q1
q2
q3
q4
2009 (1)(2)(3)(4)
revenues
$
9,599
$
8,087
$
8,596
$
9,867
net income
earnings per share:
diluted
$
0.45
$
0.33
$
0.51
$
0.47
basic
0.46
0.33
0.51
0.48
2008 (1)(2)
revenues
$
10,452
$
8,710
$
9,236
$
9,445
net income
1,250
1,133
1,284
earnings per share:
diluted
$
0.63
$
0.58
$
0.66
$
0.40
basic
0.66
0.60
0.68
0.41
(1)
results for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 include a non-cash gain in connection with the merger of lifetime entertainment services and a&e
television networks ($0.07 per diluted share) and restructuring and impairment charges ($0.06 per diluted share). the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 included a bad debt charge for a receivable from lehman brothers ($0.03 per diluted share) and an
impairment charge ($0.01 per diluted share).
(2)
results for the
third quarter of fiscal 2009 include restructuring and impairment charges ($0.01 per diluted share). the third quarter of fiscal 2008 included an accounting gain related to the acquisition of the disney stores north america and a gain on the sale of
movies.com (together $0.01 per diluted share) and favorable resolutions of certain prior-year income tax matters ($0.03 per diluted share)
(3)
results for the second quarter of fiscal 2009 include restructuring and impairment charges ($0.11 per diluted share)
(4)
results for the
first quarter of fiscal 2009 include a gain on the sale of our investment in two pay television services in latin america ($0.04 per diluted share).
