10-k
a05-20674_110k.htm
annual report pursuant to section 13 and 15(d)
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington,
d.c. 20549
form10-k
(mark one)
x annual
report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act
of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
september24, 2005
or
o transition
report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act
of 1934
for the transition period fromto
commission file number 0-10030
apple computer, inc.
(exact name of registrant
as specified in its charter)
california
(state or other
jurisdiction
of incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
1 infinite loop
cupertino, california
(address of
principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone
number, including area code: (408) 996-1010
securities registered
pursuant to section12(b)of the act: none
securities registered
pursuant to section12(g)of the act:
common stock, no par value
(titles of classes)
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13
or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file
such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90days.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if
disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s-k
(section229.405of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will
not be contained, to the best of the registrants knowledge, in definitive
proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of
this form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.x
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as defined in rule12b-2
of the act).yesxnoo
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the
act).yesonox
the aggregate market value
of the voting and non-voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant, as
of march26, 2005, was approximately $29,434,521,480 based upon the
closing price reported for such date on the nasdaq national market. for
purposes of this disclosure, shares of common stock held by persons who hold
more than 5% of the outstanding shares of common stock and shares held by
executive officers and directors of the registrant have been excluded because
such persons may be deemed to be affiliates. this determination of executive
officer or affiliate status is not necessarily a conclusive determination for
other purposes.
842,767,948 shares of common stock issued and
outstanding as of november18, 2005
parti
the business section and other parts of this annual
report on form10-k (form10-k) contain forward-looking
statements that involve risks and uncertainties. many of the forward-looking
statements are located in managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations. forward-looking statements can also be
identified by words such as anticipates, expects, believes, plans, predicts,
and similar terms. forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance
and the companys actual results may differ significantly from the results
discussed in the forward-looking statements. factors that might cause
such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the
subsection entitled factors that mayaffect future results and financial
condition under partii, item 7 of this form10-k. the company
assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for
any reason, except as required by law.
item 1. business
company background
apple computer,inc.
(apple or the company) was incorporated under the laws of the state of
california on january3, 1977. the company designs, manufactures, and
markets personal computers and related software, services, peripherals, and
networking solutions. the company also designs, develops, and markets a line of
portable digital music players along with related accessories and services
including the online distribution of third-party music, audio books, music
videos, short films, and television shows. the companys products and services
include the macintosh line of desktop and notebook computers, the ipod digital
music player, the xserve g5 server and xserve raid storage products, a
portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the mac os x
operating system, the itunes music store, a portfolio of peripherals that
support and enhance the macintosh and ipod product lines, and a variety of
other service and support offerings. the company sells its products worldwide
through its online stores, its own retail stores, its direct sales force, and
third-party wholesalers, resellers, and value added resellers. the company also
sells a variety of third-party products that are compatible with the companys
macintosh and ipod product lines, including computer printers and printing
supplies, storage devices, computer memory, digital camcorders and still
cameras, personal digital assistants, ipod accessories, and various other
computing products and supplies through its online and retail stores. the
companys fiscal year ends on the last saturday of september. unless otherwise
stated, all information presented in this form10-k is based on the
companys fiscal calendar.
business strategy
the company is committed
to bringing the best personal computing and music experience to students,
educators, creative professionals, businesses, government agencies, and
consumers through its innovative hardware, software, peripherals, services, and
internet offerings. the companys business strategy leverages its unique
ability, through the design and development of its own operating system,
hardware, and many software applications and technologies, to bring to its
customers new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless
integration, and innovative industrial design. the company believes continual
investment in research and development is critical to facilitate innovation of
new and improved products and technologies. besides updates to its existing
line of personal computers and related software, services, peripherals, and
networking solutions, the company continues to capitalize on the convergence of
digital consumer electronics and the computer by creating innovations like the
ipod and itunes music store. the companys strategy also includes expanding its
distribution network to effectively reach more of its targeted customers and
provide them a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience.
digital hub
the company believes personal computing is in an era
in which the personal computer functions for both professionals and consumers
as the digital hub for advanced new digital devices such as the companys
ipod digital music players, personal digital
assistants, cellular phones, digital camcorders and still cameras, cd and dvd
players, televisions, and other consumer electronic devices. the attributes of
the personal computer include a high quality user interface, relatively
inexpensive data storage, and the ability to run complex applications and
easily connect to the internet. apple is the only company in the personal
computer industry that controls the design and development of the entire
personal computerfrom the hardware and operating system to sophisticated
applications. additionally, the companys products provide innovative
industrial design, intuitive ease-of-use, and built-in networking,
graphics and multimedia capabilities. thus, the company is uniquely positioned
to offer integrated digital hub products and solutions.
the company develops
products and technologies that adhere to many industry standards in order to
provide an optimized user experience through interoperability with peripherals
and devices from other companies. the company has played a role in the
development, enhancement, promotion, and/or use of numerous of these industry
standards.
expanded
distribution
the company believes that a high quality buying
experience with knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the
companys products and services is critical to attracting and retaining
customers. the company sells many of its products and resells certain
third-party products in most of its major markets directly to consumers,
education customers, and businesses through its retail and online stores in the
u.s. and internationally. the company has also invested in programs to enhance
reseller sales, including the apple sales consultant program, which consists of
the deployment of apple employees and contractors to selected third-party
reseller locations. the company believes providing direct contact with its targeted
customers is an efficient way to demonstrate the advantages of its macintosh
computer and other products over those of its competitors. the company has
significantly increased the points of distribution for the ipod product family
in order to make its products available at locations where its customers shop.
from inception of the retail initiative in 2001
through 2005, the company had opened 116 retail stores in the u.s. and 8
international stores in canada, japan, and the u.k. the company opened 2 additional
stores in october2005. the company
has typically located its stores at high traffic locations in quality shopping
malls and urban shopping districts.
one of the goals of the retail initiative is to bring new customers to
the company and expand its installed base through sales to computer users who
currently do not own a macintosh computer and first time personal computer
buyers. by operating its own stores and building them in desirable high traffic
locations, the company is able to better control the customer retail experience
and attract new customers. the stores are designed to simplify and enhance the
presentation and marketing of personal computing products. to that end, retail
store configurations have evolved into various sizes in order to accommodate
market demands. the stores employ experienced and knowledgeable personnel who
provide product advice and certain hardware support services. the stores offer
a wide selection of third-party hardware, software, and various other computing
products and supplies selected to complement the companys own products. additionally,
the stores provide a forum in which the company is able to present computing
solutions to users in areas such as digital photography, digital video, music,
childrens software, and home and small business computing.
education
for more than 25 years,
the company has focused on the use of technology in education and has been
committed to delivering tools to help educators teach and students learn. the
company believes effective integration of technology into classroom instruction
can result in higher levels of student achievement, especially when used to
support collaboration, information access, and the expression and
representation
of student thought and
ideas. the company creates solutions that enable new modes of curriculum
delivery, better ways of conducting research, and opportunities for
professional development of faculty, students, and staff. the company has
designed a range of products and services to help schools maximize their
investments in technology. this is manifested in many of the companys products
and services that are designed to meet the needs of education customers. these
products and services include the emac, imac, and the ibook, video creation
and editing solutions, wireless networking, student information systems, high-quality curriculum and professional
development solutions, and one-to-one (1:1) learning solutions (primarily in
k-12). 1:1 learning solutions typically
consist of ibook portable computers for every student and teacher along with a
wireless network connected to a central server.
creative
professionals
creative professionals constitute one of the companys
most important markets for both hardware and software products. this market is
also important to many third-party developers who provide macintosh-compatible
hardware and software solutions. creative customers utilize the companys
products for a variety of creative activities including digital video and film
production and editing; digital video and film special effects, compositing,
and titling; digital still photography and workflow management; graphic design,
publishing, and print production; music creation and production; audio
production and sound design; and web design, development, and administration.
the company designs its
high-end hardware solutions, including servers, desktops, and portable
macintosh systems, to incorporate the power, expandability, and features
desired by creative professionals. the companys operating system, mac os x,
incorporates powerful graphics and audio technologies and features developer
tools to optimize system and application performance when running powerful
creative solutions provided by the company or third-party developers. the
company also offers various software solutions to meet the needs of its
creative customers.
business organization
the company manages its
business primarily on a geographic basis. the companys reportable operating
segments are comprised of the americas, europe, japan, and retail. the
americas, europe, and japan reportable segments do not include activities
related to the retail segment. the americas segment includes both north and
south america. the europe segment includes european countries as well as the
middle east and africa. the retail segment currently operates apple-owned
retail stores in the u.s., canada, japan, and the u.k. other operating segments
include asia-pacific, which includes australia and asia except for japan, and
the companys subsidiary, filemaker,inc. each reportable geographic
operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar
services. further information regarding the companys operating segments may be
found in partii, item 7 of this form10-k under the heading segment
operating performance, and in partii, item 8 of this form10-k
in the notes to consolidated financial statements at note 11, segment
information and geographic data.
hardware products
the company offers a range
of personal computing products including desktop and notebook computers, server
and storage products, related devices and peripherals, and various third-party
hardware products. the companys entire line of macintosh systems, excluding
servers and storage systems, features the companys mac os x version 10.4
tiger and ilife suite of software for digital photography, music, movies, and
music creation.
macintosh
computers
in june2005, the
company announced its plan to begin using intel microprocessors in its
macintosh computers. the company plans to begin shipping certain models with
intel microprocessors by june2006
and to complete the
transition of all of its macintosh computers to intel microprocessors by the
end of calendar year 2007. the company also announced its new translation
technology, rosetta, which will allow most powerpc-based macintosh
applications to run on new intel-based macintosh computers. there are potential risks and uncertainties
associated with this transition, which are further discussed in partii,
item 7 of this 10-k under the heading factors that mayaffect future
results and financial condition.
power mac
the power mac line of
desktop personal computers is targeted at business and professional users and
is designed to meet the speed, expansion, and networking needs of the most
demanding macintosh user. powered by the powerpc g5 processor, the power mac g5
utilizes 64-bit processing technology for memory expansion up to 16gb and
advanced 64-bit computation while also running existing 32-bit applications
natively. in october2005, the company updated the power mac g5 product
line, which now comes in three processor configurationsdual 2.0ghz, dual
2.3ghz, and a quad 2.5ghz that features two 2.5ghz dual processors. all power
mac g5 desktops feature a superdrive and a nvidia geforce 6600 graphics card.
in addition, all power mac g5 desktops deliver connectivity and
high-performance input/output (i/o), including dual gigabit ethernet, firewire
800 and firewire 400 ports, usb 2.0 ports, optical digital i/o, pci express
expansion, and optional airport extreme wireless networking and bluetooth
connectivity. the new power mac g5 product line also includes mighty mouse, the
companys next generation mouse, featuring up to four programmable buttons and
a scroll ball that lets users scroll vertically, horizontally, and diagonally.
xserve and xserve
raid storage system
xserve is a rack-mount
server product designed for simple setup and remote management of intensive i/o
applications such as digital video, high-resolution digital imagery, and large
databases. in january2005, the company upgraded xserve g5, which is now
available with either a single 2.0ghz or dual 2.3ghz powerpc g5 processor.
xserve g5 includes a system controller with up to 16gb of pc3200 error
correcting code memory; three hot-plug serial ata drive modules that deliver up
to 1.5tb of storage; and dual on-board gigabit ethernet for high-performance
networking. the companys xserve raid storage system was updated in september2005
to deliver up to 7 terabytes of storage capacity and also expanded support for
heterogeneous environments. the dual independent raid controllers with 512mb
cache per controller offer sustained throughput of over 385 mbpshigh enough to
support media production environments using
protected raid level 5.
imac
the imac line of desktop
computers is targeted at consumer and education markets. in
october2005, the company introduced the new imac g5, featuring the
powerpc g5 processor, a built-in isight video camera, and a design that
integrates the entire computer into either a 17-inch or 20-inch widescreen lcd
flat-panel display. the 17-inch and 20-inch models come with 1.9ghz and 2.1ghz
powerpc g5 processors, respectively. the imac g5 offers 512mb of 533mhz ddr2
memory expandable to 2.5gb and 7200 rpm serial ata drives expandable up to
500gb. the imac g5 comes standard with ati radeon x600 pro or xt graphics,
video memory, a superdrive, built-in airport extreme wireless networking, an
internal bluetooth module, built-in stereo speakers and microphone, and mighty
mouse. the imac g5 also offers built-in ethernet (10/100/1000base-t), three usb
2.0 and two firewire 400 ports. the imac g5 also features front row media
experience with the apple remote, which allows users to play music and view
photos and videos via a remote control.
emac
the emac, a desktop
personal computer targeted at the companys education customers, features a
powerpc g4 processor, a high resolution 17-inch flat cathode ray tube display,
and preserves the all-in-one
compact design of the
original imac. the emac offers powerpc g4 processors running at up to 1.42ghz,
333mhz ddr memory, an optional superdrive, built-in modem and ethernet
(10/100base-t), ati radeon graphics, airport extreme-ready, and usb 2.0 and 1.1
ports for connectivity to peripherals.
mac mini
in january2005, the
company introduced mac mini, a desktop personal computer with a starting price
of $499 and weighing as little as 2.9 pounds. in july2005, the company
updated its mac mini lineup, expanding to three models and increasing memory to
512mb. the first model includes a 1.25ghz powerpc g4 processor, a 40gb hard
drive, and a combo drive. the second model includes a 1.42ghz powerpc g4
processor, an 80gb hard drive, and a combo drive. the third model includes a
1.42ghz powerpc g4 processor, an 80gb hard drive, and a superdrive. all models
include ati radeon 9200 graphics with 32mb of dedicated ddr memory, built-in
ethernet (10/100 base-t), one firewire 400 and two usb 2.0 ports, and a dvi
interface that also supports vga so consumers can connect to lcd or crt
displays. the 1.42ghz models of the mac mini also include built-in airport
extreme for 54 mbps 802.11g wireless networking along with an internal
bluetooth module.
powerbook
the powerbook family of
portable computers is designed to meet the mobile computing needs of
professionals and advanced consumer users. in october2005, the company
updated its powerbook g4 notebooks with extended battery life as well as higher
resolution displays, including 1440 by 960 pixels in the 15-inch model and 1680
by 1050 pixels in the 17-inch model. both the 15-inch and 17-inch powerbook g4
offer a 1.67ghz powerpc g4 processor and the ati mobility radeon 9700 graphics
processor. the 12-inch powerbook g4 features a 1.5ghz powerpc processor, and
the nvidia geforce fx go5200 graphics processor. every powerbook g4 notebook
comes with a superdrive, 512mb of ddr memory, built-in airport extreme wireless
networking, an internal bluetooth module for wireless connectivity, as well as
a full complement of i/o ports including firewire 400, usb 2.0, and a built-in
56k v.92 modem and ethernet (10/100base-t), for connectivity to a wide range of
peripherals. the 15-inch and 17-inch powerbook g4 models also include built-in
gigabit ethernet and firewire 800.
ibook
the ibook is designed to
meet the portable computing needs of education and consumer users. in july2005,
the company upgraded its ibook g4 line to include faster powerpc g4 processors
running up to 1.42ghz, built-in airport extreme 54 mpbs 802.11g wireless
networking and an available slot-load superdrive. the 12-inch model features a
1.33ghz powerpc g4 processor and a slot-load combo drive, while the 14-inch
model includes a 1.42ghz g4 processor and a superdrive. all ibook g4 models
offer a full complement of i/o ports including firewire 400, usb 2.0, a
built-in 56k v.92 modem and ethernet (10/100base-t), as well as a built-in
internal wireless bluetooth module, for connectivity to a wide range of
peripherals.
music products and
services
the company offers its
ipod line of digital music players and related accessories to macintosh and
windows users. the company also provides an online service to distribute
third-party music, audio books, music videos, short films, and television shows
through its itunes music store.
ipod
the ipod is the companys portable digital music
player, featuring the companys patent pending click wheel, which combines a
touch-sensitive wheel with five push buttons for one-handed navigation. in october2005,
the company introduced the new ipod containing a 2.5-inch color screen that can
display album artwork and photos and play video including music videos, video
podcasts, home movies, short films, and television shows. the ipod lineup includes a 30gb model holding
up to 7,500 songs, 25,000 photos, or
75 hours of video, and a 60gb model holding up to
15,000 songs, 25,000 photos, or 150 hours of video. the ipod features the
companys patent pending auto-sync technology that automatically downloads
digital music, podcasts, photos, audio books, home movies, music videos, short
films, and television shows onto the ipod and keeps it up-to-date whenever it
is plugged into a macintosh or windows computer using usb. the ipod also
features shuffle songs, which randomly plays songs in a selected playlist or
across the entire library. all ipods work with the companys itunes digital
music management software on either a macintosh or windows computer.
the ipods functionality
extends beyond playing music, listening to audio books, and watching music
videos, short films, home movies, and television shows. other key capabilities
include data storage, calendar and contact information utility, and a selection
of games. with the addition of third-party ipod peripherals, the capabilities
of certain ipods can be enhanced to include photo downloading directly from
certain digital cameras. the company has also entered into alliances with many
automobile manufacturers to offer seamless integration of the ipod in certain
automobiles. along with the ipod, the company has developed the itunes software
and the itunes music store, a service that consumers may use to purchase
third-party music, audio books, music videos, short films, and television shows
over the internet.
ipod nano
in september2005,
the company introduced ipod nano, a flash-memory based digital music player. the
ipod nano is available in either a 2gb model holding up to 500 songs or 25,000
photos, or a 4gb model holding up to 1,000 songs or 25,000 photos. the ipod
nano, which weighs as little as 1.5 ounces and is .27inches thin,
features a color screen and the companys patent pending click wheel.
ipod shuffle
in january2005, the
company introduced ipod shuffle, a flash-memory based digital music player,
which is based on ipods shuffle feature that randomly selects songs from the
users music library or playlists. ipod shuffle works with itunes and its
patent-pending autofill feature that automatically selects songs to fill ipod
shuffle from a users music library on their computer. ipod shuffle can also be
used as a portable usb flash drive with up to 1gb of storage space. it is
available in a 512mb model holding up to 120 songs and a 1gb model holding up
to 240 songs.
itunes music store
the companys itunes music store, available for both windows-based
and macintosh computers, is a service that allows customers to find, purchase,
and download third-party digital music, audio books, music videos, short films,
and television shows. the itunes music store also offers podcast directory that
allows users to search for and download audio programs to their computer and
automatically receive new episodes over the internet. users can search the
contents of the store catalog to locate works by title, artist, or album, or
browse the entire contents of the store by genre and artist. users can also
listen to a free 30-second preview of content available through the
store. the itunes music store was originally introduced in the u.s. in april2003
and now serves customers in 21 countries.
the itunes music store is
fully integrated directly into the itunes software allowing customers to
preview, purchase, download, organize, share, and transfer digital content to
an ipod using a single software application. further discussion on the itunes
software may be found below under the heading software products and computer
technologies. the itunes music store offers customers a broad range of
personal rights to the third-party content they have purchased. content
purchased through the store may also be used in certain applications such as
iphoto, imovie, and idvd. additional features of the itunes music store
include gift certificates that can be sent via e-mail; prepaid gift cards; an allowance
feature that enables users to automatically deposit funds into an itunes music
store account every month; online gift options that let customers give specific
songs, albums, music videos, or their own playlists to anyone with an email
address; parental controls; and album reviews.
peripheral products
the company sells various
apple-branded computer hardware peripherals, including isight digital video
cameras and a range of high quality flat panel tft active-matrix digital color
displays. the company also sells a variety of third-party macintosh compatible
hardware products directly to end users through both its retail and online
stores, including computer printers and printing supplies, storage devices,
computer memory, digital video and still cameras, personal digital assistants,
and various other computing products and supplies.
isight
the companys isight
digital video camera enables video conferencing over broadband connections.
isight is a small, portable aluminum alloy camera with all audio, video, and
power provided by a single firewire cable. isight is designed to be center-mounted
on the top of a computer screen and uses its integrated tilt and rotate
mechanism to easily position the camera for natural, face-to-face video
conferencing. isight features an auto focusing auto exposure f/2.8 lens that
captures high-quality pictures and full-motion video. with its on-board
processor, isight automatically adjusts color, white balance, sharpness and
contrast to provide high-quality images with accurate color reproduction in
most lighting conditions. isight also includes a dual-element microphone that
suppresses ambient noise for clear digital audio.
displays
the company offers a
family of widescreen flat panel displays featuring the 30-inch apple cinema hd
display, a widescreen active-matrix lcd with 2560-by-1600 pixel resolution, a
23-inch widescreen apple cinema display with 1920-by-1200 pixel resolution and
a 20-inch widescreen apple cinema display with 1680-by-1050 pixel resolution.
the displays feature dual firewire and dual usb 2.0 ports built into the
display and use the industry standard dvi interface for a pure digital
connection with the companys latest power mac and powerbook systems. the
cinema displays feature an aluminum design with a very thin bezel, suspended by
an aluminum stand that allows viewing angle adjustment.
software
products and computer technologies
the company offers a range
of software products for education, creative, consumer and business customers,
including mac os x, the companys proprietary operating system software for the
macintosh; server software and related solutions; professional application
software; and consumer, education and business oriented application software.
operating system
software
in april2005, the
company began shipping mac os x tiger, the companys fifth major version of mac
os x. tiger incorporates more than 200 new features and innovations including
spotlight, a desktop search technology that lets users find items stored on
their macintosh computers, including documents, emails, contacts and images;
and dashboard, a new way to instantly access information such as weather
forecasts and stock quotes, using a new class of mini-applications called
widgets. the server version of the mac os operating system, mac os x server
version 10.4, also began shipping in april2005.
server software and
server solutions
apple remote desktop 2 is the second generation of
the companys asset management, software distribution, and help desk support
software. apple remote desktop 2 includes more than 50 features for centrally
managing mac os x systems. apple remote desktop 2 can perform a wide range of
desktop management tasks such as installing operating system and application
software, running hardware and software inventory reports, and executing
commands on one or more remote mac os x systems on the network. remote software
installation tools allow it professionals to install single or multiple
software packages immediately or at specific dates and times. comprehensive
hardware and software reports based on more than 200 system information
attributes allow administrators to keep track of their mac os x
systems. in addition, built-in real-time screen
sharing enables help desk professionals to provide online assistance by
observing and controlling the desktops of any remote macintosh or virtual
network computing-enabled computer, including windows and linux systems.
xsan, the companys
enterprise-class storage area network (san) file system, began shipping in january2005.
xsan is a 64-bit cluster file system for mac os x that enables organizations to
consolidate storage resources and provide multiple computers with concurrent
file-level read/write access to shared volumes over fibre channel. advanced
features such as metadata controller failover and fibre channel multipathing
ensure high availability; file-level locking allows multiple systems to read
and write concurrently to the same volume which is ideal for complex workflows;
bandwidth reservation provides for effective ingestion of bandwidth-intensive
data streams, such as high resolution video; and flexible volume management
results in more efficient use of storage resources. since xsan is interoperable
with adics stornext file system, it can be used in heterogeneous environments
that include windows, unix, and linux server operating system platforms.
professional application
software
in april2005, the company announced final cut
studio, a high definition (hd) video production suite that features final cut
pro 5, the companys editing software for digital video (dv), standard
definition (sd), hd, and film. final cut studio also includes tools that
complement final cut pro 5 such as soundtrack pro, a new application that
gives audio and video professionals a way to create, control and repair audio;
motion 2, an application that allows real-time motion graphics design; and dvd
studio pro 4, dvd authoring software that burns dvds, including high
definition dvds to the latest hd dvd specification. these components of final
cut studio are also sold separately.
final cut pro 5, the latest version of the companys
video editing software, which began shipping in april2005, includes
editing tools that work with most formats, from dv and native high definition
video (hdv) to fully uncompressed hd. final cut pro 5 acquires hdv media via
firewire and keeps it in the original format, transferring it into the system
without any generation loss. with a real-time multi-stream effects
architecture, multicam editing tools, and advanced color correction, final cut
pro 5 enables users to view and cut from multiple sources in real time, group
up to 128 sources together into multi-clips, then add or subtract cameras at
any time. final cut pro 5 allows users to use external audio control surfaces
to mix and record multiple fader automations simultaneously.
soundtrack pro is a new audio editing and sound
design application that gives audio and video professionals a way to create,
control, and repair audio. soundtrack pro features a waveform editor with
flexible action layers that allow users to re-order, bypass, or change any
edit, effect, or process. find-and-fix features identify and repair common
audio problems such as background noise, pops, clicks, and hum. an integrated
multitrack mixer allows editors to apply common effects to multiple tracks and
group common tracks using busses. soundtrack pro also features over 50
professional plug-ins for creating sounds, over 5,000 loops, an integrated
mixer, and integration with final cut studio.
motion 2 is a real-time motion graphics software that
enables final cut pro editors to add motion graphics to their projects. motion
2 features interactive animation of text and graphics for dvd motion menus,
video or film in real time, and quick output rendering by built-in gpu
acceleration at 8-bit, 16-bit, or 32-bit float film quality. with motion 2s
new design tool, replicator, users can automatically generate and animate
multiple copies of a graphic, shape, or movie.
dvd studio pro 4 is the latest version of the companys
professional dvd authoring application. with dvd studio pro 4 and its
integrated, scalable h.264 encoding, users can author sd or hd dvds. dvd studio
pro 4 allows users to preview hd content in real time with a second digital
cinema desktop and audition surround sound using s/pdif (digital audio) out to
an external dts or dolby digital (ac-3) decoder. its interactive graphical view
also enables users to edit/display menus, tracks, slideshows, scripts,
and stories of a dvd project in a storyboard layout.
dvd studio pro 4 includes compressor 2, a full-featured video and audio
compression application. compressor gives users control over encoding,
including the ability to encode several clips in one batch operation to a wide
variety of formats and perform advanced format conversions at the same time.
in april2005, the company announced shake 4, an
upgrade to the companys compositing software, which began shipping in june2005.
used to create visual effects for film and television,shake 4 features 3d
multi-plane compositing, optical flow image processing and integration with
final cut pro 5. users can composite live action and 3d cgi layers with added
realism using opengl accelerated 3d multi-plane compositing node. other
features include advanced optical flow technology that uses pixel-by-pixel
image analysis to create smooth retiming and automatic stabilization. shake 4
also integrates truelight monitor calibration to maintain color consistency
between the computer screen and the final look on film.
logic pro 7 is used by musicians around the world and
by professionals in music production and film scoring. it combines digital
music composition, notation, and audio production facilities in one
comprehensive product and includes software instruments such as sculpture, a
component-modeling based synthesizer; ultrabeat, a drum synthesizer with
built-in step sequencer; and digital signal processing (dsp) plug-ins including
guitar amp pro, a full-featured guitar amplifier simulator. along with workflow
enhancements, mastering plug-ins, and support for apple loops, logic pro 7 adds
distributed audio processing, a technology that allows professionals to utilize
multiple macintosh systems to expand available dsp power via an ethernet
network.
in october2005, the
company announced aperture, began shipping in november2005. aperture is
an application designed to provide professional photographers with
post-production tools to manage, edit, and publish digital pictures. features include
compare and select tools, nondestructive image processing, color managed
printing, and custom web and book publishing. compare and select tools in
aperture allow photographers to sift through photo projects and identify their
final selections. raw images are maintained natively throughout aperture
without any intermediate conversion process, and can be retouched using a suite
of adjustment tools designed especially for photographers. print options
include customizable contact sheets, high-quality local printing, and
color-managed online prints. aperture also provides a layout environment where
photographers can create and order custom books and publish web galleries.
consumer, education
and business oriented application software
ilife 05
in january2005, the company introduced ilife
05, an upgrade to its digital lifestyle suite, which features iphoto, imovie,
idvd, garageband, and itunes.
iphoto 5 is the companys consumer-oriented digital
photo software application. iphoto 5 includes advanced editing tools, adds
support for uncompressed raw photos, and includes a slideshow builder allowing
users to apply effects, transitions and durations to each individual slide.
iphoto 5 allows users to create and order hardcover and softcover photo books
using a variety of book layouts with double-sided printing, directly within the
application.
imovie hd, a consumer-oriented digital video editing
software application, enables users to import hdv from hdv camcorders and edit
digital videos on their macintosh computers. imovie hd also includes magic
imovie, which automatically imports video into separate clips and adds titles,
transitions and music. imovie hd imports video from hdv and standard dv
camcorders, and from video cameras that generate mpeg-4 video.
idvd is a consumer-oriented software application that
enables users to turn imovie files, quicktime files, and digital pictures into
dvds that can be played on most consumer dvd players. idvd 5 includes 15 new
themes featuring moving drop zones that can display video clips or photos in
motion across dvd menus. idvd 5 also features onestep dvd, which automatically
creates a dvd from footage directly from a users camcorder. with a compatible
superdrive, idvd 5 supports all recordable single-layer and double-layer dvd
format standards.
garageband is a consumer-oriented music creation
software application. garageband 2 adds 8-track recording so that users can
record multiple digital audio tracks at once. garageband 2 can improve
out-of-tune notes and timing in both vocal and real-instrument recordings.
garageband 2 displays and edits musical notation in real time for software
instrument tracks for people who know how to read and write music or want to learn.
with garageband jam packs, including the latest, jam pack 4: symphony
orchestra, garageband users can create music in their favorite genres.
ilife 05 also includes itunes, the companys digital
music jukebox software application that allows users to purchase a variety of digital
content available through the companys itunes music store. itunes organizes
content using searching, browsing, and playlists, and also includes features
such as imix playlist sharing and provides integration with the complete family
of ipods. in october2005, the company introduced itunes 6, the latest
version of its itunes software. itunes 6 allows users to purchase and download
music videos, short films, and television shows from the itunes music store,
watch them on their computers, and auto-sync them onto their ipod.
in september2005,
the company, motorola inc., and cingular wireless llc announced the
availability of a mobile phone with itunes software (motorola rokr), enabling
users to transfer up to 100 songs from the itunes library on their macintosh or
windows-based computers to their motorola rokr mobile phones.
iwork 05
in january2005, the company introduced iwork 05,
productivity software designed to take advantage of both mac os x and ilife 05
to help users create, present, and publish documents and presentations. iwork 05
introduced pages, a word processor, and also features keynote 2, an updated
version of the companys presentation software.
pages gives users the tools to create letters,
newsletters, reports, brochures and resumes with advanced typography, multiple
columns, footnotes, tables of content and styles. with features like dynamic
text wrapping and alignment guides, pageslets users create free-form
arrangements of text, graphics, photos, tables, and charts. an integrated ilife
media browser lets users drag and drop photos from the iphoto library directly
into documents.
keynote 2 is the companys presentation software that
gives users the ability to create presentations, portfolios, interactive
slideshows, and storyboards. keynote 2 contains slide animations to synchronize
the movement of multiple objects and cinematic real-time animated text. the
ilife media browser within keynote allows users to insert photos, movies, and
music directly into presentations, and with image masking, users can frame the
exact part of the photo they want to display. keynote 2 can also work with a second
monitor to display upcoming slides, notes, and a timer.
in january2005, the company announced final cut
express hd, an update to final cut express, which began shipping in february2005.
final cut express hd enables users to capture, edit, and output hdv over a
single firewire cable, and supports digital cinema desktop with multiple
displays. final cut express hd features sound editing tools including 99 audio
tracks, real-time volume and audio filter adjustment, a voice-over tool, and
soundtrack music creation software that allows users to compose musical scores
for their videos. final cut express hd includes livetype, which can add
hd-quality
animated text and motion graphics to videos. in
addition, imovie projects can be imported directly into final cut express hd
with all of their effects, transitions, and audio levels intact.
logic express 7 is a streamlined version of logic pro
7 that provides a basic set of professional tools to compose and produce music
for students, educators, and advanced hobbyists. its high-resolution audio of
up to 24-bit/96khz, the adaptive self-configuring track mixer, and 32-bit
floating-point math provide professional sound quality. logic express 7 comes
with support for projects from garageband offering users a smooth migration
path to high-end audio production.
filemaker,inc., a
wholly owned subsidiary of the company, develops, publishes, and distributes
desktop-based database management application software for either a macintosh
or windows-based computer. the filemaker pro database
software and related products offer relational databases and desktop-to-web
publishing capabilities. filemaker pro 8, the newest version of the desktop
database introduced in august2005, features new ways to share and manage
information of various types. filemaker pro 8 allows users to convert graphic-rich reports
of their data into alternative file formats, which can be emailed for sharing
with non-filemaker users.
internet software and services
the company is focused on
delivering seamless integration with and access to the internet throughout the
companys products and services. the companys internet solutions adhere to
many industry standards in order to provide an optimized user experience
through interoperability.
safari
safari, the companys mac
os x compatible web browser, uses the advanced interface technologies
underlying mac os x and includes built-in google search; snapback to instantly
return to search results; a way to name, organize and present bookmarks; tabbed
browsing; and automatic pop-up ad blocking.
quicktime
quicktime, the companys multimedia software for
macintosh or windows-based computers, features streaming of live and stored
video and audio over the internet and playback of high-quality audio and video
on computers. quicktime 7 features a new video codec called h.264, which
delivers high video quality at low data rates. quicktime 7 automatically
determines a users connection speed to ensure they are getting the
highest-quality content stream possible. quicktime 7 also delivers
multi-channel audio and supports audio formats, including aiff, wav, mov, mp4
(aac only), caf, and aac/adts.
the company offers several
other quicktime products. quicktime 7 pro, a suite of software tools, allows
creation and editing of internet-ready audio and video files. quicktime 7 pro allows
users to create h.264 video, capture audio and video, create multi-channel
audio, and export multiple files while playing back or editing video. quicktime
streaming server facilitates the broadcasting of streaming digital video. quicktime
broadcaster allows users to produce professional-quality live events for online
delivery.
.mac
the companys .mac offering is a suite of internet
services that for an annual fee provides macintosh users with a powerful set of
internet tools. .mac services include: homepage, for personal web sites; idisk,
a virtual hard drive accessible anywhere with internet access; .mac sync, which
keeps safari bookmarks, ical calendars, address book information, keychain
(passwords), and mac os x mail preferences up-to-date across multiple macintosh
computers and available via web browser when users are away from their mac;
.mac mail, an ad-free email service; and learning center, featuring tutorials
for certain software applications. the current version of .mac includes .mac
groups, a service that helps members communicate, coordinate schedules, and
stay in sync with private groups of friends or colleagues; an
updated version of .mac
backup software that allows members to archive the content of their ilife home
folder; and a four-fold increase in combined idisk and email storage to 1gb for
individuals and 2gb for families.
wireless
connectivity and networking
airport extreme
airport extreme is the
companys next generation wi-fi wireless networking technology. airport extreme
is based on the 802.11g standard, which supports speeds up to 54 mbps, and is
fully compatible with most wi-fi devices that use the 802.11b standard. airport
extreme base stations can serve up to 50 macintosh and windows users
simultaneously, provide wireless bridging to extend the range beyond just one
base station, and support usb printer sharing to allow multiple users to
wirelessly share usb printers connected directly to the base station.
airport express
airport express is the
first 802.11g mobile base station that can be plugged directly into the wall
for wireless internet connections and usb printing. airport express also
features analog and digital audio outputs that can be connected to a stereo and
airtunes music networking software which works with itunes, giving users a way
to wirelessly stream itunes music from their macintosh or windows-based
computer to any room in the house. airport express features a single piece
design weighing 6.7 ounces.
other
connectivity and networking solutions
mac os x includes capabilities for bluetooth
technology. bluetooth is an industry standard for wirelessly connecting
computers and peripherals that supports transmission of data at up to 3 mbps
within a range of approximately 30 feet. the companys bluetooth technology for
mac os x lets customers wirelessly share files between macintosh systems,
synchronize and share contact information with palm-os based pdas, and access
the internet through bluetooth-enabled cell phones. a bluetooth usb adaptor can
bluetooth-enable any usb-based macintosh computer running in mac os x version
10.1.4 or higher.
bonjour, the companys zero configuration networking
technology, is based on open internet engineering task force (ietf) standard protocols
such as ip, arp, and dns and is built into mac os x. this technology uses
industry standard networking protocols and zero configuration technology
including ethernet or 802.11-based wireless networks like the companys airport
products. the source code for this technology also includes software to support
unix, linux, and windows-based systems and devices.
the company developed
firewire technology, also referred to as ieee 1394, which is a high-speed
serial i/o technology for connecting digital devices such as digital camcorders
and cameras to desktop and portable computers. with its high data-transfer
speed and hot plug-and-play capability, firewire has become an established
cross-platform industry standard for both consumers and professionals. firewire
is currently integrated in all macintosh systems.
product support and services
applecare offers a range of support options for the companys
customers. these options include assistance that is built into software
products, printed and electronic product manuals, online support including
comprehensive product information as well as technical assistance, and the
applecare protection plan. the applecare protection plan is a fee-based service
that typically includes three years of phone support and hardware repairs,
dedicated web-based support resources, and user diagnostic tools.
markets and distribution
the companys customers
are primarily in the education, creative, consumer, and business markets. the
company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and
regional retailers and
cataloguers. no individual
customer accounted for more than 10% of net sales in 2005, 2004, or 2003. the
company also sells many of its products and resells certain third-party
products in most of its major markets directly to consumers, education
customers, and businesses through its retail and online stores in the u.s. and
internationally. over 12% of the companys net sales in 2005 were through its
u.s. education channel, including sales to elementary and secondary schools,
higher education institutions, and individual customers.
competition
the company is confronted by aggressive competition in
all areas of its business. the market for personal computers and related
software and peripheral products is highly competitive. this market continues
to be characterized by rapid technological advances in both hardware and
software that have substantially increased the capabilities and use of personal
computers and have resulted in the frequent introduction of new products with
competitive price, feature, and performance characteristics. over the past
several years, price competition in the market for personal computers has been
particularly intense. the companys competitors who sell personal computers
based on other operating systems have aggressively cut prices and lowered their
product margins to gain or maintain market share. the companys results of
operations and financial condition can be adversely affected by these and other
industry-wide downward pressures on gross margins.
the principal competitive factors in the market for
personal computers include price, relative price/performance, product quality
and reliability, design innovation, availability of software, product features,
marketing and distribution capability, service and support, availability of
hardware peripherals, and corporate reputation. further, as the personal
computer industry and its customers place more reliance on the internet, an
increasing number of internet devices that are smaller, simpler, and less
expensive than traditional personal computers may compete for market share with
the companys existing products.
the company is currently taking and will continue to
take steps to respond to the competitive pressures being placed on its personal
computer sales as a result of innovations from competing platforms. the companys
future operating results and financial condition are substantially dependent on
its ability to continue to develop improvements to the macintosh platform in
order to maintain perceived functional and design advantages over competing
platforms.
the companys services and
products relating to music and other creative content have already encouraged
significant competition from other companies, many of whom have greater financial,
marketing, and manufacturing resources than those of the company. the company
faces increasing competition from other companies promoting their own digital
music products and distribution services, subscription services, and free
peer-to-peer music services. the company anticipates that competition will
intensify as hardware, software, and content providers work more
collaboratively to offer integrated products competing with the companys
offerings. however, the company believes it currently maintains a competitive
advantage by more effectively integrating an entire solution, including the
hardware (ipod), software (itunes), and distribution of third-party digital
content (itunes music store).
raw materials
although most components essential to the companys
business are generally available from multiple sources, certain key components
(including microprocessors and application-specific integrated circuits (asics))
are currently obtained by the company from single or limited sources. some
other key components, while currently available to the company from multiple
sources, are at times subject to industry-wide availability constraints and
pricing pressures. in addition, the company uses some components that are not
common to the rest of the personal computer and consumer electronics
industries, and new products introduced by the company often initially utilize
custom components
obtained from only one source until the company has
evaluated whether there is a need for, and subsequently qualifies, additional
suppliers. if the supply of a key or single-sourced component to the
company were to be delayed or curtailed or in the event a key manufacturing
vendor delays shipments of completed products to the company, the companys
ability to ship related products in desired quantities and in a timely manner
could be adversely affected. the company did experience such delays during 2004
and 2005 related to powerpc g5 processors, which resulted in the constrained
availability of certain products. the companys business and financial
performance could also be adversely affected depending on the time required to
obtain sufficient quantities from the original source, or to identify and
obtain sufficient quantities from an alternative source. continued availability
of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate
on the production of common components instead of components customized to meet
the companys requirements. in june2005, the company announced its
intention to transition its macintosh computers using the powerpc g5 and g4
microprocessors, which are currently single-sourced, to intel microprocessors
by the end of calendar year 2007. the announcement of this transition may
impact the continued availability on acceptable terms of certain components and
services, including powerpc g5 and g4 microprocessors. the company attempts to
mitigate these potential risks by working closely with these and other key
suppliers on product introduction plans, strategic inventories, coordinated product
introductions, and internal and external manufacturing schedules and levels.
consistent with industry practice, the company acquires components through a
combination of formal purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders
based on projected demand information. the companys purchase commitments typically cover its requirements for periods
ranging from 30 to 150 days.
the company believes there
are several component suppliers and manufacturing vendors whose loss to the
company could have a material adverse effect upon the companys business and
financial position. at this time, such vendors include agere systems,inc.,
ambit microsystems corporation, asustek corporation, ati technologies,inc.,
broadcom corporation, cypress semiconductor corporation, freescale
semiconductor,inc., hitachi global storage technologies, hon hai
precision industry co., ltd., ibm corporation, intel corporation, international
display technology, inventec appliances corporation, lg. phillips co., ltd.,
matsushita, mitsubishi electric corporation, nvidia corp., portalplayer,inc.,
quanta computer,inc., samsung electronics, synaptics,inc., and
toshiba corporation.
research and development
because the personal
computer and consumer electronics industries are characterized by rapid
technological advances, the companys ability to compete successfully is
heavily dependent upon its ability to ensure a continuing and timely flow of
competitive products and technology to the marketplace. the company continues
to develop new products and technologies and to enhance existing products in
the areas of hardware and peripherals, consumer electronic products, system
software, applications software, networking and communications software and
solutions, and the internet. the company may expand the range of its product
offerings and intellectual property through licensing and/or acquisition of
third-party business and technology. the companys research and development
expenditures totaled $534million, $489million, and
$471million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively.
patents,
trademarks, copyrights and licenses
the company currently holds rights to patents and
copyrights relating to certain aspects of its computer systems, ipods,
peripherals and software. in addition, the company has registered, and/or has
applied to register, trademarks and service marks in the u.s. and a number of
foreign countries for apple, the apple logo, macintosh, ipod, itunes, itunes
music store, and numerous other trademarks and service marks. although the
company believes the ownership of such patents, copyrights, trademarks and
service marks is an important factor in its business and that its success does
depend in part on the
ownership thereof, the company relies primarily on the
innovative skills, technical competence, and marketing abilities of its
personnel.
many of the companys
products are designed to include intellectual property obtained from
third-parties. while it may be necessary in the future to seek or renew
licenses relating to various aspects of its products and business methods, the
company believes that, based upon past experience and industry practice, such
licenses generally could be obtained on commercially reasonable terms; however,
there is no guarantee that such licenses could be obtained at all. because of
technological changes in the computer industry, current extensive patent
coverage, and the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, it is possible certain
components of the companys products and business methods may unknowingly infringe
existing patents of others. from time to time, the company has been notified
that it may be infringing certain patents or other intellectual property rights
of third-parties.
foreign
and domestic operations and geographic data
the u.s. represents the companys largest geographic
marketplace. approximately 60% of the companys net sales in 2005 came from
sales to customers inside the u.s. final assembly of products sold by the
company is conducted in the companys manufacturing facility in cork, ireland,
and by external vendors in fremont, california, fullerton, california, taiwan,
korea, the peoples republic of china, and the czech republic. currently,
manufacture of many of the components used in the companys products and final
assembly of substantially all of the companys portable products including
powerbooks, ibooks, and ipods are performed by third-party vendors in china.
margins on sales of the companys products in foreign countries, and on sales
of products that include components obtained from foreign suppliers, can be
adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and by
international trade regulations, including tariffs and antidumping penalties.
information regarding
financial data by geographic segment is set forth in partii, item 8 of
this form10-k in the notes to consolidated financial statements at
note 11, segment information and geographic data.
seasonal business
the company has
historically experienced increased net sales in its first and fourth fiscal
quarters compared to other quarters in its fiscal year due to seasonal demand
related to the holiday season and the beginning of the school year. this
historical pattern should not be considered a reliable indicator of the companys
future net sales or financial performance.
warranty
the company offers a basic
limited parts and labor warranty on its hardware products. the basic warranty
period for hardware products is typically one year from the date of purchase by
the end-user. the company also offers a 90-day basic warranty for its
service parts used to repair the companys hardware products. in addition,
consumers may purchase extended service coverage on most of the companys
hardware products in all of its major markets.
backlog
in the companys
experience, the actual amount of product backlog at any particular time is not
a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. in particular,
backlog often increases in anticipation of or immediately following new product
introductions because of over-ordering by dealers anticipating shortages.
backlog often is reduced once dealers and customers believe they can obtain
sufficient supply. because of the foregoing, backlog should not be considered a
reliable indicator of the companys ability to achieve any particular level of
revenue or financial performance.
environmental laws
compliance with federal, state, local, and foreign
laws enacted for the protection of the environment has to date had no material
effect on the companys capital expenditures, earnings, or competitive position.
in the future, these laws could have a material adverse effect on the company.
production and marketing
of products in certain states and countries may subject the company to
environmental and other regulations including, in some instances, the
requirement that the company provide consumers with the ability to return to
the company product at the end of its useful life, and place responsibility for
environmentally safe disposal or recycling with the company. such laws and
regulations have recently been passed in several jurisdictions in which the
company operates, including various european union member states, japan, and
california. in the future, these laws could have a material adverse effect on
the company.
employees
as of september24,
2005, the company had approximately 14,800 full-time equivalent employees and
an additional 2,020 temporary employees and contractors.
available information
the companys annual
report on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q, current reports
on form8-k, and amendments to reports filed pursuant to sections 13(a)and
15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, are available on
its website at http://www.apple.com/investor when such reports are available on
the u.s. securities and exchange commission (sec) website. the public may read
and copy any materials filed by the company with the sec at the secs public
reference roomat 100 f street, ne, room1580, washington, dc 20549. the
public may obtain information on the operation of the public reference roomby
calling the sec at 1-800-sec-0330. the sec maintains an internet site that
contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information
regarding issuers that file electronically with the sec at http://www.sec.gov. the
contents of these websites are not incorporated into this filing. further, the
companys references to the urls for these websites are intended to be inactive
textual references only.
item 2. properties
the companys headquarters are located in cupertino,
california. the company has manufacturing facilities in cork, ireland. as of
september24, 2005, the company leased approximately 3.6 million square
feet of space, primarily in the u.s., and to a lesser extent, in europe, japan,
canada, and the asia pacific region. the major facility leases are for terms of
5 to 15 years and generallyprovide renewal options for terms of 3 to 5
additional years. leased space includes approximately 902,000 square feet of
retail space, a majority of which is in the u.s. lease terms for retail space
range from 5 to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often
contain multi-year renewal options.
the company owns a 352,000 square-foot manufacturing
facility in cork, ireland that also houses a customer support call center. the
company also owns a 752,000 square-foot facility in sacramento, california that
houses warehousing and distribution operations as well as a customer support
call center. in addition, the company owns approximately 942,000 square feet of
facilities located in cupertino, california, used for research and development
and corporate functions. outside the u.s., the company owns additional
facilities totaling approximately 169,000 square feet.
the company believes its
existing facilities and equipment are well maintained and in good operating
condition. the company has invested in internal capacity and strategic
relationships with outside manufacturing vendors, and therefore believes it has
adequate manufacturing capacity for the foreseeable future. the company
continues to make investments in capital equipment as needed to meet
anticipated demand for its products.
item 3. legal proceedings
the company is subject to
various legal proceedings and claims that are discussed below. the company is
also subject to certain other legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in
the ordinary course of business and which have not been fully adjudicated. in
the opinion of management, the company does not have a potential liability
related to any current legal proceedings and claims that would individually or
in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on its financial condition,
liquidity or results of operations. however, the results of legal proceedings
cannot be predicted with certainty. should the company fail to prevail in any
of these legal matters or should several of these legal matters be resolved
against the company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a
particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. the company
settled certain matters during 2005 that did not individually or in the
aggregate have a material impact on the companys results of operations.
advanced audio
devices llc v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff advanced audio
devices (aad) filed this action on march3, 2005 in the united states
district court for the northern district of illinois, eastern division,
alleging infringement by the company of u.s. patent 6,587,403 entitled music
jukebox. the complaint sought unspecified damages and other relief. the
company filed an answer on may4, 2005 denying all material allegations
and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the parties have reached a
settlement. settlement of this matter did not have a material effect on the
companys financial position or results of operation.
apple
corpsltd. v. apple computer,inc.; apple computer,inc. v.
apple corpsltd.
plaintiff apple corps filed this action on july4,
2003 in the high court of justice, chancery division, in london alleging that
the company has breached a 1991 agreement that resolved earlier trademark
litigation between the parties regarding use of certain apple marks. plaintiff
seeks an injunction, unspecified damages, and other relief. the company filed a
motion on october13, 2003, challenging jurisdiction in the u.k. the court
denied this motion on april7, 2004. the company filed an appeal of the
courts decision but subsequently withdrew the appeal. in november2004,
plaintiff served the company with an amended bill of particulars and on december23,
2004 the company filed a defence. plaintiff has indicated its intention to file
a re-amended bill of particulars. the companys defence to the re-amended bill
of particulars is not yet due. trial is set for the week of march27,
2006.
on october8, 2003,
the company filed a lawsuit against apple corps in the united states district
court for the northern district of california requesting a declaratory judgment
that the company has not breached the 1991 agreement. apple corps challenged
jurisdiction in the california case but the court denied that challenge on march25,
2004. apple corps subsequently prevailed on a motion to stay the california
case during the pendency of the u.k. action. the company has dismissed the
california lawsuit without prejudice.
bader v. anderson;
bader v. apple computer,inc. et. al.
plaintiff filed this
purported shareholder derivative action against the company and each of its
current executive officers and members of its board of directors on may19,
2005 in santa clara county superior court asserting claims for breach of
fiduciary duty, material misstatements and omissions, and violations of california
businesses and professions code 17200 (unfair competition). plaintiff alleges
that the companys march14, 2005 proxy statement was false and misleading
for failure to disclose certain information relating to the apple computer,inc.
performance bonus plan which was approved by shareholders at the annual meeting
held on april21, 2005. plaintiff, who ostensibly brings suit on the
companys behalf, has made no demand on the board of directors and alleges that
such demand is excused. plaintiff seeks injunctive and other relief for
purported injury to the company. on july27, 2005, plaintiff filed an
amended complaint alleging that, in addition to the purported derivative
claims, adoption of the
bonus plan and distribution of the proxy statement describing that plan also
inflicted injury on her
directly
as an individual shareholder. defendants filed a demurrer which is
scheduled to be heard on december6, 2005.
baghdasarian, et
al. v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiffs filed this
action in los angeles county superior court on october31, 2005, on behalf
of a purported nationwide class of all purchasers of all apple wireless
products (router, modem, or adaptor) sold at any time. the complaint alleges
that the company misrepresented the transmission rates of these products. the
complaint alleges causes of action for breach of express warranty and for
violations of the consumer legal remedies act, california business&
professions code 17200 (unfair competition) and california business&
professions code 17500 (false advertising). the complaint seeks damages and
equitable remedies. the companys response to the complaint is not yet due.
branning et al. v.
apple computer,inc.
plaintiffs filed this purported class action in san
francisco county superior court on february17, 2005. the complaint
alleges violations of california business& professions code 17200 (unfair competition) and
violation of the consumer legal remedies act (clra) regarding a variety of
purportedly unfair and unlawful conduct including, but not limited to,
allegedly selling used computers as new and failing to honor warranties.
plantiffs also bring causes of action for misappropriation of trade secrets,
breach of contract, and violation of the song beverly act. plaintiffs request
unspecified damages and other relief. the company received service of the
complaint on march12, 2005, and on march13, 2005 the company filed
a motion to transfer the case to santa clara county superior court. on may9,
2005, the court granted the motion and transferred the case to santa clara
county superior court. on may2, 2005, plaintiffs filed an amended
complaint adding two new named plaintiffs and three new causes of action
including a claim for treble damages under the cartwright act (california business
and professions code 16700 et
seq.) and a claim for false advertising. the company filed a demurrer to the
amended complaint which the court sustained in its entirety on november10,
2005. the court granted plaintiffs leave to amend their complaint.
burrow v. apple
computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
purported class action in orange county superior court on february17,
2005 alleging false advertising regarding the copy protection capabilities of
dvd studio pro. the complaint alleged violations of california business&
professions code 17200
(unfair competition), california business& professions code 17500 (false advertising) and
negligent misrepresentation. plaintiff requested unspecified damages and other
relief. the company filed an answer on april7, 2005 denying all
allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the parties have
reached a settlement. settlement of this matter did not have a material effect
on the companys financial position or results of operation.
butzer, et
al.,v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiffs filed this
action on august23, 2005, in the united states district court for the
northern district of california, san jose division, on behalf of a purported
nationwide class of all purchasers of the companys powerbook g4 portable
computers. the complaint alleges defects in the memory of the computers. the
complaint alleges that this purported defect extends to other series of the
companys portables and states that plaintiffs reserve the right to amend the
complaint to include these other series. plaintiffs assert claims for alleged
violations of california business& professions code 17200 (unfair
competition), california business& professions code 17500 (false
advertising), the consumer legal remedies act and the song-beverly consumer
warranty act. the complaint seeks remedies including restitution and/or damages
and injunctive relief. the company filed an answer on october19, 2005
denying the material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses.
cagney v. apple
computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
purported class action on january9, 2004 in los angeles county superior
court, alleging improper collection of sales tax in transactions involving
mail-in rebates. the complaint alleges violations of california business and
professions code17200
(unfair competition) and seeks restitution and other relief. the company filed
an answer on february20, 2004, denying all allegations and asserting
numerous affirmative defenses. the company filed a motion to disqualify
plaintiffs counsel, which the court denied. the company filed a petition for a
writ of mandate with respect to this ruling and the court of appeal issued an
order to show cause as to why the writ should not issue. plaintiffs lead
counsel subsequently withdrew. on february17, 2005 the court of appeal
ruled that the trial court abused its discretion in failing to grant the
companys motion to disqualify and ordered the trial court to disqualify both
of plaintiffs law firms upon remand. the trial court issued the
disqualification order on may12, 2005. on may9, 2005 plaintiff
substituted new counsel. the company has obtained an opinion on the tax issue
from the state board of equalization. discovery is stayed.
clark v. apple
computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
purported class action on february2, 2005 in santa clara county superior
court alleging defects in the companys yo-yo power adapters. plaintiffs
request unspecified damages and other relief. the parties reached a tentative
settlement in this matter. the court granted preliminary approval of the
settlement on april19, 2005. on november29, 2005, the court
continued the hearing on final settlement approval until january10, 2006,
when all claims will have been received and completely processed and relevant
claim information has been reported to the court. settlement of this matter on
the terms preliminarily approved by the court will not have a material effect
on the companys financial position or results of operation.
compression labs,inc.
v. apple computer,inc., et al.; apple v. compression labs,inc., et
al.
plaintiff compression labs,inc. filed this
patent infringement action on april22, 2004 against the company and
twenty-seven other defendants in the united states district court for the
eastern district of texas, marshall division, alleging infringement of u.s.
patent 4,698,672 (the 672 patent). plaintiff alleges that the company
infringes the patent by complying with the jpeg standard as defined by ccitt
recommendation t.81 entitled information technologydigital compression and
coding of continuous tone still imagesrequirements and guidelines. plaintiff
seeks unspecified damages and other relief.
on july2, 2004, the
company and several other defendants in the texas action filed a lawsuit in the
united states district court in delaware against compression labs,inc.
and two other companies, requesting a declaratory judgment of noninfringement,
invalidity, implied license, and unenforceability with respect to the 672
patent. additional actions regarding this patent have been filed in other
jurisdictions. on february16, 2005, the panel on multi-district
litigation (mdl) granted a petition filed by certain defendants, seeking
coordination and transfer of all of these cases to one court for pre-trial
proceedings. the mdl panel has transferred all of the cases to the northern
district of california. the defendants in the texas and delaware actions had
filed motions to dismiss prior to the transfer and both motions are still
pending. a markman hearing is set for february13, 2006.
contois music
technology llc v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff contois music technology (contois) filed
this action on june13, 2005 in the united states district court for
vermont, alleging infringement by the company of u.s. patent no.5,864,868,
entitled computer control system and user interface for media playing devices.
the complaint, which was served on october4, 2005, seeks unspecified
damages and other relief. the company filed an answer on november23, 2005
denying all material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses.
craftv. apple
computer,inc. (filed december23, 2003, santa
clara county superior court); chinv. apple computer,inc.
(filed december23,
2003, san mateo county superior court); hughesv. apple
computer,inc. (filed december23,
2003, santa clara county superior court); westleyv. apple
computer,inc. (filed december26,
2003, san francisco county superior court); keeganv. apple
computer,inc. (filed december30,
2003, alameda county superior court); wagyav. apple computer,inc.
(filed february19,
2004, alameda county superior court); yaminv. apple computer,inc. (filed february24, 2004, los
angeles county superior court); kietav. apple computer,inc. (filed july8, 2004, alameda
county superior court)
eight separate plaintiffs
filed purported class action cases in various california courts alleging
misrepresentations by the company relative to ipod battery life. the complaints
include causes of action for violation of california business and professions
code 17200
(unfair competition), the consumer legal remedies action and claims for false
advertising, fraudulent concealment, and breach of warranty. the complaints
seek unspecified damages and other relief. the cases were consolidated in san
mateo county and plaintiffs thereafter filed a consolidated complaint. on august25,
2004, the company filed an answer denying all allegations and asserting
numerous affirmative defenses. the parties reached a tentative settlement and
the court granted preliminary approval of the settlement on may20, 2005.
the trial court entered an order granting final approval to the settlement on august25,
2005. an appeal challenging the trial
courts approval of the settlement was filed on october24, 2005; the
appeal is pending. settlement of this matter on the terms approved by
the court will not have a material effect on the companys financial position
or results of operations.
a similar complaint
relative to ipod battery life, mosleyv. apple
computer,inc. was filed in westchester county, new york on june23,
2004 alleging violations of new york general business law sections 349 (unfair
competition) and 350 (false advertising). the company removed the case to
federal court and plaintiff filed a motion for remand, which the court has not
yet decided. this case is stayed and is part of the settlement, now on appeal,
referred to above.
a similar complaint related
to the ipod battery life, lenzi v. apple canada,inc.,
was filed in montreal, quebec, canada, on june7, 2005, seeking
authorization to institute a class action on behalf of generations 1, 2 and 3
ipod owners in quebec. a class certification hearing has been scheduled for january12,
2006.
two similar complaints
relative to ipod battery life, wolfe v. apple
and hirst v. apple, were filed in toronto,
ontario, canada on august15, 2005 and september12, 2005,
respectively. both actions define the class as a national class consisting of
all persons in canada who have purchased or who own an ipod. a motion for
certification of the class proceeding has been scheduled for the spring of
2006.
davisv. apple
computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
purported class action in san francisco county superior court on december5,
2002, alleging that the company engaged in unfair and deceptive business
practices relating to its applecare extended service and warranty plan.
plaintiff asserts causes of action for violation of the california business and
professions code 17200
(unfair competition) and 17500
(false advertising), breach of the song-beverly warranty act, intentional
misrepresentation and concealment. plaintiff requests unspecified damages and
other relief. the company filed a demurrer and motion to strike which were
granted, in part, and plaintiff filed an amended complaint. the company filed
an answer on april17, 2003 denying all allegations and asserting numerous
affirmative defenses. plaintiff subsequently amended its complaint. on october29,
2003, the company filed a motion to disqualify plaintiffs counsel in his role
as counsel to the purported class and to the general public. the court granted
the motion but allowed plaintiff to retain substitute counsel. plaintiff did
engage new counsel for the general public, but not for the class. the company
moved to disqualify plaintiffs new counsel and to have the court dismiss the
general public claims for equitable relief. the court declined to disqualify plaintiffs
new counsel or to dismiss the equitable claims, but did confirm that the class
action claims are dismissed. the company appealed the ruling and the case was
stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. the court of appeal denied the appeal
on august17, 2005,
affirming the trial courts decision. the company filed a petition for review
with the california supreme court which was denied on november 23, 2005.
european commission
investigation
the european commission
has notified the company that it is investigating certain matters relating to
the itunes music store in the european union (eu). the european commission is
investigating claims made by which?, a united kingdom (uk) consumer
association, that the company is violating eu competition law by charging more
for online music in the uk than in eurozone countries and preventing uk
consumers from purchasing online music from the itunes music store for eurozone
countries. the which? claims were originally lodged with the uk office of fair
trading, which subsequently referred them to the european commission. the
european commission is investigating the charges under articles 81 and 82 of
the european commission treaty.
gobeli
researchltd.v. apple computer,inc., et al.
plaintiff gobeli
researchltd. filed this patent infringement action against the company
and sun microsystems,inc. on april15, 2004 in the united states
district court for the eastern district of texas, marshall division, alleging
infringement of u.s. patent 5,418,968 related to a system and method of
controlling interrupt processing. plaintiff alleges that the companys mac os
9 and mac os x operating systems infringe plaintiffs patent. plaintiff seeks
unspecified damages and other relief. the company filed an answer on june9,
2004, denying all material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative
defenses. the company also asserted counterclaims requesting declaratory
judgment of non-infringement and invalidity. a markman hearing took place august9,
2005, and the court issued a ruling on august26, 2005 invalidating one of
plantiffs two claims. on october18, 2005, a stipulation entered into by
the parties was filed removing mac os 9 from the case. the trial is scheduled
for february6, 2006.
goldberg, et al. v.
apple computer,inc., et al. (f.k.a. dan v. apple computer,inc.)
plaintiffs filed this
purported class action on september22, 2003 in los angeles county
superior court against the company and other members of the computer industry
on behalf of an alleged nationwide class of purchasers of certain computer hard
drives. the case alleges violations of california business and professions code
17200 (unfair
competition), the consumer legal remedies act and false advertising related to
the size of the drives. plaintiffs allege that calculation of hard drive size
using the decimal method misrepresents the actual size of the drive. the
complaint seeks restitution and other relief. plaintiff filed an amended
complaint on march30, 2004 and the company filed an answer on september23,
2004, denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. defendants
filed a motion to strike portions of the complaint based on sales by resellers
and filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings based upon proposition 64. the
court granted both motions at a hearing on april6, 2005. plaintiff filed
an amended complaint on may6, 2005. the defendants filed a demurrer on june6,
2005, which was heard on august22, 2005. the court granted the demurrer
in part and denied it in part. plaintiff filed an amended complaint. the
companys response is not yet due.
honeywell
international,inc., et al.v. apple computer,inc., et al.
plaintiffs honeywell
international,inc. and honeywell intellectual properties,inc. filed
this action on october6, 2004 in the united states district court in
delaware alleging infringement by the company and other defendants of u.s.
patent 5,280,371 entitled directional diffuser for a liquid crystal display.
plaintiffs seek unspecified damages and other relief. the company filed an
answer on december21, 2004 denying all material allegations and asserting
numerous affirmative defenses. the company has tendered the case to several
suppliers. on may18, 2005 the court stayed the case against the company
and the other supplier defendants. plantiffs filed an amended complaint on
november 7, 2005 adding additional defendants and expanding the scope of the
accused products. given the stay, the companys response to the amended
complaint is not yet due.
mactech systemsv.
apple computer,inc.; macadamv. apple computer,inc.; computer
international,inc.v. apple computer,inc.; elite computers and
software,inc.v. apple computer,inc.; the neighborhood
computer storev. apple computer,inc. macaccessory center,inc.
v. apple computer, inc.; macaccessory center,inc. v. apple computer, inc. (all in santa clara county superior court)
six resellers have filed
similar lawsuits against the company for various causes of action including
breach of contract, fraud, negligent and intentional interference with economic
relationship, negligent misrepresentation, trade libel, unfair competition and
false advertising. plaintiffs request unspecified damages and other relief. the
company answered the computer international complaint on november12,
2003, denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the
company filed an answer in the macadam case on december3, 2004 denying
all allegations and asserting numerous defenses. three of the other plaintiffs
filed amended complaints on february7, 2005, and on march16, 2005
the company filed answers to these claims denying all allegations and asserting
numerous affirmative defenses. a sixth plaintiff, macaccessory center, filed a
complaint on february23, 2005. the company filed an answer to this
complaint on april20, 2005 denying all allegations and asserting numerous
affirmative defenses. these cases are in discovery.
on october1, 2003,
one of the reseller plaintiffs, macadam, was deauthorized as an apple reseller.
macadam filed a motion for a temporary order to reinstate it as a reseller,
which the court denied. the court denied macadams motion for a preliminary
injunction on december19, 2003. on december6, 2004 macadam filed
for chapter 11 bankruptcy in the northern district of california, which placed
a stay on the litigation as to macadam only. the company filed a claim in the
bankruptcy proceedings on february16, 2005. the company took macadams
debtor examination in april2005. the company, joined by another creditor
of macadam, filed a motion to convert the bankruptcy to chapter 7 (liquidation)
on april29, 2005 and that motion was granted. plantiffs counsel in four
of the six other reseller cases, was recently appointed litigation counsel for
the macadam estate by the bankruptcy court. the company has moved for
reconsideration of that decision.
premier
international associates llc v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff premier
international associates llc (premier) filed this action on november3,
2005 in the united states district court for the eastern district of texas,
marshall division, alleging infringement by the company of u.s. patents
6,243,725 and 6,763,345 both entitled list building system. the complaint
seeks unspecified damages and other relief. the companys response is not yet
due.
slattery v. apple
computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
purported class action on january3, 2005 in the united states district
court for the northern district of california alleging various claims including
alleged unlawful tying of music purchased on the itunes music store with the
purchase of ipods and vice versa and unlawful acquisition or maintenance of
monopoly market power. plaintiffs complaint alleged violations of 1 and 2 of the sherman act (15
u.s.c. 1 and 2), california business and professions code 16700 et seq. (the cartwright act),
california business and professions code 17200
(unfair competition), common law unjust enrichment and common law
monopolization. plaintiff seeks unspecified damages and other relief. the
company filed a motion to dismiss on february10, 2005. on september9,
2005, the court denied the motion in part and granted it in part. plaintiff
filed an amended complaint on september23, 2005 and the company filed an
answer on october11, 2005. the case is in discovery.
stamm v. apple
computer,inc./allen v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff stamm filed a
purported class action on november12, 2004 in circuit court, cook county,
illinois alleging that a defect in apples 17-inch studio display monitors
results in dimming of half of the screen and constant blinking of the power
light. the company removed the case to federal court on december22, 2004.
the court remanded it to state court on march22, 2005 on plaintiffs
motion. the company had filed a motion to dismiss on january27, 2005
which was taken off calendar due to the
remand. on january28,
2005 a second plaintiff, allen, filed a purported nationwide class action in
los angeles superior court alleging identical claims. plaintiff stamm dismissed
the stamm case on september2, 2005. an amended complaint in the allen case was filed on october24,
2005, adding additional named plaintiffs and expanding the alleged class to
include purchasers of the 20-inch apple cinema display and the 23-inch
apple cinema hd display. the amended complaint alleges that the displays have a
purported defect that causes dimming of one-half of the screen, and that the
company misrepresented the quality of the displays and/or concealed the
purported defect. plaintiffs assert claims under california business&
professions code 17200 (unfair competition); california business&
professions code 17500 (false advertising) and the consumer legal remedies act.
the amended complaint seeks remedies including damages and equitable relief. on
november14, 2005, the company filed an answer to the amended complaint as
to the allegations regarding the 17-inch display and a demurrer/motion to
strike as to the allegations regarding the 20-inch and 23-inch
displays on the ground that plaintiffs failed to allege that they purchased
those displays. at a status conference on november 21, 2005, the court ordered
plantiffs to amend their complaint. the companys demurrer is off calendar
pending this amendment.
st-germain v. apple
canada,inc.
plaintiff filed this case
in montreal, quebec, canada, on august5, 2005, seeking authorization to
institute a class action for the refund by the company of the canadian private
copying levy that was applied to the ipod purchase price in quebec between december12,
2003 and december14, 2004 but later declared invalid by the canadian
court. a class certification hearing is scheduled for january 13, 2006. the
company has already begun a refund program for this levy.
teleshuttle
technologies, llc and btg internationalinc.v. microsoft and apple
computer,inc.
plaintiffs filed this case
on july20, 2004 in united states district court for the northern district
of california alleging infringement of u.s. patent 6,557,054, entitled method
and system for distributing updates by presenting directory of software
available for user installation that is not already installed on user station.
plaintiffs filed an amended complaint on september7, 2004, adding a
second patent, u.s. patent 6,769,009 entitled method and system for selecting
a personalized set of information channels. plaintiffs seek unspecified
damages and other relief. the company filed an answer on october18, 2004,
denying all material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses.
on august22, 2005, the company filed an amended answer to add charges of
inequitable conduct. the case is in discovery. markman briefing is completed. a
technology tutorial and markman hearing are tentatively scheduled for january13,
20, and 27, 2006.
tiger direct,inc.
v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff tiger direct,inc.
filed this trademark infringement action in the united states district court
for the southern district of florida on april26, 2005 alleging
infringement of the word mark tiger. plaintiff claims to have a valid
registration in the mark tiger and alleges that the companys use of tiger in
reference to the latest version of mac os x infringes the mark allegedly owned
by plaintiff. plaintiff attempted to obtain an ex parte preliminary injunction
barring the companys use of the tiger mark on april27, 2005 but the
motion was denied. plaintiff served the company on april27, 2005 and
again moved for a preliminary injunction. plaintiffs motion was heard on may3,
2005. on may11, 2005, the court denied plaintiffs motion. the company
filed a response to the complaint on may17, 2005, denying all material
allegations and asserting counterclaims for cancellation of certain marks
registered to tiger direct. on june10, 2005, plaintiff filed an appeal,
but subsequently withdrew it. plaintiff filed a response to the companys
counterclaims. the parties have reached a settlement. settlement of this matter
did not have a material effect on the companys financial position or results
of operation.
tse v. apple
computer,inc. et al.
plaintiff ho keung tse
filed this action against the company and other defendants on august5,
2005 in the united states district court for the district of maryland alleging
infringement by the company of u.s. patent 6,665,797 entitled protection of
software again [sic] against unauthorized use. the complaint seeks unspecified
damages and other relief. the company filed an answer on october31, 2005
denying all material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses.
on october28, 2005, the company and the other defendants filed a motion
to transfer the case to the northern district of california.
wimmer v. apple computer,inc. (originally filed as tomczak v. apple computer,inc. on october19, 2005 in the united states
district court for the northern district of california, san jose division; amended
complaint filed october26, 2005); moschella, et al., v. apple
computer,inc. (filed october26,
2005 united states district court for the northern district of california, san
jose division); calado, et al. v. apple computer,inc. (filed october26, 2005, los angeles county
superior court); kahan, et al., v. apple computer,inc. (filed october31, 2005, united states district
court for the southern district of new york); jennings, et al., v. apple
computer,inc. (filed november4,
2005, united states district court for the northern district of california, san
jose division).
these federal and state court
complaints allege that the companys ipod nano was defectively designed so that
it scratches excessively during normal use which renders the screen unreadable.
the wimmer and moschella actions were brought on behalf of purported nationwide
classes of ipod nano purchasers, with the exception of california purchasers,
and allege violations of the consumer protection, express and implied warranty
statutes of each state covered by the putative class definition, as well as
negligent misrepresentation and unjust enrichment under the common laws of
these jurisdictions. the calado action was brought on behalf of a purported
california class of ipod nano purchasers and asserts claims for alleged
violation of california business& professions code 17200 (unfair
competition), california business& professions code 17500 (false
advertising), the consumer legal remedies act, breaches of express and implied
warranties, negligent misrepresentation and unjust enrichment. the jennings
action was filed on behalf of a purported class of all ipod nano purchasers
outside of the united states, based upon alleged violations of the same
california statutes as in the calado complaint. the kahan action was brought on
behalf of a purported new york class of ipod nano purchasers and alleges claims
under the new york unfair competition law, breach of express warranty and
unjust enrichment. the complaints seek damages and various other remedies. the
companys responses to these complaints are not yet due.
two similar complaints, carpentier v. apple canada,inc., and royer- brennan v. apple computer,inc. and apple canada,inc.
were filed in montreal, quebec, canada, on october27, 2005 and
november9, 2005, respectively, seeking authorization to institute a class
action on behalf of ipod nano purchasers in quebec.
union federale des
consummateursque choisir v. apple computer france s.a.r.l. and itunes s.a.r.l.
plaintiff, a consumer association
in france, filed this complaint on february9, 2005 alleging that the
entities above are violating consumer law by 1) omitting to mention that the
ipod is allegedly not compatible with music from online music services other
than the itunes music store and that the music from the itunes music store is
only compatible with the ipod and 2) allegedly tying the sales of ipods to the
itunes music store and vice versa. plaintiff seeks damages, injunctive relief
and other relief. the first hearing on the case took place on may24,
2005. the companys response to the complaint was served on november8,
2005.
item
4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
no matters were submitted
to a vote of security holders during the fourth quarter of the companys fiscal
year ended september24, 2005.
partii
item
5. market for the registrants common equity, related shareholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities
(a) stock
market information
the companys common stock is traded on the over-the-counter
market and is quoted on the nasdaq national market under the symbol aapl and on
the frankfurt stock exchange under the symbol apcd. in december2004, the
company delisted its shares from trading on the tokyo stock exchange. as of november18,
2005, there were 28,333 shareholders of record.
the company did not pay cash dividends in either 2005
or 2004. the company anticipates that, for the foreseeable future, it will
retain any earnings for use in the operation of its business. the price range
per share of common stock presented below represents the highest and lowest
closing prices for the companys common stock on the nasdaq national market
during each quarter.
on february28,
2005, the company effected a two-for-one stock split to shareholders of record
as of february18, 2005. all share and per share information has been
retroactively adjusted to reflect the stock split.
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
fiscal 2005 price
range per common
share
$
53.20-$36.37
$
43.74-$34.13
$
45.06-$31.58
$
34.22-$18.65
fiscal 2004 price
range per common
share
$
19.00-$14.57
$
16.85-$12.89
$
13.84-$10.57
$
12.41-$9.85
(b) related
shareholder matters
none.
(c) issuer
purchases of equity securities
none.
item 6. selected financial data
the
following selected financial information has been derived from the audited
consolidated financial statements. the information set forth below is not
necessarily indicative of results of future operations, and should be read in
conjunction with item 7, managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations and the consolidated financial statements
and related notes thereto included in item 8 of this form10-k in
order to fully understand factors that may affect the comparability of the
information presented below.
fivefiscalyearsendedseptember24,2005(inmillions,exceptshareandpershareamounts)
net sales
$
13,931
$
8,279
$
6,207
$
5,742
$
5,363
net income (loss)
$
1,335
$
$
$
$
(25
)
earnings (loss) per
common share:
basic
$
1.65
$
0.37
$
0.10
$
0.09
$
(0.04
)
diluted
$
1.56
$
0.36
$
0.09
$
0.09
$
(0.04
)
cash dividends
declared per common share
$
$
$
$
$
shares used in computing
earnings (loss) per share (in thousands):
basic
808,439
743,180
721,262
710,044
691,226
diluted
856,780
774,622
726,932
723,570
691,226
cash, cash
equivalents, and short-term investments
$
8,261
$
5,464
$
4,566
$
4,337
$
4,336
total assets
$
11,551
$
8,050
$
6,815
$
6,298
$
6,021
long-term
debt (including current maturities)
$
$
$
$
$
total liabilities
$
4,085
$
2,974
$
2,592
$
2,203
$
2,101
shareholders equity
$
7,466
$
5,076
$
4,223
$
4,095
$
3,920
net gains before taxes
related to the companys non-current debt and equity investments of $4 million,
$10million, and $75 million were recognized in 2004, 2003, and 2001,
respectively. a net loss before taxes related to the companys non-current debt
and equity investments of $42 million was recognized in 2002. in 2002, the
company acquired emagic resulting in a charge of approximately $1 million for
acquired in-process technologies with no alternative future use. the
company recognized a similar charge of $11million in 2001 related to its
acquisition of powerschool. net charges related to company restructuring
actions of $23 million, $26 million, and $30 million were recognized in 2004,
2003, and 2002, respectively. in 2003, settlement of the companys forward
stock purchase agreement resulted in a gain of $6 million. net income during
2005 benefited by $81 million from the reversal of certain tax contingency
reserves and adjustments to net deferred tax assets, including reductions to
valuation allowances. favorable cumulative-effect type adjustments from the
adoption of new accounting standards, net of taxes, of $1 million and $12
million were recognized in 2003 and 2001, respectively.
item 7. managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
this section and other parts of this form10-k
contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as anticipates,
expects, believes, plans, predicts, and similar terms. forward-looking
statements are not guarantees of future performance and the companys actual
results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking
statements. factors that might cause such differences include, but are not
limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled factors that mayaffect
future results and financial condition below. the following discussion should
be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes
thereto included in item 8 of this form10-k. all information
presented herein is based on the companys fiscal
calendar. the company assumes no obligation to revise
or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by
law.
executive overview
the company designs, manufactures, and markets
personal computers and related software, services, peripherals, and networking
solutions. the company also designs, develops, and markets a line of portable
digital music players along with related accessories and services including the
online distribution of third-party music, audio books, music videos,
short films, and television shows. the companys products and services include
the macintosh line of desktop and notebook computers, the ipod digital music
player, the xserve g5 server and xserve raid storage products, a portfolio of
consumer and professional software applications, the mac os x operating system,
the itunes music store, a portfolio of peripherals that support and enhance the
macintosh and ipod product lines, and a variety of other service and support
offerings. the company sells its products worldwide through its online stores,
its own retail stores, its direct sales force, and third-party wholesalers, resellers,
and value added resellers. in addition, the company sells a variety of
third-party macintosh compatible products, including computer printers and
printing supplies, storage devices, computer memory, digital camcorders and
still cameras, personal digital assistants, and various other computing
products and supplies through its online and retail stores. the company sells
to education, consumer, creative professional, business, and government
customers. a further description of the companys products may be found in parti,
item 1 of this document under the heading business.
the companys business strategy leverages its ability,
through the design and development of its own operating system, hardware, and
many software applications and technologies, to bring to its customers around
the world compelling new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use,
seamless integration, and innovative industrial design.
the company participates in several highly competitive
markets, including personal computers with its macintosh line of computers,
consumer electronics with its ipod line of digital music players, and
distribution of third-party digital content through its online itunes music
store. while the company is widely recognized as an innovator in the personal
computer and consumer electronic markets as well as a leader in the emerging
market for distribution of digital content, these are all highly competitive
markets that are subject to aggressive pricing and increased competition. to
remain competitive, the company believes that increased investment in research
and development (r&d) and marketing and advertising is necessary to
maintain and extend its position in the markets where it competes. the companys
r&d spending is focused on delivering timely updates and enhancements to
its existing line of personal computers, displays, operating systems, software
applications, and portable music players; developing new digital lifestyle
consumer and professional software applications; and investing in new product
areas such as rack-mount servers, raid storage systems, and wireless
technologies. the company also believes investment in marketing and advertising
programs is critical to increasing product and brand awareness.
in june2005, the company announced its plan to
begin using intel microprocessors in its macintosh computers. the company plans
to begin shipping certain models with intel microprocessors by june2006
and to complete the transition of all of its macintosh computers to intel
microprocessors by the end of calendar year 2007. there are potential risks and
uncertainties that may occur during this transition, which are further
discussed under the heading factors that mayaffect future results and
financial condition.
the company utilizes a variety of direct and indirect
distribution channels. the company believes that sales of its innovative and
differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can
convey the value of the hardware, software, and peripheral integration,
demonstrate the unique digital lifestyle solutions that are available only on
macintosh computers, and demonstrate the compatibility of the macintosh with
the windows platform and networks. the company further believes that providing
a
high-quality sales and after-sales support experience
is critical to attracting and retaining customers. to ensure a high-quality
buying experience for its products in which service and education are
emphasized, the company has expanded and improved its distribution capabilities
by opening its own retail stores in the u.s. and internationally. the company
had 124 stores open as of september24, 2005.
the company also staffs selected third-party stores
with the companys own employees to improve the buying experience through
reseller channels. the company has deployed apple employees and contractors in
reseller locations around the world including the u.s., europe, japan, and
australia. the company also sells to customers directly through its online
stores around the world.
to improve access to the
ipod product line, the company has significantly expanded the number of
distribution points where ipods are sold. the ipod product line can be
purchased in certain department stores, member-only warehouse stores, large
retail chains, and specialty retail stores, as well as through the channels
listed above.
critical
accounting policies and estimates
the preparation of financial statements and related
disclosures in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles
and the companys discussion and analysis of its financial condition and
results of operations require the companys management to make judgments,
assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated
financial statements and accompanying notes. note 1 of the notes to
consolidated financial statements of this form10-k describes the
significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the
companys consolidated financial statements. management bases its estimates on
historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be
reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for
making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. actual
results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material.
management believes the
companys critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to
revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuation and
inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, and income taxes. management
believes these policies to be critical because they are both important to the
portrayal of the companys financial condition and results, and they require
management to make judgments and estimates about matters that are inherently
uncertain. the companys senior management has reviewed these critical
accounting policies and related disclosures with the audit and finance
committee of the companys board of directors.
revenue recognition
net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale
of hardware, software, peripherals, digital content, and service and support
contracts. the company recognizes revenue pursuant to applicable accounting
standards, including statement of position (sop) no.97-2, software revenue recognition, as amended, and securities and
exchange commission (sec) staff accounting bulletin (sab) no.104, revenue recognition.
the company recognizes revenue when persuasive
evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is
fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. product is considered
delivered to the customer once it has been shipped, and title and risk of loss
have been transferred. for most of the companys product sales, these criteria
are met at the time the product is shipped. for online sales to individuals,
for some sales to education customers in the u.s., and for certain other sales,
the company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the
company legally retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during
transit. if at the outset of an arrangement the company determines the
arrangement fee is not, or is presumed not to be, fixed or determinable,
revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and
payable.
the company records
reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and
for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and
other sales programs and volume-based incentives. the estimated cost of these
programs is accrued as a reduction to revenue in the period the company has
sold the product and committed to the relevant program. the company also
records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the
companys historical experience. future market conditions and product
transitions may require the company to increase customer incentive programs and
incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional
reductions to revenue at the time such programs are offered. additionally,
certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number
of customers who will actually redeem the incentive based on historical
experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive
programs. if a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such
incentives, the company would be required to record additional reductions to
revenue, which could have a material adverse impact on the companys results of
operations.
allowance for
doubtful accounts
the company distributes its products through
third-party resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and
commercial customers. the company generally does not require collateral from
its customers. however, when possible the company does attempt to limit credit
risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers in latin
america, europe, and asia and by arranging with third-party financing companies
to provide flooring arrangements and other loan and lease programs to the
companys direct customers. these credit-financing arrangements are directly
between the third-party financing company and the end customer. as such, the
company generally does not assume any recourse or credit risk sharing related
to any of these arrangements. however, considerable trade receivables that are
not covered by collateral, third-party flooring arrangements, or credit
insurance are outstanding with the companys distribution and retail channel
partners.
the
allowance for doubtful accounts is based on managements assessment of
the collectibility of specific customer accounts and includes consideration of
the credit worthiness and financial condition of those specific customers. the company records an allowance to reduce
the specific receivables to the amount that is reasonably believed to be
collectible. the company also records an
allowance for all other trade receivables based on multiple factors including historical
experience with bad debts, the general economic environment, the financial
condition of the companys distribution channels, and the aging of such
receivables. if there is a
deterioration of a major customers financial condition, if the company becomes
aware of additional information related to the credit worthiness of a major
customer, or if future actual default rates on trade receivables in general
differ from those currently anticipated, the company may have to adjust its
allowance for doubtful accounts, which would affect earnings in the period the
adjustments are made.
inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments
the company must order components for its products and
build inventory in advance of product shipments. the company records a
write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party
products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of
anticipated demand or net realizable value. the company performs a detailed
review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors
including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development
plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. the personal computer
and consumer electronic industries are subject to a rapid and unpredictable
pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. if future demand
or market conditions for the companys products are less favorable than
forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility
of component inventory, the company may be required to record additional
write-downs which would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the
write-downs are recorded.
the
company accrues necessary reserves for cancellation fees related to component
orders that have been cancelled. consistent with industry practice, the
company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier
contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. these
commitments typically cover the companys
requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. if there is an abrupt and
substantial decline in demand for one or more of the companys products or an
unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the companys
products, the company may be required to record additional reserves for
cancellation fees that would negatively affect gross margins in the period when
the cancellation fees are identified.
warranty costs
the company provides
currently for the estimated cost for product warranties at the time the related
revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates,
historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific
product failures that are outside of the companys typical experience. each
quarter, the company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its
recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of
products subject to warranty protection, and adjusts the amounts as necessary. if actual product failure rates or repair costs
differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be
required and could negatively affect the companys results of
operations.
income taxes
the company records a tax provision for the
anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. in
accordance with statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no.109,
accounting for income taxes, the
provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method,
under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected
future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial
reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and
tax credit carryforwards. deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured
using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect
for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled.
the company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the
amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. the company is
currently evaluating the repatriation provisions of the american jobs creation
act of 2004, which, if implemented by the company, would affect the companys
tax provision and deferred tax assets and liabilities.
management believes it is more likely than not that
forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of
certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred
tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax
assets. in the event that all or part of the net deferred tax assets are
determined not to be realizable in the future, an adjustment to the valuation
allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made.
similarly, if the company subsequently realizes deferred tax assets that were
previously determined to be unrealizable, the respective valuation allowance
would be reversed, resulting in a positive adjustment to earnings or a decrease
in goodwill in the period such determination is made. in addition, the calculation
of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of
uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. resolution of these
uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with managements expectations could
have a material impact on the companys results of operations and financial
position.
net sales
net
sales and macintosh unit sales by operating segment and net sales and unit
sales by product follow (net sales in millions and unit sales in thousands):
september24,
change
september25,
change
september27,
net sales by operating segment:
americas net sales
$
6,590
%
$
4,019
%
$
3,181
europe net sales
3,073
%
1,799
%
1,309
japan net sales
%
(3
)%
retail net sales
2,350
%
1,185
%
other segments net sales (a)
%
%
total net sales
$
13,931
%
$
8,279
%
$
6,207
unit
sales by operating segment:
americas macintosh unit sales
2,184
%
1,682
%
1,620
europe macintosh unit sales
1,138
%
%
japan macintosh unit sales
%
(14
)%
retail macintosh unit sales
%
%
other segments macintosh unit sales (a)
%
%
total macintosh unit sales
4,534
%
3,290
%
3,012
net
sales by product:
desktops (b)
$
3,436
%
$
2,373
(4
)%
$
2,475
portables (c)
2,839
%
2,550
%
2,016
total macintosh net sales
6,275
%
4,923
%
4,491
ipod
4,540
%
1,306
%
other music related products and services (d)
%
%
peripherals and other hardware(e)
1,126
%
%
software, service, and other sales (f)
1,091
%
%
total net sales
$
13,931
%
$
8,279
%
$
6,207
unit
sales by product:
desktops (b)
2,520
%
1,625
(8
)%
1,761
portables (c)
2,014
%
1,665
%
1,251
total macintosh unit sales
4,534
%
3,290
%
3,012
net sales per macintosh unit sold (g)
$
1,384
(7
)%
$
1,496
%
$
1,491
ipod unit sales
22,497
%
4,416
%
net sales per ipod
unit sold (h)
$
(32
)%
$
(19
)%
$
notes:
(a) other
segments include asia pacific and filemaker.
(b) includes
imac, emac, mac mini, power mac and xserve product lines.
(c) includes
ibook and powerbook product lines.
(d) consists
of itunes music store sales, ipod services, and apple-branded and third-party
ipod accessories.
(e) includes
sales of apple-branded and third-party displays, wireless connectivity and
networking solutions, and other hardware accessories.
(f) includes
sales of apple-branded operating system, application software, third-party
software, applecare, and internet services.
(g) derived
by dividing total macintosh net sales by total macintosh unit sales.
(h) derived by
dividing total ipod net sales by total ipod unit sales.
fiscal year 2005 versus 2004
during 2005, net
sales increased 68% or $5.7 billion from 2004. several factors contributed
favorably to net sales during 2005:
net sales of ipods rose $3.2 billion or 248% during 2005 compared
to 2004. unit sales of ipods totaled 22.5 million in 2005, which represents an
increase of 409% from the 4.4 million ipod units sold in 2004. strong sales of
ipods during 2005 continued to be experienced in all of the companys operating
segments and was driven by strong demand for
the ipod shuffle introduced in january2005, the release of an updated
version of the ipod mini in february2005, the release of the ipod nano in
september2005, and expansion of the ipods distribution network.
net sales per ipod unit sold decreased 32% primarily due to the introduction of
the lower priced ipod shuffle in january2005 and ipod mini pricing
reductions in february2005. from the introduction of the ipod in 2002
through 2005, the company has sold approximately 28 million ipods.
other
music related products and services consists of sales associated with the
itunes music store and ipod services and accessories. net sales of other music
related products and services increased $621 million or 223% during 2005
compared to 2004. the company has experienced strong growth in sales of ipod
services and accessories consistent with the increase in overall ipod unit
sales for 2005. the increased sales from the itunes music store is primarily
due to substantial growth of net sales in the u.s. and expansion in europe,
canada, and japan.
total
macintosh net sales increased $1.4 billion or 27% during 2005 compared to 2004.
unit sales of macintosh systems increased 1.2 million units or 38% during 2005
compared to 2004. the increases in macintosh net sales and unit sales relate
primarily to strong demand for the companys desktop products, which was
experienced in all of the companys operating segments. the company believes
that the success of the ipod is having a positive impact on macintosh net sales
by introducing new customers to the companys other products. desktop demand
was stimulated in 2005 due to the new imac g5 and the introduction of the mac
mini in january2005. net sales and unit sales of desktop products
increased 45% and 55%, respectively, during 2005 compared to 2004. macintosh
net sales and unit sales also include sales of the companys portable products,
which increased 11% and 21%, respectively, compared to 2004.
net sales per macintosh
unit sold decreased 7% on a year-over-year basis. the decrease was the result
of changes in the overall unit mix towards relatively lower-priced consumer
products, specifically the impact of the mac mini product, and desktop and
portable price reductions. this decrease was partially offset by an increase in
the proportion of direct sales.
the
retail segments net sales grew 98% to $2.4 billion during 2005 compared to
2004. this increase is largely attributable to the increase in total stores
from 86 at the end of 2004 to 124 at the end of 2005, as well as 44%
year-over-year increase in average revenue per store. while the companys
customers in areas where the retail segment has opened stores may elect to purchase
from the retail segment stores rather than the companys preexisting sales
channels in the u.s., canada, japan, and the u.k., the company believes that a
substantial portion of the retail segments net sales is incremental to the
companys total net sales. see additional comments below related to the retail
segment under the heading segment operating performance.
net
sales of peripherals and other hardware rose by 18% during 2005 compared to
2004 primarily due to an increase in net sales of displays and other computer
accessories. net sales of other
hardware include airport cards and base stations, xserve raid storage, isight
digital video cameras, and third-party hardware products.
the
companys u.s. education channel experienced year-over-year growth in both net
sales and unit sales of approximately 21% for 2005. the increase in u.s.
education net sales for 2005 relates
primarily to a 32%
year-over-year increase in higher education net sales due to increased imac
shipments, portable system shipments, and online sales. the company also
experienced 11% growth in k-12 net sales due to increased ibook sales and
education 1:1 sales. while net sales to the k-12 market were slightly
higher during 2005 than 2004, the company believes this market continues to be
subject to budget constraints and competitive pressures.
net sales of software, service and other sales
rose $270 million or 33% during 2005 compared to 2004. this growth was
primarily attributable to increased net sales in applecare protection plan
(app) extended service and support contracts, driven primarily by higher
associated macintosh computer sales. additionally, the company experienced
increases in net sales of .mac internet service, professional and consumer
applications, third-party software, and mac os x that was primarily
attributable to the release of version 10.4 tiger in april2005.
fiscal year 2004 versus 2003
during 2004, net
sales increased 33% or $2.1 billion from 2003. several factors contributed
favorably to net sales during 2004:
net sales of macintosh
systems increased $432 million or 10% during 2004 compared to 2003 while net
sales per macintosh unit sold remained relatively flat on a year-over-year
basis. unit sales of macintosh systems increased 278,000 units or 9% during
2004 compared to 2003. these increases in net sales and unit sales were a
result of strong demand for all of the companys macintosh systems, except the
imac. the companys portable systems, consisting of the powerbook and ibook,
produced the strongest revenue and unit growth during 2004 compared to 2003 of
approximately 26% and 33%, respectively. unit sales of portable systems
accounted for 51% of all macintosh systems sold during 2004 compared to only
42% during 2003. the company believes that these results reflected an overall
trend in the industry towards portable systems. performance of the companys
power macintosh systems also yielded positive results in 2004 over 2003,
including a 15% and 6% increase in net sales and unit sales, respectively. the increase
in power macintosh sales in 2004 was due primarily to the introduction of the
power mac g5, which began shipping at the end of 2003. although power macintosh
sales increased from 2003, sales of this product were constrained in the second
half of 2004 as a result of manufacturing problems at ibm, the companys sole
supplier of the powerpc g5 processor.
net sales of ipods rose $961 million or 279% during 2004 compared
to 2003. unit sales of ipods totaled 4.4 million in 2004, which represents an
increase of 370% from the 939,000 ipod units sold in 2003. strong demand for
the ipods during 2004 were experienced in all of the companys operating
segments and was driven by enhancements to the ipod, the introduction of the
ipod mini, increased expansion of the companys ipod distribution network, and
continued success of the itunes music store due largely to making it available
to both macintosh and windows users in the u.s., u.k., france, and germany.
the
retail segments net sales grew 91% to $1.2 billion during 2004 compared to
2003. this increase was largely attributable to the increase in total stores
from 65 at the end of 2003 to 86 at the end of 2004, as well as a 36%
year-over-year increase in average revenue per store. while the companys
customers in areas where the retail segment has opened stores may have elected
to purchase from the retail segment stores rather than the companys
preexisting sales channels in the u.s. and japan, the company believes that a
substantial portion of the retail segments net sales is incremental to the
companys total net sales. see additional comments below related to the retail
segment under the heading segment operating performance.
net
sales of peripherals and other hardware rose by 38% during 2004 compared to
2003 primarily due to an increase in net sales of displays and other computer
accessories. net sales of other
computer accessories
include airport cards and base stations, isight digital video cameras, and
third-party hardware products. the increase in total net sales of peripherals
and other hardware was related to the overall increase in macintosh unit sales
and the introduction of new and updated peripheral products and was experienced
predominantly by the companys americas, europe, and retail segments.
net
sales of other music related products and services increased $242 million or
672% during 2004 compared to 2003. the company experienced strong growth in
sales of ipod services and accessories consistent with the increase in overall
ipod unit sales for 2004. the increased sales from the itunes music store,
which was originally introduced in april2003, was primarily due to making
the service available for windows in october2003 and the introduction of
the service in the u.k., france, and germany in june2004.
net
sales of software rose $140 million or 39% during 2004 compared to 2003 due
primarily to higher net sales of the companys apple-branded software and in
particular, higher net sales of the companys operating system software,
including mac os x version 10.3 panther, which was released in october2003.
net sales of panther accounted for approximately $74 million or over 50% of the
increase in software net sales for 2004 compared to 2003.
the
companys u.s. education channel experienced year-over-year growth in net sales
of approximately 19% for 2004 compared to 2003. unit sales also increased by
10% during 2004 compared to 2003. the increase in u.s. education net sales for
2004 related primarily to a 40% year-over-year increase in higher education net
sales and to a lesser extent the companys 3% growth in k-12 net sales.
service
and other sales increased $37 million or 13% during 2004 compared to 2003. these
increases were the result of significant year-over-year increases in net sales
associated with app extended maintenance and support services, as well as
increased net sales associated with the companys .mac internet service.
increased net sales associated with app were primarily the result of higher
macintosh unit sales and higher attach rates on app over the last several
years.
offsetting the
favorable factors discussed above, the companys net sales during 2004 were
negatively impacted by the following:
net
sales and unit sales of imac systems were down 23% and 16%, respectively,
during 2004 versus 2003. the decrease in imac net sales and unit sales was
largely due to the delay in the introduction of the new imac, based on the
powerpc g5 processor, primarily as a result of manufacturing problems
experienced by ibm. the delays in the new imac resulted in the depletion of
inventory of the old imac flat panel prior to availability of the new imac g5.
the old flat panel imac form factor, which was available during most of 2004,
was nearly 3 years old by the time the new imac g5 began shipping in september2004
and had experienced declines in sales as a result of the age of this product. the
company believes that sales of imac systems have also declined due to a shift
in consumer preference to portable systems and desktop models from competitors
with price points below $1,000.
net sales and unit sales in
the companys japan segment decreased 3% and 14%, respectively, during 2004
versus 2003. the company believes these declines related to a shift in sales
from the japan segment to the retail segment as a result of the tokyo and osaka
store openings in 2004. declines in net sales in japan may have also related to
delays in computer upgrades by certain professional and creative customers
pending release in japan of certain mac os x native applications, such as quark
xpress 6, which did not become available until september2004. when sales
from the japan retail stores are included in the results for the japan segment,
the combined revenue in japan resulted in a 3% year-over-year increase in 2004
as compared to 2003. see
additional comments
below related to the japan segment under the heading segment operating
performance.
segment operating performance
the company manages its
business primarily on a geographic basis. the companys reportable operating
segments are comprised of the americas, europe, japan, and retail. the
americas, europe, and japan reportable segments do not include activities
related to the retail segment. the americas segment includes both north and
south america. the europe segment includes european countries as well as the
middle east and africa. the retail segment operated apple-owned retail stores
in the u.s., canada, japan, and the u.k. during 2005. each reportable
geographic operating segment provides similar hardware and software products
and similar services. further information regarding the companys operating
segments may be found in item 8 of this form10-k in the notes to
consolidated financial statements at note 11, segment information and
geographic data.
americas
during 2005, net sales in the americas segment grew
64% or $2.6 billion compared to 2004. the increase in net sales during 2005 was
primarily attributable to the significant year-over-year increase in ipod
sales, sales of other music related products and services, and strong sales of
desktop and portable macintosh systems. this increase was partially offset by a
shift in sales to the retail segment, which had 117 stores in the u.s. and
canada as of the end of 2005. macintosh unit sales also increased by 30% in
2005 compared to 2004, driven primarily by strong sales of desktop systems
largely attributable to strong sales from the new imac, which began shipping in
september2004, and the mac mini, which was introduced in january2005.
during 2005 and 2004, the americas segment represented approximately 47% and
49%, respectively, of the companys total net sales and represented
approximately 48% and 51%, respectively, of total macintosh unit sales. as
noted above, the company experienced an increase in both u.s. education channel
net sales and unit sales of 21% for 2005 compared to 2004. strength in higher
education sales related primarily to strong imac shipments, portable system
shipments, and online sales. this strength drove year-over-year growth in net
sales of 32% for the higher education channel during 2005. despite challenges
in the k-12 market from continued budget constraints and competitive
pressures, the companys k-12 net sales grew year-over-year by 11% during
2005 due to increased ibook sales and 1:1 education sales.
during 2004, net sales in
the americas segment grew 26% or $838 million compared to 2003. the increase in
net sales during 2004 was primarily attributable to the significant
year-over-year increase in ipod sales as well as strong sales of peripherals,
software, and services. this increase was partially offset by a shift in sales
to the retail segment, which had 84 stores in the u.s. as of the end of 2004.
macintosh unit sales also increased by 4% in 2004 compared to 2003, driven primarily
by strong sales of portable and power macintosh systems, partially offset by
weakness in imac sales. during 2004 and 2003, the americas segment represented
approximately 49% and 51%, respectively, of the companys total net sales and
represented approximately 51% and 54%, respectively, of total macintosh unit
sales. the company experienced an increase in u.s. education channel net sales
of 19% for 2004 compared to 2003. strong u.s. education net sales for 2004
related primarily to strength in higher education net sales that resulted from
a successful back-to-school selling season with strong demand for the companys
portables. this strength drove year-over-year growth in net sales of 40% for
the higher education channel during 2004. the companys k-12 net sales
grew year-over-year by 3% during 2004, despite the challenges in the k-12
market from continued budget constraints and increased competition.
europe
during 2005, net sales in the europe segment grew $1.3
billion or 71% from 2004. total macintosh unit sales in europe also experienced
growth during the current year by increasing 47% in 2005 compared to
2004. consistent with the americas segment, europe
experienced strong net sales of desktop products, ipod, other music related
products and services, and software and service sales. demand in europe during
2005 was particularly strong for the companys desktop computers, which
experienced a year-over-year increase of 56%. similar to the results of the
companys other segments, net sales of ipods, peripherals and software were
strong in 2005.
net sales in europe
rebounded in 2004 increasing $490 million or 37% from 2003. total macintosh
unit sales in europe also experienced growth in 2004 by increasing 13% compared
to 2003. consistent with the americas segment, europe experienced strong net
sales across all product lines, except the imac systems. demand in europe
during 2004 was particularly strong for the companys power macintosh systems
and portable macintosh systems, which experienced year-over-year increases of
29% and 42%, respectively. similar to the results of the companys other
segments, net sales of ipods, peripherals and software were strong in 2004 over
2003.
japan
japans net sales and macintosh unit sales were up 36%
and 8%, respectively, during 2005 compared to 2004. japan experienced increased
net sales in desktop products, ipod, and other music related products and
services. desktop net sales and unit sales increased by 31% and 41%,
respectively, and ipod sales increased by 220% during 2005 compared to 2004. the
overall increase in net sales was partially offset by a decline in portable
system net sales during 2005 compared to 2004, which the company believes might
be attributable to a shift in sales from portables to the new imac g5 and mac
mini, and a shift to the retail segment as a result of opening two additional
stores in japan during 2005.
japans net sales and
macintosh unit sales were down 3% and 14%, respectively, during 2004 compared
to 2003, which lagged behind all of the companys other operating segments. these
decreases in net sales and unit sales were believed to be attributable in part
to a shift in sales from the japan segment to the retail segment as a result of
the opening of two stores in japan in 2004. in addition, such decreases may
have been related to delayed computer system upgrades by some professional and
creative customers who were awaiting the release of quark xpress 6 for mac os
x, which did not occur until september2004. the decrease in net sales was
partially offset by strong ipod and ibook sales during 2004 compared to 2003.
retail
the company opened 38 new retail stores during 2005,
including 6 international stores in the u.k, japan, and canada, bringing the
total number of open stores to 124 as of september24, 2005. this compares
to 86 open stores as of september25, 2004 and 65 open stores as of september27,
2003.
net sales of the retail segment grew to $2.4 billion
during 2005 from $1.2 billion and $621 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively.
the increases in net sales during both 2005 and 2004 reflect the impact of new
store openings for each year, including the opening of 38 new stores in 2005
and 21 new stores in 2004. an increase in average revenue per store also
contributed to the segments strong sales in 2005. with an average of 105
stores open during 2005, the retail segment achieved annualized revenue per
store of approximately $22.4 million, as compared to $15.6 million in 2004 with
a 76 store average, and $11.5 million in 2003 with a 54 store average.
as measured by the companys operating segment
reporting, the retail segment reported operating income of $151 million during
2005 as compared to operating income of $39 million during 2004 and an
operating loss of $5 million during 2003. this improvement is primarily
attributable to the segments year-over-year increase in average revenue per
store, the impact of opening new stores, and the segments year-over-year
increase in net sales, which resulted in higher leverage on occupancy,
depreciation, and other fixed costs.
expansion of the retail
segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in
fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments,
personnel, and other operating expenses. capital expenditures associated with
the retail segment were $132 million in 2005, bringing the total capital
expenditures since inception of the retail segment to approximately $529
million. as of september24, 2005, the retail segment had approximately
3,673 employees and had outstanding operating lease commitments associated with
retail store space and related facilities of approximately $606 million. the
company would incur substantial costs should it choose to terminate its retail
segment or close individual stores. such costs could adversely affect the
companys results of operations and financial condition.
gross margin
gross
margin for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions,
except gross margin percentages):
september24,
september25,
september27,
net sales
$
13,931
$
8,279
$
6,207
cost of sales
9,888
6,020
4,499
gross margin
$
4,043
$
2,259
$
1,708
gross margin percentage
29.0
%
27.3
%
27.5
%
gross margin increased in 2005 to 29.0% of net sales
from 27.3% of net sales in 2004. the companys gross margin during 2005
increased due to more favorable pricing on certain commodity components
including lcd flat-panel displays and dram memory; an increase in higher margin
software sales; a favorable shift in direct sales related primarily to the
companys retail and online stores; and higher overall revenue that provided
for more leverage on fixed production costs. these increases to gross margin
were partially offset by an increase in lower margin ipod sales.
the company anticipates that its gross margin and the
gross margin of the overall personal computer and consumer electronics
industries will remain under pressure in light of price competition, especially
for the ipod product line. the company expects gross margin percentage to
decline in the first quarter of 2006 primarily as a result of a shift in the
mix of revenue toward lower margin products such as the ipod and content from
the itunes music store.
the foregoing statements regarding the companys
expected gross margin are forward-looking. there can be no assurance that
current gross margins will be maintained or targeted gross margin levels will
be achieved. in general, gross margins and margins on individual products,
including ipods, will remain under significant downward pressure due to a
variety of factors, including continued industry wide global pricing pressures,
increased competition, compressed product life cycles, potential increases in
the cost and availability of raw material and outside manufacturing services,
and potential changes to the companys product mix, including higher unit sales
of consumer products with lower average selling prices and lower gross margins.
in response to these downward pressures, the company expects it will continue
to take pricing actions with respect to its products. gross margins could also
be affected by the companys ability to effectively manage product quality and
warranty costs and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. due to the
companys significant international operations, financial results can be
significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates.
the company orders components for its products and
builds inventory in advance of product shipments. because the companys markets
are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk
the company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third-parties
excess or insufficient inventories of particular products or components. the
companys operating results and financial condition in the past have been and
may in the future be materially adversely affected by the companys ability to
manage its inventory levels and outstanding purchase commitments and to respond
to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns.
gross margin declined in
2004 to 27.3% of net sales from 27.5% of net sales in 2003. the companys gross
margin during 2004 declined due to an increase in mix towards lower margin ipod
and ibook sales, pricing actions on certain power macintosh g5 models that were
transitioned during the beginning of 2004, higher warranty costs on certain
portable macintosh products, and higher freight and duty costs during 2004. these
unfavorable factors were partially offset by an increase in direct sales and a
39% year-over-year increase in higher margin software sales.
operating expenses
operating
expenses for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions,
except for percentages):
september24,
september25,
september27,
research and
development
$
$
$
percentage of net sales
%
%
%
selling, general,
and administrative expenses
$
1,859
$
1,421
$
1,212
percentage of net sales
%
%
%
restructuring costs
$
$
$
research and
development (r&d)
the company recognizes
that focused investments in r&d are critical to its future growth and
competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely
development of new and enhanced products that are central to the companys core
business strategy. the company has historically relied upon innovation to remain
competitive. r&d expense amounted to approximately 4% of total net sales
during 2005 down from 6% and 8% of total net sales in 2004 and 2003,
respectively. this decrease is due to the significant increase of 68% in total
net sales of the company for 2005. although r&d expense decreased as a
percentage of total net sales in 2005, actual expense for r&d in 2005
increased $45 million or 9% from 2004, which follows an $18 million or 4%
increase in 2004 compared to 2003. the overall increase in r&d expense
relates primarily to increased headcount and support for new product
development activities and the impact of employee salary increases in 2005.
r&d expense does not include capitalized software development costs of
approximately $29.7 million related to the development of mac os x tiger during
2005; $4.5 million related to the development of mac os x tiger and $2.3
million related to the development of filemaker pro 7 in 2004; and $14.7
million related to the development of mac os x panther in 2003. further
information related to the companys capitalization of software development
costs may be found in partii, item 8 of this form10-k at note
1 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
selling, general,
and administrative expense (sg&a)
expenditures for sg&a increased $438 million or
31% during 2005 compared to 2004. these increases are due primarily to the
companys continued expansion of its retail segment in both domestic and
international markets, a current year increase in discretionary spending on
marketing and advertising, and higher direct and channel selling expenses
resulting from the increase in net sales and employee salary
merit increases. sg&a as a percentage of total net
sales in 2005 was 13%, down from 17% in 2004, which is due to the increase in
total net sales of 68% for the company during 2005.
expenditures for sg&a
increased $209 million or 17% during 2004 compared to 2003. these increases
were due primarily to the companys continued expansion of its retail segment
in both domestic and international markets, an increase in discretionary
spending on marketing and advertising, an increase in amortization costs
associated with restricted stock compensation, and higher direct and channel
selling expenses resulting from the increase in net sales and employee salary
merit increases. sg&a as a percentage of total net sales in 2004 was 17%,
down from 20% in 2003 due to the increase in total net sales for the company of
33% during 2004.
fiscal 2004
restructuring actions
the company recorded total
restructuring charges of approximately $23 million during 2004, including
approximately $14 million in severance costs, $5.5 million in asset
impairments, and a $3.5 million charge for lease cancellations in conjunction
with the vacating of a leased sales facility in europe during the fourth
quarter of 2004 related to a european workforce reduction. of the $23 million
charge, $19.7 million had been utilized by the end of 2005, with the remaining
$3.3 million consisting of $0.7 million for employee severance benefits and
$2.6 million for lease cancellations. these actions will result in the
termination of 461 employees, 448 of which had been terminated prior to the end
of 2005.
fiscal 2003
restructuring actions
the company recorded total
restructuring charges of approximately $26.8 million during 2003, including
approximately $7.4 million in severance costs, a $5.0 million charge to
write-off deferred compensation, $7.1 million in asset impairments, and a $7.3
million charge for lease cancellations primarily related to the closure of the
companys singapore manufacturing operations during the first quarter of 2003.
of the $26.8 million charge, all had been utilized by the end of 2005, except
for approximately $1.7 million related to operating lease costs on abandoned
facilities. these actions resulted in the termination of 353employees.
other income and expense
other
income and expense for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in
millions):
september24,
september25,
september27,
gains on
non-current investments, net
$
$
$
interest income
$
$
$
interest expense
(3
)
(8
)
gains on sales of
short term investments, net
other income
(expense), net
(18
)
(9
)
interest and
other income, net
$
$
$
total other
income and expense
$
$
$
gains and losses on
non-current investments
the company previously
held significant investments in arm holdings plc (arm), akamai technologies,inc. (akamai), and earthlink network,inc.
(earthlink). the company sold all of the remaining holdings in these
non-current investments in 2004 and 2003. pretax gains recorded upon the sale
of these non-current investments were $4 million and $10 million in 2004 and
2003, respectively.
interest and other
income, net
total interest and other income, net increased $112
million or 211% to $165million during 2005 compared to $53 million in
2004 and $83 million in 2003. these increases are attributable primarily to
increasing investment yields on the companys cash and short-term investments
and higher invested balances. the weighted average interest rate earned by the
company on its cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased to
2.70% in 2005 compared to the 1.38% and 1.89% rates earned during 2004 and
2003, respectively. the company occasionally sells short-term investments prior
to their stated maturities. as a result of such sales, the company recognized
net losses of $137,000 in 2005 and net gains of $1 million and $21 million
during 2004 and 2003, respectively. partially offsetting the increase in other income were higher foreign
currency hedging expenses.
interest expense consisted
primarily of interest on the companys $300million aggregate principal
amount unsecured notes, which were repaid upon their maturity in february2004.
the unsecured notes were sold at 99.925% of par for an effective yield to
maturity of 6.51%. total deferred gain resulting from the closure of debt swaps
of approximately $23 million was fully amortized as of the notes maturity in february2004.
provision for income taxes
the companys effective tax rate for the year ended september24,
2005 was approximately 26%. the companys effective rate differs from the
statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed
foreign earnings for which no u.s. taxes are provided because such earnings are
intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the u.s., research and development
tax credits, and a reduction of certain tax contingency reserves and
adjustments to net deferred tax assets. the benefit from adjustments to tax
contingency reserves and net deferred tax assets was $67 million. in addition,
the company recorded a $25 million reduction of the valuation allowance
associated with deferred tax assets that, in managements opinion, are now more
likely than not to be realized in the future. $14 million of the valuation
allowance reduction was recorded as a credit to income tax expense, and the
remainder was recorded as a credit to goodwill.
as of september24, 2005, the company had
deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses,
and tax credits of $767 million before being offset against certain deferred
tax liabilities and a valuation allowance for presentation on the companys
balance sheet. management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted
income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax
planning strategies, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining net
deferred tax assets. as of september24, 2005 and september25, 2004,
a valuation allowance of $5 million and $30million, respectively, was
recorded against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of tax loss
carryforwards that may not be realized. the remaining valuation allowance at september24,
2005 relates principally to certain state operating loss carryforwards. the
company will continue to evaluate the realizability of the deferred tax assets
quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance.
the internal revenue service (irs) has completed its
field audit of the companys federal income tax returns for all years prior to
2002 and proposed certain adjustments. certain of these adjustments are being
contested through the irs appeals office. substantially all irs audit issues
for these years have been resolved. in addition, the company is also subject to
audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. management believes that
adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax
examinations. however, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with
certainty. should any issues addressed in the companys tax audits be resolved
in a manner not consistent with managements expectations, the company could be
required to adjust its provision for income tax in the period such resolution
occurs.
on october22, 2004,
the american jobs creation act (ajca) was signed into law. the ajca includes a provision
for the deduction of 85% of certain foreign earnings that are repatriated, as
defined in the
ajca. the legislation
provided the company with the option to apply this provision to repatriations
of qualifying earnings in either 2005 or 2006. the company is continuing to
evaluate the effects of the repatriation provision and expects to complete the
evaluation in 2006. a maximum of $755 million may be eligible for repatriation
under the reduced tax rate provided by ajca. however, given the uncertainties
and complexities of the repatriation provision and the companys continuing
evaluation, the company has not yet determined the amount that may be
repatriated or the related potential income tax effects of such repatriation.
recent accounting pronouncements
in november2005, the fasb issued fasb staff
position (fsp) nos. fas 115-1 and fas 124-1, the meaning
of other-than-temporary impairment and its application to certain investments.
fsp nos. fas 115-1 and fas 124-1 amend sfas no.115, accounting for certain investments in debt and equity securities, sfas
no.124, accounting for certain investments held by
not-for-profit organizations, as well as apb opinion no.18, the equity method of accounting for investments in common stock.
this guidance nullifies certain requirements of eitf 03-1, the meaning of other-than-temporary impairment and its application to
certain investments. fsp nos. fas 115-1 and fas 124-1
include guidance for evaluating and recording impairment losses on debt and
equity investments, as well as new disclosure requirements for investments that
are deemed to be temporarily impaired. fsp nos. fas 115-1 and fas 124-1
also require other-than-temporary impaired debt securities to be written down
to its impaired value, which becomes the new cost basis. fsp nos. fas 115-1
and fas 124-1 are effective for fiscal years beginning after december15,
2005. although the company will continue to evaluate the application of fsp
nos. fas115-1 and fas 124-1, management does not currently
believe adoption will have a material impact on the companys results of
operations or financial position.
in november2004, the fasb issued sfas no.151,
inventory costs, which amends the
guidance in accounting research bulletin (arb) no.43, chapter 4, inventory pricing, to clarify the accounting for abnormal
amounts of facility expense, freight, handling costs, and wasted material
(spoilage). arb 43, chapter 4, previously stated that under some
circumstances, items such as idle facility expense, excessive spoilage, double
freight, and rehandling costs may be so abnormal as to require treatment as
current period charges. sfas 151 requires that those items be recognized as
current-period charges regardless of whether they meet the criterion of so
abnormal. in addition, sfas 151 requires that allocation of fixed production
overhead to the costs of conversion be based on the normal capacity of the
production facilities. sfas 151 is effective for fiscal years beginning after june15,
2005. although the company will continue to evaluate the application of sfas
151, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact
on the companys results of operations or financial position.
in december2004, the fasb issued fsp 109-2,
accounting and disclosure guidance for the foreign
earnings repatriation provision within the american jobs creation act of 2004.
fsp 109-2 provides additional time to companies beyond the financial
reporting period of enactment to evaluate the effects of the ajca on their
plans for repatriation of foreign earnings for purposes of applying sfas 109, accounting for income taxes. the company is currently
evaluating the repatriation provisions of ajca, which if implemented by the
company would affect the companys tax provision and deferred tax assets and
liabilities. however, given the uncertainties and complexities of the
repatriation provision and the companys continuing evaluation, it is not
possible at this time to determine the amount, if any, that will be repatriated
or the related potential income tax effects of such repatriation. the company
expects to complete the evaluation in 2006.
in december2004, the fasb issued sfas no.123
(revised 2004) (sfas no.123r), share-based payment,
that addresses the accounting for share-based payment transactions in which an
enterprise receives employee services in exchange for (a)equity
instruments of the enterprise or (b)liabilities that are based on the
fair value of the enterprises equity instruments or that may be settled by the
issuance of such
equity instruments. sfas no.123r eliminates the
ability to account for share-based compensation transactions using the
intrinsic value method under accounting principles board (apb) opinion no.25,
accounting for stock issued to employees,
and instead requires such transactions be accounted for using a
fair-value-based method. the company will recognize stock-based compensation
expense on all awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service
period using the modified prospective method. in january2005, the sec
issued sab no.107, which provides supplemental implementation guidance
for sfas no.123r. sfas no.123r will be effective for the company
beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2006. the company expects the adoption
of sfas no.123r will result in a reduction of diluted earnings per common
share of approximately $0.03 for the first quarter of fiscal 2006.
in march2005, the fasb issued interpretation no.(fin)
47, accounting for conditional asset retirement
obligations, to clarify the requirement to record liabilities
stemming from a legal obligation to perform an asset retirement activity in
which the timing or method of settlement is conditional on a future event. the
company plans to adopt fin 47 in the first quarter of fiscal 2006, and does not
expect the application of fin 47 to have a material impact on its results of
operations, cash flows or financial position.
in may2005, the fasb
issued sfas no.154, accounting changes and
error corrections which replaces apb opinion no.20 accounting changes and sfas no.3, reporting
accounting changes in interim financial statementsan amendment of apb opinion no.28.
sfasno.154 requires retrospective application to prior periods
financial statements of a voluntary change in accounting principal unless it is
not practicable. sfasno.154 is effective for accounting changes and
corrections of errors made in fiscal years beginning after december15,
2005 and is required to be adopted by the company in the first quarter of
fiscal 2007. although the company will continue to evaluate the application of
sfas no.154, management does not currently believe adoption will have a
material impact on the companys results of operations or financial position.
liquidity and capital resources
the
following table presents selected financial information and statistics for each
of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions):
september24,
september25,
september27,
cash, cash
equivalents, and short-term investments
$
8,261
$
5,464
$
4,566
accounts
receivable, net
$
$
$
inventory
$
$
$
working capital
$
6,816
$
4,404
$
3,530
days sales in
accounts receivable (dso) (a)
days of supply in
inventory (b)
days payables
outstanding (dpo) (c)
annual operating cash
flow
$
2,535
$
$
(a) dso is based on ending
net trade receivables and most recent quarterly net sales for each period.
(b) days supply of inventory
is based on ending inventory and most recent quarterly cost of sales for each
period.
(c) dpo is based on ending
accounts payable and most recent quarterly cost of sales adjusted for the
change in inventory.
as of september24, 2005, the company had $8.261
billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, an increase of
$2.797billion over the same balances at the end of 2004. the principal
components of this increase were cash generated by operating activities of
$2.535 billion and proceeds of $543 million from the issuance of common stock
under stock plans, partially offset by cash used to
purchase property, plant, and equipment of $260
million. the companys short-term investment portfolio is primarily invested in
high credit quality, liquid investments. as of september24, 2005,
approximately $4.3 billion of the companys cash, cash equivalents, and short-term
investments were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in u.s.
dollar-denominated holdings. amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are
generally subject to u.s. income taxation on repatriation to the u.s. the
company is currently assessing the impact of the one-time favorable foreign
dividend provisions recently enacted as part of the american jobs creation act
of 2004, and may decide to repatriate earnings from some of its foreign
subsidiaries.
the company believes its
existing balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments
will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital expenditures,
stock repurchase activity, outstanding commitments, and other liquidity
requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12months.
capital
expenditures
the companys total
capital expenditures were $260 million during 2005, $132 million of which were
for retail store facilities and equipment related to the companys retail
segment and $128 million of which were primarily for corporate infrastructure,
including information systems enhancements and operating facilities enhancements
and expansions. the company currently
anticipates it will utilize approximately $390million for capital
expenditures during 2006, approximately $210 million of which is expected to be
utilized for further expansion of the companys retail segment and the
remainder utilized to support normal replacement of existing capital assets and
enhancements to general information technology infrastructure.
stock repurchase
plan
in july1999, the companys board of directors
authorized a plan for the company to repurchase up to $500 million of its
common stock. this repurchase plan does not obligate the company to acquire any
specific number of shares or acquire shares over any specified period of time. since
inception of the stock repurchase plan, the company had repurchased a total of
13.1 million shares at a cost of $217 million. the company has not engaged in
any transactions to repurchase its common stock during 2005 or 2004. the
company was authorized to repurchase up to an additional $283 million of its common
stock as of september24, 2005.
on february28, 2005,
the company effected a two-for-one stock split to shareholders of record as of february18,
2005. all share and per share information has been retroactively adjusted to
reflect the stock split.
off-balance
sheet arrangements and contractual obligations
the company has not entered into any transactions with
unconsolidated entities whereby the company has financial guarantees,
subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent
arrangements that expose the company to material continuing risks, contingent
liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an
unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or
credit risk support to the company.
the
following table presents certain payments due by the company under contractual
obligations with minimum firm commitments as of september24, 2005 and
excludes amounts already recorded on the companys balance sheet as current
liabilities (in millions):
total
payments
dueinless
than
1year
payments
duein
1-3years
payments
duein
4-5years
payments
dueinmore
than
5years
operating leases
$
$
$
$
$
purchase
obligations
1,994
1,994
asset retirement
obligations
other obligations
total
$
2,877
$
2,106
$
$
$
lease commitments
as of september24,
2005, the company
had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating leases of
approximately $865 million, $606 million of which related to the lease of
retail space and related facilities. lease terms on the companys existing
major facility operating leases range from 5 to 20 years.
purchase
commitments with contract manufacturers and component suppliers
the company utilizes several contract manufacturers to
manufacture sub-assemblies for the companys products and to perform final
assembly and test of finished products. these contract manufacturers acquire
components and build product based on demand information supplied by the
company, which typically covers periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. the
company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety
of individual suppliers. consistent with industry practice, the company
acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier
contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. such purchase
commitments typically cover the companys forecasted component and
manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. as of september24,
2005, the company had outstanding third-party manufacturing commitments and
component purchase commitments of approximately $2.0 billion.
subsequent to september24,
2005, the company entered into long-term supply agreements with hynix
semiconductor,inc., intel corporation, micron technology,inc.,
samsung electronics co., ltd., and toshiba corporation to secure supply of nand
flash memory through calendar year 2010. as part of these agreements, the
company intends to prepay a total of $1.25 billion for flash memory components
by the end of the second quarter of 2006.
asset retirement
obligations
the companys asset
retirement obligations are associated with commitments to return property
subject to operating leases to original condition upon lease termination. as of
september24, 2005, the company estimates that gross expected future cash
flows of approximately $14 million will be required to fulfill these obligations.
other obligations
the companys other
obligations of approximately $4 million are primarily related to internet and
telecommunications services.
indemnifications
the company generally does
not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software
against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual
property rights. other agreements entered into by the company sometimes include
indemnification provisions under which the company
could be subject to costs
and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the company or an
indemnified third-party. however, the company has not been required to make any
significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against
itself or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does
not have a liability related to unresolved infringement claims subject to
indemnification that would have a material adverse effect on its financial
condition, liquidity or results of operations.
factors
that mayaffect future results and financial condition
because of the following
factors, as well as other factors affecting the companys operating results and
financial condition, past financial performance should not be considered to be
a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use
historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods.
general economic conditions and current economic and
political uncertainty could adversely affect the demand for the companys
products and the financial health of its suppliers, distributors, and
resellers.
the companys operating
performance depends significantly on general economic conditions in the u.s.
and abroad. at times in the past, demand for the companys products has been
negatively impacted by difficult global economic conditions. additionally, some
of the companys education customers appeared to be delaying technology
purchases due to concerns about the overall impact of the weaker economy and
state budget deficits on their available funding. although recent macroeconomic
trends seem to indicate an economic recovery, continued uncertainty about
future economic conditions makes it difficult to forecast future demand for the
companys products and related operating results. should global and/or regional
economic conditions deteriorate, demand for the companys products could be
adversely affected, as could the financial health of its suppliers,
distributors, and resellers.
war, terrorism, public health issues or other business
interruptions could disrupt supply, delivery or demand of products, which could
negatively affect the companys operations and performance.
war, terrorism, public health issues and other
business interruptions whether in the u.s. or abroad, have caused and could
cause damage or disruption to international commerce
by creating economic and political uncertainties that may have a strong
negative impact on the global economy, the company, and the companys
suppliers or customers. the companys major business operations are subject to
interruption by earthquake, other natural disasters, fire, power shortages,
terrorist attacks and other hostile acts, labor disputes, public health issues,
and other events beyond its control. the majority of the companys research and
development activities, its corporate headquarters, information technology
systems, and other critical business operations, including certain component
suppliers and manufacturing vendors, are located near major seismic faults.
because the company does not carry earthquake insurance for direct
quake-related losses, the companys operating results and financial condition
could be materially adversely affected in the event of a major earthquake or
other natural or manmade disaster.
although it is impossible
to predict the occurrences or consequences of any such events, such events
could result in a decrease in demand for the companys products, make it
difficult or impossible for the company to deliver products to its customers or
to receive components from its suppliers, and could create delays and
inefficiencies in the companys supply chain. in addition, should major public
health issues, including pandemics, arise, the company could be negatively
impacted by the need for more stringent employee travel restrictions,
additional limitations in the availability of freight services, governmental
actions limiting the movement of products between various regions, delays in
production ramps of new products, and disruptions in the operations of the
companys manufacturing vendors and component suppliers. the companys
operating results and financial condition have been, and in the future may be,
adversely affected by these events.
the market for personal computers and related
peripherals and services, as well as digital music devices and related
services, is highly competitive. if the company is unable to effectively
compete in these markets, its results of operations could be adversely
affected.
the personal computer industry is highly competitive
and is characterized by aggressive pricing practices, downward pressure on
gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life
cycles, evolving industry standards, continual improvement in product
price/performance characteristics, rapid adoption of technological and product
advancements by competitors, price sensitivity on the part of consumers, and a
large number of competitors. over the past several years, price competition in
the market for personal computers and related peripherals has been particularly
intense as competitors who sell windows and linux based personal computers have
aggressively cut prices and lowered their product margins for personal
computing products. the companys results of operations and financial condition
have been, and in the future may continue to be, adversely affected by these
and other industry-wide pricing pressures and downward pressures on gross
margins.
the personal computer industry has also been
characterized by rapid technological advances in software functionality,
hardware performance, and features based on existing or emerging industry
standards. further, as the personal computer industry and its customers place
more reliance on the internet, an increasing number of internet devices that
are smaller and simpler than traditional personal computers may compete for
market share with the companys existing products. several competitors of the
company have either targeted or announced their intention to target certain of
the companys key market segments, including consumer, education, professional
and consumer digital video editing, and design and publishing. several of the
companys competitors have introduced or announced plans to introduce digital
music products and/or online stores offering digital music distribution that
mimic many of the unique design, technical features, and solutions of the
companys products. the company has a significant number of competitors, many
of whom have greater financial, marketing, manufacturing, and technological
resources, as well as broader product lines and larger installed customer bases
than those of the company. additionally, there has been a trend towards
consolidation in the personal computer industry that has resulted in larger and
potentially stronger competitors in the companys markets.
the company is currently the only maker of hardware
using the mac os. the mac os has a minority market share in the personal
computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers utilizing other
competing operating systems, including windows and linux. the companys future
operating results and financial condition are substantially dependent on its
ability to continue to develop improvements to the macintosh platform in order
to maintain perceived design and functional advantages over competing platforms.
additionally, if unauthorized copies of the mac os are used on other companies
hardware products and result in decreased demand for the companys hardware
products, the companys results of operations may be adversely affected.
the company is currently focused on market
opportunities related to digital music distribution and related consumer
electronic devices, including ipods. the company faces increasing competition
from other companies promoting their own digital music products, including
music enabled cell phones, distribution services, and free peer-to-peer music
services. these competitors include both new entrants with different market
approaches, such as subscription services models, and also larger companies
that may have greater technical, marketing, distribution, and other resources
than those of the company, as well as established hardware, software, and
digital content supplier relationships. failure to effectively compete could
negatively affect the companys operating results and financial position. there
can be no assurance that the company will be able to continue to provide
products and services that effectively compete in these markets or successfully
distribute and sell digital music outside the u.s. the company may also have to
respond to price competition by lowering prices and/or increasing features
which could adversely affect the companys music product gross margins as well
as overall company gross margins.
the company also faces
increased competition in the u.s. education market. u.s. elementary and
secondary schools, as well as college and university customers, remain a core
market for the company. uncertainty in this channel remains as several
competitors of the company have either targeted or announced their intention to
target the education market for personal computers, which could negatively
affect the companys market share. in an effort to regain market share and
remain competitive, the company has been and will continue to pursue one-to-one
(1:1) learning solutions in education. 1:1learning solutions typically
consist of ibook portable systems for every student and teacher along with a
wireless network connected to a central server. these 1:1 learning solutions
and other strategic sales are generally priced more aggressively and could
result in significantly less profitability or even in financial losses,
particularly for larger deals. although the company believes it has taken
certain steps to strengthen its position in the education market, there can be
no assurance that the company will be able to increase or maintain its share of
the education market or execute profitably on large strategic arrangements.
failure to do so may have an adverse impact on the companys operating results
and financial condition.
the companys transition from powerpc microprocessors
used by macintosh computers to microprocessors built by intel is subject to
numerous risks.
in june2005, the
company announced its intention to transition from the use of powerpc
microprocessors to the use of intel microprocessors in all of its macintosh
computers by the end of calendar year 2007. this transition is subject to
numerous risks and uncertainties, including the companys ability to timely
develop and deliver new products using intel microprocessors, the timely
innovation and delivery of related hardware and software products, including
the companys applications, to support intel microprocessors, market acceptance
of intel-based macintosh computers, the development and availability on acceptable
terms of components and services essential to enable the company to timely
deliver intel-based macintosh computers, and the effective management of
inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand for both powerpc and
intel-based macintosh computers. in addition, the company is dependent on
third-party software developers such as microsoft and adobe continuing to
support current applications that run on powerpc-based computers and timely
developing versions of current and future applications that run on intel and
powerpc-based macintosh computers. the companys inability to timely deliver
new intel-based products or obtain developer commitment both to continue
supporting applications that run on powerpc microprocessors and timely
transition their applications to run natively on intel-based products may have
an adverse impact on the companys results of operations. the companys
announcement of its intention to transition to intel microprocessors may
negatively impact sales of current and future macintosh products containing
powerpc microprocessors, as customers may elect to delay purchases until the
intel-based products are available. additionally, there can be no assurance
that the company will be able to maintain its historical gross margin percentages
on its products, including intel-based macintosh computers, which may adversely
impact the companys results of operations.
future operating results are dependent upon the
companys ability to obtain a sufficient supply of components, including microprocessors,
some of which are in short supply or available only from limited sources.
although most components essential to the companys
business are generally available from multiple sources, certain key components
including microprocessors and asics are currently obtained by the company from
single or limited sources. some key components (including without limitation
dram, nand flash-memory, and tft-lcd flat-panel displays), while currently
available to the company from multiple sources, are at times subject to
industry-wide availability and pricing pressures. in addition, new products
introduced by the company often initially utilize custom components obtained
from only one source until the company has evaluated whether there is a need
for, and subsequently qualifies, additional suppliers. in situations where a
component or product utilizes new technologies, initial capacity constraints
may exist until such time as the suppliers yields have matured. the company
and other producers in the personal computer industry also compete for various
components with other industries that have
experienced increased demand for their products. the
company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal
computer industry including certain microprocessors and asics. continued
availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to
concentrate on the production of components other than those customized to meet
the companys requirements. if the supply of a key component were to be delayed
or constrained on a new or existing product, the companys results of
operations and financial condition could be adversely affected.
the companys ability to
produce and market competitive products is dependent on the ability and desire
of ibm and freescale semiconductor,inc. (freescale) to supply powerpc
microprocessors and intel to supply its microprocessors for the companys
macintosh computers and to provide the company with a sufficient supply of
microprocessors with price/performance features that compare favorably to those
supplied to the companys competitors. while the company has supply agreements
with ibm and freescale, the companys recent announcement of plans to
transition to intel microprocessors may impact the continued availability on
acceptable terms of certain components and services, including powerpc g4 and
g5 microprocessors, which are essential to the companys business and are
currently obtained by the company from sole or limited sources. additionally,
there have been instances in recent years where the inability of the companys
suppliers to provide advanced powerpc microprocessors in sufficient quantity
has had significant adverse effects on the companys results of operations. in
addition, ibm is currently the companys sole supplier of the powerpc g5
processor, which is used in the companys current power mac, xserve, and imac
g5 products. freescale is the sole supplier of the g4 processor, which is used
in the companys emac, mac mini, and portable products. ibm experienced
manufacturing problems with the powerpc g5 processor, which resulted in the
company delaying the shipment of various products and constrained certain
product shipments during the second half of 2004 and the first quarter of 2005.
manufacturing problems experienced by any of the companys suppliers in the
future or failure by them to deliver components to the company in sufficient
quantities with competitive price/performance features could adversely affect
the companys results of operations and financial condition.
the company must successfully manage frequent product
introductions and transitions to remain competitive and effectively stimulate
customer demand.
due to the highly volatile
and competitive nature of the personal computer and consumer electronics
industries, which are characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and
rapid technological advances, the company must continually introduce new
products and technologies, enhance existing products in order to remain
competitive, and effectively stimulate customer demand for new products and
upgraded versions of the companys existing products. the success of new
product introductions is dependent on a number of factors, including market
acceptance; the companys ability to manage the risks associated with product
transitions, including the transition to intel-based macintosh computers, and
production ramp issues; the availability of application software for new
products; the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated
product demand, including anticipated demand for powerpc-based and intel-based
macintosh computers; the availability of products in appropriate quantities to
meet anticipated demand; and the risk that new products may have quality or
other defects in the early stages of introduction. accordingly, the company
cannot determine in advance the ultimate effect that new products will have on
its sales or results of operations.
the companys products from time to time experience
quality problems that can result in decreased net sales and operating profits.
the company sells highly
complex hardware and software products that can contain defects in design and
manufacture. sophisticated operating system software and applications, such as
those sold by the company, often contain bugs that can unexpectedly interfere
with the operation of the software. defects may also occur in components and
products the company purchases from third-parties. there can be no assurance
that the company will be able to detect and fix all defects in the hardware and
software it sells.
failure to do so could
result in lost revenue, loss of reputation, and significant warranty and other
expense to remedy.
because orders for components, and in some cases
commitments to purchase components, must be placed in advance of customer
orders, the company faces substantial inventory risk.
the company records a write-down for inventories of
components and products that have become obsolete or are in excess of
anticipated demand or net realizable value and accrues necessary reserves for
cancellation fees of orders for inventories that have been cancelled. although
the company believes its inventory and related provisions are currently
adequate, given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product obsolescence in the
computer and consumer electronics industries and the transition to intel-based
macintosh computers, no assurance can be given that the company will not incur
additional inventory and related charges. in addition, such charges have had,
and may have, a material effect on the companys financial position and results
of operations.
the company must order
components for its products and build inventory in advance of product
shipments. because the companys markets are volatile and subject to rapid
technology and price changes, and because of the transition to intel-based
macintosh computers, there is a risk the company will forecast incorrectly and
produce or order from third parties excess or insufficient inventories of
particular products. consistent with industry practice, components are normally
acquired through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open
orders based on projected demand information. such purchase commitments
typically cover the companys forecasted component and manufacturing
requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. the companys operating
results and financial condition have been in the past and may in the future be
materially adversely affected by the companys ability to manage its inventory
levels and respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns.
the company is dependent on manufacturing and
logistics services provided by third parties, many of whom are located outside
of the u.s.
most of the companys products are manufactured in
whole or in part by third-party manufacturers. in addition, the company has
outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. while
outsourcing arrangements may lower the cost of operations, they also reduce the
companys direct control over production and distribution. it is uncertain what
effect such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of the
products manufactured or services rendered, or the flexibility of the company
to respond to changing market conditions. moreover, although arrangements with
such manufacturers may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement,
the company may remain at least initially responsible to the consumer for
warranty service in the event of product defects. any unanticipated product
defect or warranty liability, whether pursuant to arrangements with contract
manufacturers or otherwise, could adversely affect the companys future
operating results and financial condition.
final assembly of products
sold by the company is currently performed in the companys manufacturing
facility in cork, ireland, and by external vendors in fremont, california,
fullerton, california, taiwan, korea, the peoples republic of china, and the
czech republic. currently, manufacturing of many of the components used in the
companys products is performed by third-party vendors in taiwan, china, japan,
korea, and singapore. final assembly of substantially all of the companys
portable products including powerbooks, ibooks, and ipods is performed by
third-party vendors in china. if for any reason manufacturing or logistics in
any of these locations is disrupted by regional economic, business, labor,
environmental, public health, or political issues, as well as information
technology system failures or military actions, the companys results of
operations and financial condition could be adversely affected.
the companys future operating performance is
dependent on the performance of distributors and other resellers of the companys
products.
the company distributes its products through
wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers, and cataloguers, many
of whom distribute products from competing manufacturers. in addition, the
company sells many of its products and resells certain third-party products in
most of its major markets directly to end users, certain education customers,
and certain resellers through its online stores around the world and its retail
stores. many of the companys resellers operate on narrow product margins and
have been negatively affected by weak economic conditions over the last several
years. considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral or
credit insurance are outstanding with the companys distribution and retail
channel partners. the companys business and financial results could be
adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakens, if
resellers within consumer channels were to cease distribution of the companys
products, or if uncertainty regarding demand for the companys products caused
resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the companys products. the
company has invested and will continue to invest in various programs to enhance
reseller sales, including staffing selected resellers stores with company
employees and contractors. these programs could require a substantial
investment from the company, while providing no assurance of return or
incremental revenue to offset this investment.
over the past several years, an increasing proportion
of the companys net sales has been made by the company directly to end-users
through its online stores around the world and through its retail stores in the
u.s., canada, japan, and the u.k. some of the companys resellers have
perceived this expansion of the companys direct sales as conflicting with
their own businesses and economic interests as distributors and resellers of
the companys products. perception of such a conflict could discourage the
companys resellers from investing additional resources in the distribution and
sale of the companys products or lead them to limit or cease distribution of
the companys products. the companys business and financial results could be
adversely affected if expansion of its direct sales to end-users causes some or
all of its resellers to cease or limit distribution of the companys products.
further information
regarding risks associated with marketing and distribution may be found in parti,
item 1 of this form10-k under the heading markets and
distribution.
the company relies on third-party digital content,
which may not be available to the company on commercially reasonable terms or
at all.
the company contracts with third parties to offer
their digital content to customers through the companys itunes music store.
the company pays substantial fees to obtain the rights to offer to its
customers this third-party digital content. the companys licensing
arrangements with these third-party content providers are short-term in nature
and do not guarantee the future renewal of these arrangements at commercially
reasonable terms, if at all. certain parties in the music industry have consolidated
and formed alliances, which could limit the availability and increase the fees
required to offer digital content to customers through the itunes music store.
further, some third-party content providers currently, or may in the future,
offer music products and services that compete with the companys music
products and services, and could take action to make it more difficult or
impossible for the company to license their digital content in the future. if
the company is unable to continue to offer a wide variety of digital content at
reasonable prices with acceptable usage rules, or continue to expand its
geographic reach outside the u.s., then sales and gross margins of the companys
itunes music store as well as related hardware and peripherals, including
ipods, may be adversely affected.
third-party content
providers and artists require that the company provide certain digital rights
management solutions and other security mechanisms. if the requirements from
content providers or artists change, then the company may be required to
further develop or license technology to address such new rights and
requirements. there is no assurance that the company will be able to develop or
license
such solutions at a
reasonable cost and in a timely manner, if at all, which could have a
materially adverse effect on the companys operating results and financial
position.
the companys future performance is dependent upon
support from third-party software developers. if third-party
software applications cease to be developed or available for the companys
hardware products, then customers may choose not to buy the companys products.
the company believes that decisions by customers to
purchase the companys personal computers, as opposed to windows-based
systems, are often based on the availability of third-party software for
particular applications such as microsoft office. the company also believes the
availability of third-party application software for the companys
hardware products depends in part on third-party developers perception
and analysis of the relative benefits of developing, maintaining, and upgrading
such software for the companys products versus software for the larger windows
market or growing linux market. this analysis may be based on factors such as
the perceived strength of the company and its products, the anticipated
potential revenue that may be generated, continued acceptance by customers of
mac os x, and the costs of developing such software products. to the extent the
minority market share held by the company in the personal computer market has
caused software developers to question the companys prospects in the personal
computer market, developers could be less inclined to develop new application
software or upgrade existing software for the companys products and more
inclined to devote their resources to developing and upgrading software for the
larger windows market or growing linux market. moreover, there can be no
assurance software developers will continue to develop software for mac os x,
the companys operating system, on a timely basis or at all.
in june2005, the company announced its plan to
begin using intel microprocessors in its macintosh computers. the company plans
to begin shipping certain models with intel microprocessors by june2006
and to complete this transition to intel microprocessors for all of its
macintosh computers by the end of calendar year 2007. the company depends on
third-party software developers to timely develop current and future
applications that run on intel and powerpc microprocessors. the companys
inability to timely deliver new intel-based products, or a decline in available
applications that run on the companys powerpc products or the lack of
applications that run on intel-based macintosh systems could have a materially
adverse effect on the companys operating results and financial position.
in addition, past and future development by the
company of its own software applications and solutions may negatively impact
the decision of software developers, such as microsoft and adobe, to develop,
maintain, and upgrade similar or competitive software for the companys
products. the company currently markets and sells a variety of software
applications for use by professionals, consumers, and education customers that
could influence the decisions of third-party software developers to develop or
upgrade macintosh-compatible software products. software applications currently
marketed by the company include software for professional film and video
editing, professional compositing and visual effects for large format film and
video productions, professional music production and music post production,
professional and consumer dvd encoding and authoring, professional digital
photo editing and workflow management, consumer digital video and digital photo
editing and management, digital music management, desktop-based database
management, word processing, and high-quality presentations. the company also
markets an integrated productivity application that incorporates word
processing, pagelayout, image manipulation, spreadsheets, databases, and
presentations in a single application. discontinuance of third-party products
for the macintosh platform, including microsoft office could have an adverse
effect on the companys net sales and results of operations.
the companys business relies on access to patents and
intellectual property obtained from third parties, and the companys future
results could be adversely affected if it is alleged or found to have infringed
on the intellectual property rights of others.
many of the companys products are designed to include
intellectual property obtained from third parties. while it may be necessary in
the future to seek or renew licenses relating to various aspects of its
products and business methods, the company believes that based upon past
experience and industry practice, such licenses generally could be obtained on
commercially reasonable terms. however, there can be no assurance that the
necessary licenses would be available or available on acceptable terms.
because of technological
changes in the computer and consumer electronics industries, current extensive
patent coverage, and the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, it is possible
certain components of the companys products and business methods may
unknowingly infringe existing patents of others. the company has from time to
time been notified that it may be infringing certain patents or other
intellectual property rights of others. responding to such claims, regardless
of their merit, can be time-consuming, result in significant expenses, and
cause the diversion of management and technical personnel. several pending
claims are in various stages of evaluation. the company may consider the
desirability of entering into licensing agreements in certain of these cases.
however, no assurance can be given that such licenses can be obtained on
acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur. in the event there is a
temporary or permanent injunction entered prohibiting the company from
marketing or selling certain of its products or a successful claim of
infringement against the company requiring it to pay royalties to a
third-party, the companys future operating results and financial condition
could be adversely affected. information regarding certain claims and
litigation involving the company related to alleged patent infringement and
other matters is set forth in parti, item 3 of this form10-k.
in the opinion of management, the company does not have a potential liability
for damages or royalties from any current legal proceedings or claims related
to the infringement of patent or other intellectual property rights of others
that would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on
its results of operations, or financial condition. however, the results of such
legal proceedings cannot be predicted with certainty. should the company fail
to prevail in any of the matters related to infringement of patent or other
intellectual property rights of others described in parti, item 3 of this
form10-k or should several of these matters be resolved against the
company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular
reporting period could be materially adversely affected.
the companys retail initiative has required and will
continue to require a substantial investment and commitment of resources and is
subject to numerous risks and uncertainties.
through october2005, the company had opened 126 retail
stores. the companys retail initiative has required substantial investment in
equipment and leasehold improvements, information systems, inventory, and
personnel. the company has also entered into substantial operating lease
commitments for retail space with lease terms ranging from 5 to 20 years, the
majority of which are for 10 years. the company could incur substantial costs
should it choose to terminate this initiative or close individual stores. such
costs could adversely affect the companys results of operations and financial
condition. additionally, a relatively high proportion of the retail segments
costs are fixed because of depreciation on store construction costs and lease
expense. as a result, significant losses would result should the retail segment
experience a significant decline in sales for any reason.
certain of the companys stores
have been designed and built to serve as high profile venues that function
as vehicles for general corporate marketing, corporate events, and brand
awareness. because of their unique design elements, locations and size, these
stores require substantially more investment in equipment and leasehold improvements than the companys more typical
retail stores. the company has opened seven such stores through october2005.
because of their location and size, these high profile stores also require the
company to enter into substantially larger operating lease commitments compared
to those required for its more typical stores. current leases on such locations
have terms ranging from 10 to 14 years with total
remaining commitments per
location ranging from $4 million to $46 million. closure or poor performance of
one of these high profile stores could have a particularly significant negative
impact on the companys results of operations and financial condition.
many of the general risks
and uncertainties the company faces could also have an adverse impact on its
retail segment. also, many factors unique to retail operations present risks and uncertainties, some of which
are beyond the companys control, that could adversely affect the retail
segments future results, cause its actual results to differ from those
currently expected, and/or have an adverse effect on the companys consolidated
results of operations. potential risks and uncertainties unique to retail
operations that could have an adverse impact on the retail segment include,
among other things, macro-economic factors that have a negative impact on
general retail activity; inability to manage costs associated with store
construction and operation; failure to attract new users to the macintosh
platform; inability to sell third-party hardware and software products at
adequate margins; failure to manage relationships with existing retail channel
partners; lack of experience in managing retail operations outside the u.s.;
costs associated with unanticipated fluctuations in the value of apple-branded
and third-party retail inventory; and inability to obtain quality retail
locations at reasonable cost.
investment in new business strategies and initiatives
could disrupt the companys ongoing business and may present risks not
originally contemplated.
the company has and may in
the future invest in new business strategies or engage in acquisitions that
complement the companys strategic direction and product roadmap. such
endeavors may involve significant risks and uncertainties, including
distraction of managements attention away from normal business operations;
insufficient revenue generation to offset liabilities assumed and expenses
associated with the strategy; and unidentified issues not discovered in the
companys due diligence process. because these new ventures are inherently
risky, no assurance can be given that such strategies and initiatives will be
successful and will not materially adversely affect the companys business,
operating results or financial condition.
declines in the sales of the companys professional
products, software, accessories, or service and support contracts, or increases
in sales of consumer products, including ipods, may negatively impact the
companys gross margin and operating margin percentages.
the companys professional products, including power
macintosh and powerbook systems, software, accessories, and service and support
contracts, generally have higher gross margins than the companys consumer
products, including imacs, ibooks, ipods, and content from the itunes music
store. a shift in sales mix away from higher margin professional products
towards lower margin consumer products could adversely affect the companys
future gross margin and operating margin percentages. the companys traditional
professional customers may choose to buy consumer products, specifically the
imac g5 and ibook, instead of professional products. professional users may
choose to buy the imac g5 due to its relative price performance, use of the
same powerpc g5 processor used in the companys power macs, and unique design
featuring a flat panel screen. potential powerbook customers may also choose to
purchase ibooks instead due to their price performance and screen size.
additionally, significant future growth in ipod sales without corresponding
growth in higher margin product sales could also reduce gross margin and
operating margin percentages.
it is likely that some of
the companys current and potential professional,
creative, and small business customers, who are most likely to utilize
professional systems, believe that the relatively slower mhz rating or
clock speed of the microprocessors the company utilizes in its macintosh
systems compares unfavorably to those utilized by other computer manufacturers
and translates to slower overall system performance. these factors may result
in an adverse impact to sales of the companys professional products as well as
to gross margin and operating margin percentages.
the company expects
its quarterly revenue and operating results to fluctuate for a variety of
reasons.
the companys profit margins
vary among its products and its distribution channels. the companys direct
sales, primarily through its retail and online stores, generally have higher
associated profitability than its indirect sales. additionally, the companys
direct channels have traditionally had more sales of software and higher priced
hardware products, which generally have higher gross margins, than its indirect
channels. as a result, the companys gross margin and operating margin
percentages as well as overall profitability may be adversely impacted as a
result of a shift in product, geographic, or channel mix, or new product
announcements, including the transition to intel-based macintosh computers. in
addition, the company generally sells more products during the third month of
each quarter than it does during either of the first two months, a pattern
typical in the personal computer industry. this sales pattern can produce
pressure on the companys internal infrastructure during the third month of a
quarter and may adversely impact the companys ability to predict its financial
results accurately. developments late in a quarter, such as lower-than-anticipated
demand for the companys products, an internal systems failure, or failure of
one of the companys key logistics, components suppliers, or manufacturing
partners, can have significant adverse impacts on the company and its results
of operations and financial condition.
the company has higher research and development and
selling, general and administrative costs, as a percentage of revenue, than
many of its competitors.
the companys ability to
compete successfully and maintain attractive gross margins and revenue growth
is heavily dependent upon its ability to ensure a continuing and timely flow of
innovative and competitive products and technologies to the marketplace. as a
result, the company incurs higher research and development costs as a
percentage of revenue than its competitors who sell personal computers based on
other operating systems. many of these competitors seek to compete aggressively
on price and maintain very low cost structures. further, as a result of the
expansion of the companys retail segment and costs associated with marketing
the companys brand including its unique operating system, the company incurs
higher selling costs as a percentage of revenue than many of its competitors.
if the company is unable to continue to develop and sell innovative new
products with attractive gross margins, its results of operations may be
materially adversely affected by its operating cost structure.
the company is exposed to credit risk on its accounts
receivable and prepayments related to long-term supply agreements. this risk is
heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen.
the company distributes
its products through third-party computer resellers and retailers and directly
to certain educational institutions and commercial customers. a substantial
majority of the companys outstanding trade receivables are not covered by
collateral or credit insurance. the company also has unsecured non-trade
receivables from certain of its manufacturing vendors resulting from the sale
by the company of raw material components to these manufacturing vendors who
manufacture sub-assemblies or assemble final products for the company. in
addition, the company has entered into long-term supply agreements to secure supply
of nand flash-memory and intends to prepay a total of $1.25 billion under these
agreements. while the company has procedures in place to monitor and limit
exposure to credit risk on its trade and non-trade receivables as well as
long-term prepayments, there can be no assurance that such procedures will be
effective in limiting its credit risk and avoiding losses. additionally, if the
global economy and regional economies fail to improve or continue to
deteriorate, it becomes more likely that the company will incur a material loss
or losses as a result of the weakening financial condition of one or more of
its customers or manufacturing vendors.
the companys
success depends largely on its ability to attract and retain key personnel.
much of the future success
of the company depends on the continued service and availability of skilled
personnel, including its chief executive officer, members of its executive team,
and those in technical, marketing and staff positions. experienced personnel in
the information technology industry are in high demand and competition for
their talents is intense, especially in the silicon valley, where the majority
of
the companys key
employees are located. the company has relied on its ability to grant stock
options as one mechanism for recruiting and retaining this highly skilled
talent. recent accounting regulations requiring the expensing of stock options
will impair the companys future ability to provide these incentives without
incurring significant compensation costs. there can be no assurance that the
company will continue to successfully attract and retain key personnel.
the company is
subject to risks associated with the selection, availability, and cost of
insurance.
the company has observed
rapidly changing conditions in the insurance markets relating to nearly all
areas of traditional commercial insurance. such conditions have and may
continue to result in higher premium costs, higher policy deductibles, lower
coverage limits and may also yield possible policy form exclusions. for some
risks, because of cost and/or availability, the company does not have insurance
coverage. because the company retains some portion of its insurable risks, and
in some cases self insures completely, unforeseen or catastrophic losses in
excess of insured limits may have a material adverse effect on the companys
results of operations and financial position.
failure of information technology systems and breaches
in the security of data upon which the company relies could adversely affect
the companys future operating results.
information technology
system failures and breaches of data security could disrupt the companys
ability to function in the normal course of business by potentially causing
delays or cancellation of customer orders, impeding the manufacture or shipment
of products, or resulting in the unintentional disclosure of customer or
company information. management has taken steps to address these concerns for
its own systems by implementing sophisticated network security and internal
control measures. however, there can be no assurance that a system failure or
data security breach of the company or a third-party vendor will not have a
material adverse effect on the companys results of operations.
the companys
business is subject to the risks of international operations.
a large portion of the companys revenue is derived
from its international operations. as a result, the companys operating results
and financial condition could be significantly affected by risks associated
with international activities, including economic and labor conditions,
political instability, tax laws (including u.s. taxes on foreign subsidiaries),
and changes in the value of the u.s. dollar versus the local currency in which
the products are sold and goods and services are purchased. the companys
primary exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates relate to
non-dollar denominated sales in europe, japan, australia, canada, and certain
parts of asia and non-dollar denominated operating expenses incurred throughout
the world. weaknesses in foreign currencies, particularly the japanese yen and
the euro, can adversely impact consumer demand for the companys products and
the u.s. dollar value of the companys foreign currency denominated sales. conversely,
a strengthening in these and other foreign currencies can cause the company to
modify international pricing and affect the value of the companys foreign
denominated sales, and in some cases, may also increase the cost to the company
of some product components.
margins on sales of the companys products in foreign
countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained from
foreign suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate
fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including tariffs and
antidumping penalties.
derivative instruments, such as foreign exchange
forward and option positions have been utilized by the company to hedge
exposures to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. the use of such
hedging activities may not offset more than a portion of the adverse financial
impact resulting from unfavorable movements in foreign exchange rates.
further information
related to the companys global market risks may be found in partii, item
7a of this form10-k under the subheading foreign currency risk
and may be found in partii, item 8 of this form10-k at notes
1 and 2 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
the company is
subject to risks associated with environmental regulations.
production and marketing
of products in certain states and countries may subject the company to
environmental and other regulations including, in some instances, the
requirement to provide customers the ability to return product at the end of
its useful life, and place responsibility for environmentally safe disposal or
recycling with the company. such laws and regulations have recently been passed
in several jurisdictions in which the company operates, including various
european union member countries, japan, and certain states within the u.s. in
the future, these laws could have a material adverse effect on the companys
results of operations.
changes in accounting
rulescould affect the companys future operating results.
financial statements are
prepared in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles.
these principles are subject to interpretation by various governing bodies,
including the fasb and the sec, who create and interpret appropriate accounting
standards. a change from current accounting standards could have a significant
effect on the companys results of operations. in december2004, the fasb
issued new guidance that addresses the accounting for share-based payments,
sfas no.123r. in april2005, the sec deferred the effective date of
sfas no.123r to years beginning after june15, 2005. therefore,
sfasno.123r will be effective for the company beginning in its
first quarter of fiscal 2006. the company expects the adoption of sfas no.123r
will result in a reduction of diluted earnings per common share of
approximately $0.03 for the first quarter of fiscal 2006. although the effect
from the adoption of sfas no.123r is expected to have a material impact
on the companys results of operations, future changes to various assumptions
used to determine the fair-value of awards issued or the amount and type of
equity awards granted create uncertainty as to the amount of future stock-based
compensation expense.
changes in the
companys tax rates could affect its future results.
the companys future
effective tax rates could be favorably or unfavorably affected by changes in
the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in
the valuation of the companys deferred tax assets and liabilities, or by
changes in tax laws or their interpretation. in addition, the company is
subject to the continuous examination of its income tax returns by the internal
revenue service and other tax authorities. the company regularly assesses the
likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine
the adequacy of its provision for income taxes. there can be no assurance that
the outcomes from these continuous examinations will not have an adverse affect
on the companys net income and financial condition.
the companys stock
price may be volatile.
the companys stock has at
times experienced substantial price volatility as a result of variations
between its actual and anticipated financial results and as a result of
announcements by the company and its competitors. the stock market has
experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have affected the market
price of many technology companies in ways that may have been unrelated to the
operating performance of these companies. these factors, including lack of
positive general economic and political conditions and investors concerns
regarding the credibility of corporate financial reporting and integrity of financial
markets, may materially adversely affect the market price of the companys
stock in the future. in addition, increases in the companys stock price may
result in greater dilution of earnings per share.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk
interest rate and
foreign currency risk management
the company regularly
reviews its foreign exchange forward and option positions and its interest rate
swap and option positions, both on a stand-alone basis and in conjunction
with its underlying foreign currency and interest rate related exposures.
however, given the effective horizons of the companys risk management
activities and the anticipatory nature of the exposures, there can be no
assurance the hedges will offset more than a portion of the financial impact
resulting from movements in either foreign exchange or interest rates. in
addition, the timing of the accounting for recognition of gains and losses
related to mark-to-market instruments for any given period may not
coincide with the timing of gains and losses related to the underlying economic
exposures and, therefore, may adversely affect the companys operating results
and financial position.
interest rate risk
while the company is exposed to interest rate
fluctuations in many of the worlds leading industrialized countries, the
companys interest income and expense is most sensitive to fluctuations in the
general level of u.s. interest rates. in this regard, changes in u.s. interest
rates affect the interest earned on the companys cash, cash equivalents, and
short-term investments as well as costs associated with foreign currency
hedges.
the companys short-term investment policy and
strategy is to ensure the preservation of capital, meet liquidity requirements,
and optimize return in light of the current credit and interest rate
environment. the company benchmarks its performance by utilizing external money
managers to manage a small portion of the aggregate investment portfolio. the
external managers adhere to the companys investment policies and also provide
occasional research and market information that supplements internal research
used to make credit decisions in the investment process.
the companys exposure to market risk for changes in
interest rates relates primarily to the companys investment portfolio. the
company places its short-term investments in highly liquid securities issued by
high credit quality issuers and, by policy, limits the amount of credit
exposure to any one issuer. the companys general policy is to limit the risk
of principal loss and ensure the safety of invested funds by limiting market
and credit risk. all highly liquid investments with maturities of three months
or less are classified as cash equivalents; highly liquid investments with
maturities greater than three months are classified as short-term
investments. as of september24, 2005, approximately $287 million of the
companys short-term investments had underlying maturities ranging from 1 to 5
years. as of september25, 2004, $180 million of the companys investment
portfolio classified as short-term investments had maturities ranging from 1 to
5 years. the remainder all had underlying maturities between 3 and 12 months.
the company may sell its investments prior to their stated maturities, due to
liquidity needs, in anticipation of credit deterioration, or for duration
management. the company recognized a net loss before taxes of $137,000 in 2005,
and net gains before taxes of $1 million and $21 million in 2004, and 2003,
respectively as a result of such sales.
in order to provide a meaningful assessment of the
interest rate risk associated with the companys investment portfolio, the
company performed a sensitivity analysis to determine the impact that a change
in interest rates would have on the value of the investment portfolio assuming
a 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve. based on investment
positions as of september24, 2005, a hypothetical 100 basis point
increase in interest rates across all maturities would result in a $19.9
million decline in the fair market value of the portfolio. as of september25,
2004, a similar 100 basis point shift in the yield curve would have resulted in
a $14.4 million decline in fair value. such losses would only be realized if
the company sold the investments prior to maturity. except in instances noted
above, the companys policy is to hold investments to maturity.
from time to time, the
company has entered into interest rate derivative transactions with financial
institutions in order to better match the companys floating-rate interest
income on its cash equivalents and short-term investments with its fixed-rate
interest expense on its debt, and/or to diversify a portion of the companys exposure
away from fluctuations in short-term u.s. interest rates. the company did not
enter into any interest rate derivatives during 2005 or 2004 and had no open
interest rate derivatives at september24, 2005.
foreign currency
risk
in general, the company is a net receiver of
currencies other than the u.s. dollar. accordingly, changes in exchange rates,
and in particular a strengthening of the u.s. dollar, may negatively affect the
companys net sales and gross margins as expressed in u.s. dollars. there is
also a risk that the company will have to adjust local currency product pricing
due to competitive pressures when there has been significant volatility in
foreign currency exchange rates.
the company may enter into foreign currency forward
and option contracts with financial institutions to protect against foreign
exchange risks associated with existing assets and liabilities, certain firmly
committed transactions, forecasted future cash flows, and net investments in
foreign subsidiaries. generally, the companys practice is to hedge a majority
of its existing material foreign exchange transaction exposures. however, the
company may not hedge certain foreign exchange transaction exposures due to
immateriality, prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular exposures, and
limited availability of appropriate hedging instruments.
in order to provide a meaningful assessment of the
foreign currency risk associated with certain of the companys foreign currency
derivative positions, the company performed a sensitivity analysis using a
value-at-risk (var) model to assess the potential impact of fluctuations in
exchange rates. the var model consisted of using a monte carlo simulation to
generate 3000 random market price paths. the var is the maximum expected loss in
fair value, for a given confidence interval, to the companys foreign exchange
portfolio due to adverse movements in rates. the var model is not intended to
represent actual losses but is used as a risk estimation and management tool. the
model assumes normal market conditions. forecasted transactions, firm
commitments, and assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies were
excluded from the model. based on the results of the model, the company
estimates with 95% confidence a maximum one-day loss in fair value of $10.0
million as of september24, 2005 compared to a maximum one-day loss of
$3.2 million as of september25, 2004. because the company uses foreign
currency instruments for hedging purposes, losses incurred on those instruments
are generally offset by increases in the fair value of the underlying
exposures.
actual future gains and losses associated with the
companys investment portfolio and derivative positions may differ materially
from the sensitivity analyses performed as of september24, 2005 due to
the inherent limitations associated with predicting the changes in the timing
and amount of interest rates, foreign currency exchanges rates, and the companys
actual exposures and positions.
item
8. financial statements and supplementary data
index to consolidated
financial statements
page
financial statements:
consolidated
balance sheets as of september24, 2005 and september25, 2004
consolidated
statements of operations for the three fiscal years ended september24,
consolidated
statements of shareholders equity for the three fiscal years ended
september24,2005
consolidated
statements of cash flows for the three fiscal years ended september24,
notes
to consolidated financial statements
selected
quarterly financial information (unaudited)
reports
of independent registered public accounting firm, kpmg llp
all financial statement schedules have been omitted,
since the required information is not applicable or is not present in amounts
sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the information
required is included in the consolidated financial statements and notes
thereto.
consolidated
balance sheets
(inmillions, except share amounts)
september24,2005
september25,2004
assets:
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
3,491
$
2,969
short-term investments
4,770
2,495
accounts receivable, less allowances of $46 and $47,
respectively
inventories
deferred tax assets
other current assets
total current assets
10,300
7,055
property, plant, and equipment, net
goodwill
acquired intangible assets, net
other assets
total assets
$
11,551
$
8,050
liabilities and shareholders equity:
current
liabilities:
accounts payable
$
1,779
$
1,451
accrued expenses
1,705
1,200
total current liabilities
3,484
2,651
non-current
liabilities
total liabilities
4,085
2,974
commitments and
contingencies
shareholders
equity:
common stock, no par value; 1,800,000,000 shares
authorized; 835,019,364 and 782,887,234 shares issued and outstanding,
respectively
3,521
2,514
deferred stock compensation
(60
)
(93
)
retained earnings
4,005
2,670
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
(15
)
total shareholders equity
7,466
5,076
total liabilities
and shareholders equity
$
11,551
$
8,050
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
consolidated
statements of operations
(inmillions, except share and per share amounts)
threefiscalyearsendedseptember24,2005
net sales
$
13,931
$
8,279
$
6,207
cost of sales
9,888
6,020
4,499
gross margin
4,043
2,259
1,708
operating
expenses:
research and development
selling, general, and administrative
1,859
1,421
1,212
restructuring costs
total operating expenses
2,393
1,933
1,709
operating income
(loss)
1,650
(1
)
other income and expense:
gains on non-current investments, net
interest and other income, net
total other income and expense
income before
provision for income taxes
1,815
provision for
income taxes
income before
accounting changes
1,335
cumulative
effects of accounting changes, net of income taxes
net income
$
1,335
$
$
earnings per common share before accounting changes:
basic
$
1.65
$
0.37
$
0.09
diluted
$
1.56
$
0.36
$
0.09
earnings per common share:
basic
$
1.65
$
0.37
$
0.10
diluted
$
1.56
$
0.36
$
0.09
shares used in computing earnings per share (in
thousands):
basic
808,439
743,180
721,262
diluted
856,780
774,622
726,932
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
consolidated
statements of shareholders equity
(inmillions, except share amounts which are in thousands)
accumulated
other
total
commonstock
deferredstock
retained
comprehensive
shareholders
shares
amount
compensation
earnings
income(loss)
equity
balances as of september28, 2002
717,918
$
1,826
$
(7
)
$
2,325
$
(49
)
$
4,095
components of comprehensive income:
net income
change in foreign
currency translation
change in
unrealized gain on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
(12
)
(12
)
change in
unrealized gain on derivative investments, net of tax
(5
)
(5
)
total
comprehensive income
amortization of
deferred stock compensation
write-off of
deferred stock
compensation
common stock
issued under stock plans
18,598
(75
)
settlement of
forward purchase
agreement
(3,062
)
(35
)
(35
)
tax benefit
related to stock options
balances as of september27, 2003
733,454
$
1,926
$
(62
)
$
2,394
$
(35
)
$
4,223
components of comprehensive income:
net income
change in foreign
currency translation
change in
unrealized gain on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
(5
)
(5
)
change in
unrealized loss on derivative investments, net of tax
total
comprehensive income
issuance of
restricted stock units
(64
)
adjustment to
common stock related to a prior year acquisition
(159
)
(2
)
(2
)
amortization of
deferred stock compensation
common stock
issued under stock plans
49,592
tax benefit
related to stock options
balances as of september25, 2004
782,887
$
2,514
$
(93
)
$
2,670
$
(15
)
$
5,076
components
of comprehensive income:
net income
1,335
1,335
change in foreign
currency translation
change in
unrealized gain on derivative investments, net of tax
total
comprehensive income
1,350
issuance of restricted stock units, net
(7
)
amortization of deferred stock compensation
common stock issued under stock plans
52,132
tax benefit related to stock options
balances as of
september24, 2005
835,019
$
3,521
$
(60
)
$
4,005
$
$
7,466
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
consolidated statements of cash flows
(inmillions)
threefiscalyearsendedseptember24,2005
cash and cash
equivalents, beginning of the year
$
2,969
$
3,396
$
2,252
operating activities:
net income
1,335
cumulative
effects of accounting changes, net of taxes
(1
)
adjustments to reconcile
net income to cash generated by operating activities:
depreciation, amortization and accretion
stock-based compensation expense
non-cash restructuring
provision for (benefit from) deferred income taxes
(11
)
tax benefit from stock options
loss on disposition of property, plant, and
equipment
gains on sales of short-term investments, net
(1
)
(21
)
gains on non-current investments, net
(4
)
(10
)
gain on forward purchase agreement
(6
)
changes in operating
assets and liabilities:
accounts receivable
(121
)
(8
)
(201
)
inventories
(64
)
(45
)
(11
)
other current assets
(150
)
(176
)
(34
)
other assets
(61
)
(39
)
(30
)
accounts payable
other liabilities
cash generated by operating activities
2,535
investing
activities:
purchases of
short-term investments
(11,470
)
(3,270
)
(2,648
)
proceeds from
maturities of short-term investments
8,609
1,141
2,446
proceeds from
sales of short-term investments
1,116
proceeds from
sales of non-current investments
purchases of
property, plant, and equipment
(260
)
(176
)
(164
)
other
(21
)
cash (used for) generated by investing activities
(2,556
)
(1,488
)
financing
activities:
payment of
long-term debt
(300
)
proceeds from issuance
of common stock
cash used for
repurchase of common stock
(26
)
cash generated by financing activities
increase
(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(427
)
1,144
cash and cash
equivalents, end of the year
$
3,491
$
2,969
$
3,396
supplemental cash
flow disclosures:
cash paid during the year for interest
$
$
$
cash paid
(received) for income taxes, net
$
$
(7
)
$
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
notes to consolidated financial statements
note
1summary of significant accounting policies
apple computer,inc.
and its subsidiaries (the company) designs, manufactures, and markets personal
computers and related software, services, peripherals, and networking solutions.
the company also designs, develops, and markets a line of portable digital
music players along with related accessories and services including the online
distribution of third-party music, audio books, music videos, short films, and
television shows. the company sells its products worldwide through its online
stores, its own retail stores, its direct sales force, and third-party
wholesalers, resellers, and value-added resellers. in addition to its own
hardware, software, and peripheral products, the company sells a variety of
third-party hardware and software products through its online and retail stores.
the company sells to education, consumer, creative professional, business, and
government customers.
basis
of presentation and preparation
the accompanying
consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the company.
intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated. the preparation of
these consolidated financial statements in conformity with u.s. generally
accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the amounts reported in these consolidated financial
statements and accompanying notes. actual results could differ materially from
those estimates. certain prior year amounts in the consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto have been reclassified to conform to the current
year presentation.
typically, the companys
fiscal year ends on the last saturday of september. fiscal years 2005, 2004,
and 2003 were each 52-week years. however, approximately every six years,
the company reports a 53-week fiscal year to align its fiscal quarters
with calendar quarters by adding a week to its first fiscal quarter. the
company will add this additional week in the first fiscal quarter of its fiscal
year 2006. all information presented herein is based on the companys fiscal
calendar.
common stock split
on february28, 2005,
the company effected a two-for-one stock split to shareholders of record as of february18,
2005. all share and per share information has been retroactively adjusted to
reflect the stock split.
financial
instruments
cash equivalents
and short-term investments
all highly liquid
investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase are
classified as cash equivalents. highly liquid investments with maturities
greater than three months are classified as short-term investments. the
companys debt and marketable equity securities have been classified and
accounted for as available-for-sale. management determines the
appropriate classification of its investments in debt and marketable equity
securities at the time of purchase and reevaluates available-for-sale
designation as of each balance sheet date. these securities are carried at fair
value, with the unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported as a
component of shareholders equity. the cost of securities sold is based upon
the specific identification method.
derivative
financial instruments
the company accounts for
its derivative instruments as either assets or liabilities and carries them at
fair value. derivatives that are not defined as hedges in sfas 133, accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities,
must be adjusted to fair value through earnings. if the derivative is a hedge,
depending on the nature of the hedge, changes in fair value will either be
offset against the change in fair value of the
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
hedged assets,
liabilities, or firm commitments through earnings, or recognized in other
comprehensive income until the hedged item is recognized in earnings.
for derivative instruments that hedge the exposure to
variability in expected future cash flows that are designated as cash flow
hedges, the net gain or loss on the derivative instrument is reported as a
component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders equity and
reclassified into earnings in the same period or periods during which the
hedged transaction affects earnings. to receive hedge accounting treatment,
cash flow hedges must be highly effective in offsetting changes to expected
future cash flows on hedged transactions. for derivative instruments that hedge
the exposure to changes in the fair value of an asset or a liability and that
are designated as fair value hedges, the net gain or loss on the derivative
instrument as well as the offsetting gain or loss on the hedged item
attributable to the hedged risk are recognized in earnings in the current
period. the net gain or loss on the effective portion of a derivative
instrument that is designated as an economic hedge of the foreign currency
translation exposure of the net investment in a foreign operation is reported
in the same manner as a foreign currency translation adjustment. for forward
contracts designated as net investment hedges, the company excludes changes in
fair value relating to changes in the forward carry component from its
definition of effectiveness. accordingly, any gains or losses related to this
component are recognized in current earnings.
the company may enter into
foreign currency forward contracts to hedge the translation and economic
exposure of a net investment position in a foreign subsidiary. for such
contracts, hedge effectiveness is measured based on changes in the fair value
of the contract attributable to changes in the spot exchange rate. the
effective portion of the net gain or loss on a derivative instrument designated
as a hedge of the net investment position in a foreign subsidiary is reported
in the same manner as a foreign currency translation adjustment. any residual
changes in fair value of the forward contract, including changes in fair value
based on the differential between the spot and forward exchange rates, are
recognized in current earnings in other income and expense.
inventories
inventories are stated at
the lower of cost, computed using the first-in, first-out method, or market. if
the cost of the inventories exceeds their market value, provisions are made
currently for the difference between the cost and the market value. the companys
inventories consist primarily of finished goods for all periods presented.
property,
plant, and equipment
property, plant, and
equipment are stated at cost. depreciation is computed by use of the straight-line
method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which are 30 years for
buildings, up to 5 years for equipment, and the shorter of lease terms or 10
years for leasehold improvements. the company capitalizes eligible costs to
acquire or develop internal-use software that are incurred subsequent to the
preliminary project stage. capitalized costs related to internal-use software
are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of
the assets, which range from 3 to 5 years. depreciation and amortization
expense on property and equipment was $141 million, $126 million, and $108
million during 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary of significant accounting
policies (continued)
asset retirement
obligations
the company records obligations associated with the
retirement of tangible long-lived assets and the associated asset retirement
costs in accordance with sfas no.143, accounting for asset
retirement obligations. the company reviews legal obligations
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets that result from the
acquisition, construction, development and/or normal use of the assets. if it
is determined that a legal obligation exists, the fair value of the liability
for an asset retirement obligation is recognized in the period in which it is
incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. the fair value of
the liability is added to the carrying amount of the associated asset and this
additional carrying amount is depreciated over the life of the asset. the
difference between the gross expected future cash flow and its present value is
accreted over the life of the related lease as an operating expense. all of the
companys existing asset retirement obligations are associated with commitments
to return property subject to operating leases to original condition upon lease
termination.
the following table
reconciles changes in the companys asset retirement liabilities for fiscal
2004 and 2005 (in millions):
asset retirement
liability as of september27, 2003
$
7.2
additional asset retirement obligations recognized
0.5
accretion recognized
0.5
asset retirement liability as of september25,
$
8.2
additional asset retirement obligations recognized
2.8
accretion recognized
0.7
asset retirement
liability as of september24, 2005
$
11.7
cumulative
effects of accounting changes
in 2003, the company
recognized a net favorable cumulative effect type adjustment of approximately $1million
from the adoption of sfas no.150, accounting for certain
financial instruments with characteristic of both liabilities and equity
and sfas no.143.
long-lived
assets including goodwill and other acquired intangible assets
the company reviews property, plant, and equipment and
certain identifiable intangibles, excluding goodwill, for impairment whenever
events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may
not be recoverable. recoverability of these assets is measured by comparison of
its carrying amount to future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected
to generate. if property, plant, and equipment and certain identifiable
intangibles are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized
equals the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds its fair
market value. for the three fiscal years ended september24, 2005, the
company had no material impairment of its long-lived assets, except for the
impairment of certain assets in connection with the restructuring actions
described in note 5 of these notes to consolidated financial statements.
sfas no.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets requires that goodwill and intangible assets with
indefinite useful lives should not be amortized but rather be tested for
impairment at least annually or sooner whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that they may be impaired. the company performs its
goodwill impairment tests on or about august30 of each year. the company
did not recognize any goodwill or intangible asset impairment charges in 2005,
2004, or 2003. the company established reporting units based on its current
reporting structure. for purposes of testing goodwill for
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
impairment,
goodwill has been allocated to these reporting units to the extent it relates
to each reporting unit.sfas no.142 also requires that intangible assets
with definite lives be amortized over their estimated useful lives and reviewed
for impairment in accordance with sfas no.144, accounting
for the impairment of long-lived assets and for long-lived assets to be
disposed of. the company is currently amortizing its acquired
intangible assets with definite lives over periods ranging from 3 to 10 years.
foreign currency translation
the company translates the
assets and liabilities of its international non-u.s. functional currency
subsidiaries into u.s. dollars using exchange rates in effect at the end of each
period. revenue and expenses for these subsidiaries are translated using rates
that approximate those in effect during the period. gains and losses from these
translations are credited or charged to foreign currency translation included
in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in shareholders equity. the
companys foreign manufacturing subsidiaries and certain other international
subsidiaries that use the u.s. dollar as their functional currency remeasure
monetary assets and liabilities at exchange rates in effect at the end of each
period, and inventories, property, and nonmonetary assets and liabilities at
historical rates. gains and losses from these translations were insignificant
and have been included in the companys results of operations.
revenue recognition
net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale
of hardware, software, peripherals, digital content, and service and support
contracts. the company recognizes revenue pursuant to applicable accounting
standards, including statement of position (sop) no.97-2, software revenue recognition, as amended, and securities and
exchange commission (sec) staff accounting bulletin (sab) no.104, revenue recognition.
the company recognizes revenue when persuasive
evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is
fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. product is considered
delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss
have been transferred. for most of the companys product sales, these criteria
are met at the time the product is shipped. for online sales to individuals,
for some sales to education customers in the u.s., and for certain other sales,
the company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the
company legally retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during
transit. if at the outset of an arrangement the company determines the
arrangement fee is not, or is presumed to not be, fixed or determinable,
revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and
payable.
revenue from service and support contracts is deferred
and recognized ratably over the service coverage periods. these contracts
typically include extended phone support, repair services, web-based support resources,
diagnostic tools, and extend the service coverage offered under the companys
one-year limited warranty.
the company sells software and peripheral products
obtained from other companies. the company establishes its own pricing and
retains related inventory risk, is the primary obligor in sales transactions
with its customers, and assumes the credit risk for amounts billed to its
customers. accordingly, the company recognizes revenue for the sale of products
obtained from other companies at the gross amount billed.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
revenue on
arrangements that include multiple elements such as hardware, software, and
services is allocated to each element based on the relative fair value of each
element. each elements allocated revenue is recognized when revenue
recognition criteria for that element has been met. fair value is generally
determined by vendor specific objective evidence (vsoe), which is based on the
price charged when each element is sold separately. if the company cannot objectively determine
the fair value of any undelivered element included in a multiple-element
arrangement, the company defers revenue until all elements are delivered and
services have been performed, or until fair value can objectively be determined
for any remaining undelivered elements. when the fair value of a delivered
element has not been established, the company uses the residual method to
recognize revenue if the fair value of all undelivered elements is
determinable. under the residual method, the fair value of the undelivered
elements is deferred and the remaining portion of the arrangement fee is
allocated to the delivered elements and is recognized as revenue.
the company records reductions to revenue for
estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive
programs, including reseller and end user rebates, and other sales programs and
volume-based incentives. the estimated cost of these programs is accrued as a
reduction to revenue in the period the company has sold the product and
committed to a plan. the company also records reductions to revenue for
expected future product returns based on the companys historical experience.
generally, the company
does not offer specified or unspecified upgrade rights to its customers in
connection with software sales or the sale of extended warranty and support
contracts. when the company does offer specified upgrade rights, the company
defers revenue for the fair value of the specified upgrade right until the
future obligation is fulfilled or when the right to the specified upgrade
expires. additionally, a limited number of the companys software products are
available with maintenance agreements that grant customers rights to
unspecified future upgrades over the maintenance term on a when and if
available basis. revenue associated with such maintenance is recognized ratably
over the maintenance term.
allowance
for doubtful accounts
the company records its allowance
for doubtful accounts based upon its assessment of various factors. the company
considers historical experience, the age of the accounts receivable balances,
credit quality of the companys customers, current economic conditions and
other factors that may affect customers ability to pay.
shipping costs
the companys shipping and
handling costs are included in cost of sales for all periods presented.
warranty expense
the company provides
currently for the estimated cost for product warranties at the time the related
revenue is recognized. the company assesses the adequacy of its preexisting
warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary based on actual
experience and changes in future estimates.
software development costs
research and development costs are expensed as
incurred. development costs of computer software to be sold, leased, or
otherwise marketed are subject to capitalization beginning when a products
technological feasibility has been established and ending when a product is available
for general release to customers
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
pursuant to sfas no.86, computer
software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed. in most
instances, the companys products are released soon after technological
feasibility has been established. therefore, costs incurred subsequent to
achievement of technological feasibility are usually not significant, and
generally all software development costs have been expensed.
in the fourth quarter of 2004, the company began
incurring substantial development costs associated with mac os x version 10.4
tiger subsequent to achievement of technological feasibility as evidenced by
public demonstration in august2004 and the subsequent release of a
developer beta version of the product. the company capitalized approximately
$29.7 and $4.5 million during 2005 and 2004, respectively, of costs associated
with the development of tiger. in accordance with sfas no.86, amortization
of this asset to cost of sales began in april2005 when the company began
shipping tiger and is being recognized on a straight-line basis over a 3 year
estimated useful life.
during the second quarter of 2004, the company
incurred substantial development costs associated with filemaker pro 7
subsequent to achievement of technological feasibility as evidenced by public
demonstration and release of a developer beta version, and prior to the release
of the final version of the product in march2004. therefore, during the
second quarter of 2004, the company capitalized approximately $2.3 million of
costs associated with the development of filemaker pro 7. in accordance with
sfas no.86, amortization of this asset to cost of sales began in march2004
when the company began shipping filemaker pro 7 and is being recognized on a
straight-line basis over a 3 year estimated useful life.
during the third and fourth quarters of 2003, the
company incurred substantial development costs associated with the development
of mac os x version 10.3 (code-named panther), subsequent to achievement of
technological feasibility as evidenced by public demonstration and release of a
developer beta in june2003, and prior to release of the final version of
the product in the first quarter of 2004. therefore, during 2003 the company
capitalized approximately $14.7 million of development costs associated with
the development of panther. amortization of this asset began in the first
quarter of 2004 when panther was shipped and is being recognized on a
straight-line basis in accordance with sfas no.86 over a 3 year estimated
useful life.
total amortization related
to capitalized software development costs was $15.7 million, $10.7 million, and
$5.8 million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively.
advertising costs
advertising costs are
expensed as incurred. advertising expense was $287 million, $206 million, and
$193million for 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively.
stock-based compensation
the company currently measures compensation expense
for its employee stock-based compensation plans using the intrinsic value
method prescribed by accounting principles board (apb) opinion no.25, accounting for stock issued to employees. the company
applies the disclosure provisions of sfas no.123, accounting
for stock-based compensation, as amended by sfas no.148, accounting for stock-based compensationtransition and disclosure
as if the fair-value-based method had been applied in measuring compensation
expense. under apb opinion no.25, when the exercise price of the companys
employee stock options equals the market price of the underlying stock on the
date of the grant, no compensation expense is recognized.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
as required under
sfas no.123, the pro forma effects of stock-based compensation on net
income and earnings per common share for employee stock options granted and
employee stock purchase plan share purchases have been estimated at the date of
grant and beginning of the period, respectively, using a black-scholes
option pricing model. for purposes of pro forma disclosures, the estimated fair
value of the options and shares is amortized to pro forma net income over the
options vesting period and the shares plan period.
the
companys pro forma information for each of the last three fiscal years follows
(in millions, except per share amounts):
net incomeas reported
$
1,335
$
$
add: stock-based
employee compensation expense included in reported net income, net of tax
deduct: stock-based
employee compensation expense determined under the fair value based method
for all awards, net of tax
(114
)
(141
)
(181
)
net income (loss)pro
forma
$
1,259
$
$
(97
)
net income per common
shareas reported
basic
$
1.65
$
0.37
$
0.10
diluted
$
1.56
$
0.36
$
0.09
net income (loss) per
common sharepro forma
basic
$
1.56
$
0.23
$
(0.13
)
diluted
$
1.47
$
0.22
$
(0.13
)
in december2004, the
fasb issued sfas no.123 (revised 2004) (sfas no.123r), share-based payment, which addresses the accounting for
share-based payment transactions in which an enterprise receives employee
services in exchange for (a)equity instruments of the enterprise or (b)liabilities
that are based on the fair value of the enterprises equity instruments or that
may be settled by the issuance of such equity instruments. sfas no.123r
eliminates the ability to account for share-based compensation transactions
using the intrinsic value method under apb opinion no.25, and requires
instead that such transactions be accounted for using a fair-value-based
method. in january2005, the sec issued sabno.107, which
provides supplemental implementation guidance for sfas no.123r. sfas no.123r
will be effective for the company beginning in the first quarter of its fiscal
2006. the companys assessment of the estimated stock-based compensation
expense is affected by the companys stock price as well as assumptions
regarding a number of complex variables and the related tax impact. these
variables include, but are not limited to, the companys stock price,
volatility, and employee stock option exercise behaviors and the related tax
impact. the company will recognize stock-based compensation expense on all
awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period using the
modified prospective method. although the adoption of sfas no.123r is
expected to have a material effect on the companys results of operations,
future changes to various assumptions used to determine the fair-value of
awards issued or the amount and type of equity awards granted create
uncertainty as to whether future stock-based compensation expense will be
similar to the historical sfas no.123 pro forma expense.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary of significant accounting
policies (continued)
earnings per common
share
basic earnings per common share is computed by
dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted-average number
of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. diluted earnings per
common share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by
the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during
the period increased to include the number of additional shares of common stock
that would have been outstanding if the dilutive potential shares of common
stock had been issued. the dilutive effect of outstanding options, restricted stock
and restricted stock units is reflected in diluted earnings per share by
application of the treasury stock method. under the treasury stock method, an
increase in the fair market value of the companys common stock can result in a
greater dilutive effect from outstanding options, restricted stock and
restricted stock units. additionally, the exercise of employee stock options
and the vesting of restricted stock and restricted stock units can result in a
greater dilutive effect on earnings per share.
the
following table sets forth the computation of basic and diluted earnings per
share:
numerator (in millions):
income before accounting
changes
$
1,335
$
$
cumulative effects of
accounting changes, net of tax
net income
$
1,335
$
$
denominator (in
thousands):
weighted-average shares
outstanding, excluding unvested restrictedstock
808,439
743,180
721,262
effect of dilutive
options, restricted stock units and restricted stock
48,341
31,442
5,670
denominator for diluted
earnings per share
856,780
774,622
726,932
basic earnings per share
before accounting changes
$
1.65
$
0.37
$
0.09
basic earnings per share
after accounting changes
$
1.65
$
0.37
$
0.10
diluted earnings per
share before accounting changes
$
1.56
$
0.36
$
0.09
diluted earnings per share after accounting changes
$
1.56
$
0.36
$
0.09
potentially dilutive
securities representing approximately 12.4 million, 8.7 million, and 101.6 million
shares of common stock for the years ended september24, 2005,
september25, 2004, and september27, 2003, respectively, were
excluded from the computation of diluted earnings per share for these periods
because their effect would have been antidilutive. these potentially dilutive
securities include stock options, restricted stock, and restricted stock units.
comprehensive
income
comprehensive income
consists of two components, net income and other comprehensive income. other
comprehensive income refers to revenue, expenses, gains and losses that under
generally accepted accounting principles are recorded as an element of
shareholders equity but are excluded from net income. the companys other
comprehensive income is comprised of foreign currency translation adjustments
from those subsidiaries not using the u.s. dollar as their functional currency,
unrealized gains and losses on marketable securities categorized as
available-for-sale, and net deferred gains and losses on certain derivative
instruments accounted for as cash flow hedges.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note
1summary of significant accounting policies (continued)
segment information
the company reports
segment information based on the management approach. the management approach
designates the internal reporting used by management for making decisions and
assessing performance as the source of the companys reportable segments.
information about the companys products, major customers, and geographic areas
on a company-wide basis is also disclosed.
note 2financial
instruments
the carrying amounts of cash
and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued
expenses approximate their fair value due to the short maturities of those
instruments.
cash,
cash equivalents and short-term investments
the
following table summarizes the fair value of the companys cash and available-for-sale
securities held in its short-term investment portfolio, recorded as cash and
cash equivalents or short-term investments (in millions):
september24,
september25,
cash
$
$
u.s. treasury and
agency securities
u.s. corporate
securities
2,030
1,795
foreign
securities
1,245
total cash equivalents
3,364
2,769
u.s. treasury and agency securities
1,080
u.s. corporate
securities
3,662
1,352
foreign
securities
total short-term investments
4,770
2,495
total cash, cash
equivalents, and short-term investments
$
8,261
$
5,464
the companys u.s. corporate securities consist
primarily of commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and
corporate debt securities. foreign securities consist primarily of foreign
commercial paper, certificates of deposit and time deposits with foreign
institutions, most of which are denominated in u.s. dollars. the company had
net unrealized losses totaling $5.9 million on its investment portfolio,
approximately half of which related to investments with stated maturities less
than 1 year as of september24, 2005 and net unrealized losses of $6.3
million on its investment portfolio, primarily related to investments with
stated maturities less than 1 year as of september25, 2004. the company
occasionally sells short-term investments prior to their stated maturities. the
company recognized a net loss before taxes of $137,000 in 2005 and net gains
before taxes of $1 million and $21 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively, as a
result of such sales. these net gains were included in interest and other
income, net.
as of september24, 2005, approximately $287 million
of the companys short-term investments had underlying maturities ranging from
1 to 5 years. the remaining short-term investments as of september24,
2005 had maturities of 3 to 12 months. as of september25, 2004,
approximately $180 million of the companys short-term investments had
underlying maturities ranging from 1 to 5 years. the remaining short-term
investments as of september25, 2004 had maturities of 3 to 12 months.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2financial
instruments (continued)
in accordance with eitf 03-1, the meaning of other-than-temporary impairment and its application to
certain investments, the following table shows gross unrealized
losses and fair value for those investments that were in an unrealized loss position
as of september24, 2005 and september25, 2004, aggregated by
investment category and the length of time that individual securities have been
in a continuous loss position (in millions):
lessthan12
months
12monthsor
greater
total
security description
fair
value
unrealized
loss
fair
value
unrealized
loss
fair
value
unrealized
loss
u.s. treasury and
agencies
$
$
(1
)
$
$
$
$
(1
)
corporate bonds
(3
)
(3
)
certificate of deposits
asset backed
securities
(1
)
(1
)
commercial paper
4,526
(1
)
4,526
(1
)
total
$
5,502
$
(6
)
$
$
$
5,530
$
(6
)
lessthan12
months
12monthsor
greater
total
security description
fair
value
unrealized
loss
fair
value
unrealized
loss
fair
value
unrealized
loss
u.s. treasury and
agencies
$
1,126
$
(4
)
$
$
$
1,126
$
(4
)
corporate bonds
(1
)
(1
)
certificate of
deposits
(1
)
(1
)
asset backed
securities
commercial paper
2,407
(1
)
2,407
(1
)
total
$
4,513
$
(6
)
$
$
(1
)
$
4,657
$
(7
)
market values were
determined for each individual security in the investment portfolio. the
decline in value of these investments is primarily related to changes in
interest rates and is considered to be temporary in nature. investments are
reviewed periodically to identify possible impairment. when evaluating the
investments, the company reviews factors such as the length of time and extent
to which fair value has been below cost basis, the financial condition of the
issuer, and the companys ability and intent to hold the investment for a
period of time which may be sufficient for anticipated recovery in market
value.
accounts receivable
trade receivables
the company distributes its products through third-party
resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and commercial
customers. the company generally does not require collateral from its
customers. however, when possible the company does attempt to limit credit risk
on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers in latin
america, europe, and asia and by arranging with third-party financing companies
to provide flooring arrangements and other loan and lease programs to the
companys direct customers. these credit financing arrangements are directly
between the third-party financing company and the end customer. as such, the
company generally does not assume any recourse or credit risk sharing related
to any of these arrangements. however, considerable trade receivables that
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2financial
instruments (continued)
are not covered by collateral, third-party flooring
arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the companys
distribution and retail channel partners. no customer accounted for more than
10% of trade receivables as of september24, 2005 or september25,
2004.
the following table
summarizes the activity in the allowance for doubtful accounts (in millions):
september24,
september25,
september27,
beginning
allowance balance
$
$
$
charged to costs
and expenses
deductions (a)
(9
)
(5
)
(6
)
ending allowance balance
$
$
$
(a) represents
amounts written off against the allowance, net of recoveries.
vendor non-trade receivables
the company has non-trade
receivables from certain of its manufacturing vendors resulting from the sale
of raw material components to these manufacturing vendors who manufacture
sub-assemblies or assemble final products for the company. the company
purchases these raw material components directly from suppliers. these
non-trade receivables, which are included in the consolidated balance sheets in
other current assets, totaled $417 million and $276 million as of september24,
2005 and september25, 2004, respectively. the company does not reflect
the sale of these components in net sales and does not recognize any profits on
these sales until the products are sold through to the end customer at which
time the profit is recognized as a reduction of cost of sales.
derivative financial instruments
the company uses derivatives to partially offset its
business exposure to foreign exchange and interest rate risk. foreign currency
forward and option contracts are used to offset the foreign exchange risk on
certain existing assets and liabilities and to hedge the foreign exchange risk
on expected future cash flows on certain forecasted revenue and cost of sales.
from time to time, the company enters into interest rate derivative agreements
to modify the interest rate profile of certain investments and debt. the
companys accounting policies for these instruments are based on whether the
instruments are designated as hedge or non-hedge instruments. the company
records all derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2financial
instruments (continued)
the following table shows
the notional principal, net fair value, and credit risk amounts of the companys
foreign currency instruments as of september24, 2005 and september25,
2004 (in millions):
september24,2005
september25,2004
notional
principal
fair
value
creditrisk
amounts
notional
principal
fair
value
creditrisk
amounts
foreign exchange
instruments qualifying as accounting hedges:
spot/forward contracts
$
$
$
$
$
(3
)
$
purchased options
$
1,668
$
$
$
$
$
sold options
$
1,087
$
(5
)
$
$
$
(3
)
$
foreign exchange
instruments other thanaccounting hedges:
spot/forward contracts
$
$
(3
)
$
$
$
$
purchased options
$
$
$
$
$
$
sold options
$
$
$
$
$
$
the notional principal amounts for derivative
instruments provide one measure of the transaction volume outstanding as of
year-end, and do not represent the amount of the companys exposure to credit
or market loss. the credit risk amount shown in the table above represents the
companys gross exposure to potential accounting loss on these transactions if
all counterparties failed to perform according to the terms of the contract,
based on then-current currency exchange rates at each respective date.
the companys exposure to credit loss and market risk will vary over time as a
function of currency exchange rates.
the estimates of fair
value are based on applicable and commonly used pricing models and prevailing
financial market information as of september24, 2005 and september25,
2004. although the table above reflects the notional principal, fair value, and
credit risk amounts of the companys foreign exchange instruments, it does not
reflect the gains or losses associated with the exposures and transactions that
the foreign exchange instruments are intended to hedge. the amounts ultimately
realized upon settlement of these financial instruments, together with the
gains and losses on the underlying exposures, will depend on actual market
conditions during the remaining life of the instruments.
foreign exchange
risk management
the company may enter into foreign currency forward
and option contracts with financial institutions to protect against foreign
exchange risk associated with existing assets and liabilities, certain firmly
committed transactions, forecasted future cash flows, and net investments in
foreign subsidiaries. generally, the companys practice is to hedge a majority
of its existing material foreign exchange transaction exposures. however, the
company may not hedge certain foreign exchange transaction exposures due to
immateriality, prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular exposures, or
limited availability of appropriate hedging instruments.
to help protect gross margins from fluctuations in
foreign currency exchange rates, the companys u.s. dollar functional
subsidiaries hedge a portion of forecasted foreign currency revenues, and the
companys non-u.s. dollar functional subsidiaries selling in local currencies
hedge a portion of forecasted inventory purchases not denominated in the
subsidiaries functional currency. other comprehensive income associated with
hedges of foreign currency revenues is recognized as a component of net sales
in the same
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2financial
instruments (continued)
period as the related sales are recognized, and other
comprehensive income related to inventory purchases is recognized as a
component of cost of sales in the same period as the related costs are
recognized. typically, the company hedges portions of its forecasted foreign
currency exposure associated with revenues and inventory purchases over a time
horizon of 3 to 6 months.
derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges
must be de-designated as hedges when it is probable that the forecasted hedged
transaction will not occur in the initially identified time period or within a
subsequent 2 month time period. deferred gains and losses in other
comprehensive income associated with such derivative instruments are immediately
reclassified into earnings in other income and expense. any subsequent changes
in fair value of such derivative instruments are also reflected in current
earnings unless they are re-designated as hedges of other transactions. the
company recognized net losses of $1.6 million and $2.8 million in 2005 and
2004, respectively, in other income and expense related to the loss of hedge
designation on discontinued cash flow hedges due to changes in the companys
forecast of future net sales and cost of sales and due to prevailing market
conditions. no net gains, or losses, of a similar nature were recorded in 2003.
as of september24, 2005, the company had a net deferred gain associated
with cash flow hedges of approximately $3.6 million, net of taxes, substantially
all of which is expected to be reclassified to earnings by the end of the
second quarter of fiscal 2006.
the net gain or loss on the effective portion of a
derivative instrument designated as a net investment hedge is included in the
cumulative translation adjustment account of accumulated other comprehensive
income within shareholders equity. as of september24, 2005 and
september25, 2004, the company had a net gain of $673,000 and a net loss
of $1.8 million, respectively, included in the cumulative translation
adjustment.
the company may also enter
into foreign currency forward and option contracts to offset the foreign
exchange gains and losses generated by the re-measurement of certain assets and
liabilities recorded in non-functional currencies. changes in the fair value of
these derivatives are recognized in current earnings in other income and
expense as offsets to the changes in the fair value of the related assets or
liabilities. due to currency market movements, changes in option time value can
lead to increased volatility in other income and expense.
interest rate risk
management
from time to time, the company historically entered
into interest rate derivative transactions with financial institutions in order
to better match the companys floating-rate interest income on its cash
equivalents and short-term investments with its fixed-rate interest expense on
any outstanding long-term debt, and/or to diversify a portion of the companys
exposure away from fluctuations in short-term u.s. interest rates.
during 2001 and 2002, the company entered into and
then subsequently terminated various interest rate debt swap agreements
generating a realized gain of $23 million. these gains were deferred and
amortized over the remaining life of the underlying debt, which matured and was
repaid in february2004.
as of september24,
2005 and september25, 2004, the company had no interest rate derivatives
outstanding.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2financial instruments (continued)
non-current
debt and equity investments and related gains and losses
the company previously
held significant investments in arm holdings plc (arm), akamai technologies,inc. (akamai), and earthlink network,inc.
(earthlink). the company sold all of the remaining holdings in these
non-current investments in 2004 and 2003. pretax gains recorded upon the sale
of these non-current investments were $4 million and $10 million in 2004 and
2003, respectively.
note 3consolidated financial statement details (in
millions)
other current assets
vendor non-trade
receivables
$
$
other current
assets
total other current
assets
$
$
property, plant,
and equipment
land and
buildings
$
$
machinery,
equipment, and internal-use software
office furniture
and equipment
leasehold
improvements
1,481
1,298
accumulated
depreciation and amortization
(664
)
(591
)
net property, plant, and
equipment
$
$
other assets
non-current
deferred tax assets
$
$
capitalized
software development costs, net
other assets
total other assets
$
$
accrued expenses
deferred revenuecurrent
$
$
accrued marketing
and distribution
accrued
compensation and employee benefits
accrued warranty
and related costs
other current
liabilities
total accrued expenses
$
1,705
$
1,200
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 3consolidated
financial statement details (in millions) (continued)
non-current
liabilities
deferred revenuenon-current
$
$
deferred tax
liabilities
other non-current
liabilities
total non-current
liabilities
$
$
interest and other
income, net
interest income
$
$
$
interest expense
(3
)
(8
)
gains on sales of
short term investments
other income
(expense), net
(18
)
(9
)
total interest and other
income, net
$
$
$
note 4goodwill and other intangible assets
the company is currently amortizing its acquired
intangible assets with definite lives over periods ranging from 3 to 10 years.
the
following table summarizes the components of gross and net intangible asset
balances (in millions):
september24,2005
september25,2004
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
carrying
amount
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
carrying
amount
goodwill
$
$
$
$
$
$
other acquired
intangible assets
(5
)
(5
)
acquired
technology
(34
)
(25
)
total acquired
intangible assets
$
$
(39
)
$
$
$
(30
)
$
during the fourth quarter of 2005, the company
recorded an adjustment of approximately $11 million to goodwill relating to a
reduction of valuation allowances that were recorded at the time certain net
operating loss carryforwards (nols) were acquired in previous business
combinations. during the fourth quarter of 2005, these nols were deemed to be
more likely than not to be realized and accordingly the valuation allowances
were reversed against the related goodwill that was recognized at the time of
the acquisitions.
during the third quarter of 2004, the company recorded
an adjustment of approximately $5 million to goodwill related to the
acquisition of powerschool, inc. (powerschool) in 2001. this reduction of
goodwill included the cancellation of 158,334 shares of the companys common stock,
valued at approximately $2million, that were previously held in escrow
and were refunded upon resolution of certain matters arising out of the
acquisition of powerschool. this adjustment also included approximately $3
million to adjust the original estimates of the pre-acquisition powerschool
restructuring liability to actual costs incurred.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 4goodwill
and other intangible assets (continued)
expected annual
amortization expense related to acquired technology is as follows (in
millions):
fiscal years:
$
thereafter
total expected annual
amortization expense
$
amortization expense
related to acquired intangible assets was $9 million, $7 million, and $10
million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively.
note 5restructuring charges
fiscal 2004
restructuring actions
the company recorded total restructuring charges of
approximately $23 million during the year ended september25, 2004,
including approximately $14 million in severance costs, $5.5 million in asset
impairments, and a $3.5 million charge for lease cancellations in conjunction
with the vacating of a leased sales facility related to a european workforce
reduction during the fourth quarter of 2004. of the $23million charge,
$19.7 million had been utilized by the end of 2005, with the remaining $3.3
million consisting of $0.7 million for employee severance benefits and $2.6
million for lease cancellations. these actions will result in the termination
of 461 employees, 448 of which had been terminated prior to the end of 2005.
the
following table summarizes activity associated with restructuring actions
initiated during 2004 (inmillions):
employee
severance
asset
lease
benefits
impairments
cancellations
totals
total charge
$
14.0
$
5.5
$
3.5
$
23.0
total spending
through september24, 2005
(12.4
)
(0.9
)
(13.3
)
total non-cash
items
(5.2
)
(5.2
)
adjustments
(0.9
)
(0.3
)
(1.2
)
accrual at
september24, 2005
$
0.7
$
$
2.6
$
3.3
fiscal 2003
restructuring actions
the company recorded total restructuring charges of
approximately $26.8 million during the year ended september27, 2003,
including approximately $7.4 million in severance costs, a $5.0 million charge
to write-off deferred compensation, $7.1 million in asset impairments,
and a $7.3 million charge for lease cancellations primarily related to the
closure of the companys singapore manufacturing operations during the first
quarter of 2003. of the $26.8 million charge, all had been utilized by the end
of 2005, except for approximately $1.7 million related to operating lease costs
on abandoned facilities. during the third quarter of 2003, approximately
$500,000 of the amount originally accrued for lease cancellations was
determined to be in excess due to the sublease of a property sooner than originally
expected and a shortfall
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 5restructuring
charges (continued)
of approximately $500,000 was identified in the severance
accrual due to higher than expected severance costs related to the closure of
the companys singapore manufacturing operations. these adjustments had no net
effect on reported operating expense. these actions resulted in the termination
of 353 employees.
the
following table summarizes activity associated with restructuring actions
initiated during 2003 (inmillions):
employee
deferred
severance
compensation
asset
lease
benefits
write-off
impairments
cancellations
totals
total charge
$
7.4
$
5.0
$
7.1
$
7.3
$
26.8
total spending
through september24, 2005
(7.9
)
(5.1
)
(13.0
)
total non-cash
items
(5.0
)
(7.1
)
(12.1
)
adjustments
0.5
(0.5
)
accrual at september24,
$
$
$
$
1.7
$
1.7
note 6income taxes
the
provision for income taxes consisted of the following (in millions):
federal:
current
$
$
$
deferred
(7
)
state:
current
deferred
(91
)
(18
)
(11
)
(25
)
(13
)
(7
)
foreign:
current
deferred
(3
)
(16
)
(1
)
provision for income
taxes
$
$
$
the foreign provision for income taxes is based on
foreign pretax earnings of approximately $922 million, $384 million, and $250
million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. as of september24, 2005,
approximately $4.3 billion of the companys cash, cash equivalents, and short-term
investments were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in u.s.
dollar-denominated holdings. amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are
generally subject to u.s. income taxation on repatriation to the u.s. the
companys consolidated financial statements fully provide for any related tax
liability on amounts that may be repatriated, aside from undistributed earnings
of certain of the companys foreign subsidiaries that are intended to be
indefinitely reinvested in operations outside the u.s. u.s. income taxes have
not been provided on a cumulative total of $1.2 billion of such earnings. it is
not practicable to determine the income tax liability that might be incurred if
these earnings were to be distributed.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 6income
taxes (continued)
on october22, 2004, the american jobs creation
act (ajca) was signed into law. the ajca includes a provision for the deduction
of 85% of certain foreign earnings that are repatriated, as defined in the
ajca. the legislation provided the company with the option to apply this
provision to repatriations of qualifying earnings in either 2005 or 2006. the
company is continuing to evaluate the effects of the repatriation provision and
expects to complete the evaluation in 2006. a maximum of $755 million may be
eligible for repatriation under the reduced tax rate provided by ajca. however,
given the uncertainties and complexities of the repatriation provision and the
companys continuing evaluation, the company has not yet determined the amount
that may be repatriated or the related potential income tax effects of such
repatriation.
deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect the
effects of tax losses, credits, and the future income tax effects of temporary
differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of
existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and are measured
using enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in the years in which
those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
as of september24,
2005 and september25, 2004, the significant components of the companys
deferred tax assets and liabilities were (in millions):
deferred tax assets:
accrued liabilities and other reserves
$
$
tax losses and credits
basis of capital assets and investments
accounts receivable and inventory reserves
other
total deferred tax assets
less valuation
allowance
net deferred tax
assets
deferred tax
liabilities:
unremitted earnings of subsidiaries
total deferred tax liabilities
net deferred tax asset
$
$
as of september24, 2005, the company had
operating loss carryforwards for federal tax purposes of approximately
$62million, which expire from 2011 through 2024. a portion of these
carryforwards was acquired from the companys previous acquisitions, the
utilization of which is subject to certain limitations imposed by the internal
revenue code. the company also has federal credit carryforwards and various
state and foreign tax loss and credit carryforwards, the tax effect of which is
approximately $206 million and which expire between 2010 and 2025. the
remaining benefits from tax losses and credits do not expire. as of september24,
2005 and september25, 2004, a valuation allowance of $5 million and $30
million, respectively, was recorded against the deferred tax asset for the
benefits of tax losses that may not be realized. the remaining valuation
allowance relates principally to the state operating losses. management
believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income
that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together
with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to
fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 6income
taxes (continued)
a reconciliation of the
provision for income taxes, with the amount computed by applying the statutory
federal income tax rate (35% in 2005, 2004, and 2003) to income before
provision for income taxes, is as follows (in millions):
computed expected
tax
$
$
$
state taxes, net
of federal effect
(19
)
(5
)
(4
)
indefinitely
invested earnings of foreign subsidiaries
(98
)
(31
)
(13
)
nondeductible
executive compensation
research and
development credit, net
(26
)
(5
)
(7
)
other items
(24
)
provision for
income taxes
$
$
$
effective tax rate
%
%
%
during 2005, the company reversed certain tax
contingency reserves and recorded a corresponding benefit to income tax expense
primarily as a result of a change in the estimated outcome of certain tax
disputes. additionally, during the fourth quarter of 2005, the company recorded
a benefit to tax expense to adjust its net deferred tax assets as a result of
the companys year-end review of its deferred tax accounts, the impact of which
was not material to the current or prior periods results of operations. the
total benefit to income tax expense from the reversal of these tax contingency
reserves and adjustments to net deferred tax assets was $67 million. the
company also recorded a $14 million credit to income tax expense resulting from
a reduction of the valuation allowance.
the internal revenue
service (irs) has completed its field audit of the companys federal income tax
returns for all years prior to 2002 and proposed certain adjustments. certain
of these adjustments are being contested through the irs appeals office. substantially
all irs audit issues for these years have been resolved. in addition, the
company is also subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities.
management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments
that may result from tax examinations. however, the outcome of tax audits
cannot be predicted with certainty. should any issues addressed in the companys
tax audits be resolved in a manner not consistent with managements
expectations, the company could be required to adjust its provision for income
tax in the period such resolution occurs.
note 7shareholders equity
preferred stock
the company has 5 million shares of authorized
preferred stock, none of which is outstanding. under the terms of the companys
restated articles of incorporation, the board of directors is authorized to
determine or alter the rights, preferences, privileges and restrictions of the
companys authorized but unissued shares of preferred stock.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 7shareholders
equity (continued)
restricted stock units
during 2005 and 2004, the
companys board of directors approved the grant of 230,000 and 5.03 million
restricted stock units, respectively, to members of the companys senior
management team, excluding its ceo. these restricted stock units generally vest
over four years either in two equal installments on the second and fourth
anniversaries of the date of grant or in equal installments on each of the
first through fourth anniversaries of the grant date. upon vesting, the
restricted stock units will convert into an equivalent number of shares of
common stock. the company has recorded $10.3 million and $64.4 million in 2005
and 2004, respectively, in value for these restricted stock units as a component
of shareholders equity and is amortizing the amounts on a straight-line basis
over the four-year requisite service period. the value of the restricted stock
units was based on the closing market price of the companys common stock on
the date of grant. the restricted stock units have been included in the
calculation of diluted earnings per share utilizing the treasury stock method.
ceo restricted stock award
on march19, 2003, the company entered into an
option cancellation and restricted stock award agreement (the agreement) with mr.steven
p. jobs, its ceo. the agreement cancelled stock option awards for the purchase
of 55 million shares of the companys common stock previously granted to mr.jobs
in 2000 and 2001. mr.jobs retained options to purchase 120,000 shares of
the companys common stock granted in augustof 1997 in his capacity as a
member of the companys board of directors, prior to becoming the companys ceo.
the agreement replaced the cancelled options with a restricted stock award of 10
million shares of the companys common stock. the restricted stock award
generally vests three years from the date of grant. vesting of some or all of
the restricted shares will be accelerated in the event mr.jobs is
terminated without cause, dies, or has his management role reduced following a
change in control of the company.
the company determined the
value of the restricted stock award in accordance with apb opinion no.25
and has recorded the value as deferred stock compensation as a component of shareholders
equity and is amortizing that amount on a straight-line basis over the 3 year
service period. the value of the restricted stock award was based on the
closing market price of the companys common stock on the date of the award.
the 10 million restricted shares have been included in the calculation of
diluted earnings per share utilizing the treasury stock method.
stock repurchase plan
in july1999, the companys board of directors
authorized a plan for the company to repurchase up to $500 million of its
common stock. this repurchase plan does not obligate the company to acquire any
specific number of shares or acquire shares over any specified period of time.
during the fourth quarter
of 2001, the company entered into a forward purchase agreement to acquire
3.1million shares of its common stock in septemberof 2003 at an
average price of $8.32 per share for a total cost of $25.5 million. in august2003,
the company settled this agreement prior to its maturity, at which time the
companys common stock had a fair value of $11.41. other than this forward
purchase transaction, the company has not engaged in any transactions to
repurchase its common stock since 2000. since inception of the stock repurchase
plan, the company had repurchased a total of 13.1 million shares at a cost of
$217 million. the company was authorized to repurchase up to an additional $283
million of its common stock as of september24, 2005.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 7shareholders
equity (continued)
comprehensive income
comprehensive income consists of two components, net
income and other comprehensive income. other comprehensive income refers to
revenue, expenses, gains and losses that under u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles are recorded as an element of shareholders equity but
are excluded from net income. the companys other comprehensive income consists
of foreign currency translation adjustments from those subsidiaries not using
the u.s. dollar as their functional currency, unrealized gains and losses on
marketable securities categorized as available-for-sale, and net deferred gains
and losses on certain derivative instruments accounted for as cash flow hedges.
the
following table summarizes the components of accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss), net of taxes (in millions):
unrealized
gains/(losses) on available-for-sale securities
$
(4
)
$
(4
)
$
unrealized
gains/(losses) on derivative investments
(4
)
(16
)
cumulative
foreign currency translation
(7
)
(20
)
accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss)
$
$
(15
)
$
(35
)
the
following table summarizes activity in other comprehensive income related to
available-for-sale securities, net of taxes (in millions):
change in fair
value of available-for-sale securities
$
$
(1
)
$
adjustment for
net gains realized and included in net income
(4
)
(23
)
change in unrealized
gain/loss on available-for-sale securities
$
$
(5
)
$
(12
)
the tax effect related to the change in unrealized
gain on available-for-sale securities was $4 million and $6million for
2004 and 2003, respectively. the tax effect on the reclassification adjustment
for net gains/losses included in net income was $1 million and $(8)million
for 2004 and 2003, respectively.
the
following table summarizes activity in other comprehensive income related to
derivatives, net of taxes, held by the company (in millions):
changes in fair
value of derivatives
$
$
(21
)
$
(24
)
adjustment for
net gains realized and included in net income
change in unrealized
gain/loss on derivative instruments
$
$
$
(5
)
the tax effect related to
the changes in fair value of derivatives was $(3)million, $10 million,
and $11million for 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. the tax effect
related to derivative gains/losses reclassified from other comprehensive income
to net income was $(2)million, $(13) million, and $(7)million for
2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 8employee benefit plans
2003 employee stock plan
the 2003 employee stock
plan (the 2003 plan) is a shareholder approved plan that provides for broad-based
grants to employees, including executive officers. based on the terms of
individual option grants, options granted under the 2003 plan generally expire
7 to 10 years after the grant date and generally become exercisable over a
period of 4 years, based on continued employment, with either annual or
quarterly vesting. the 2003 plan permits the granting of incentive stock
options, nonstatutory stock options, restricted stock units, stock appreciation
rights, and stock purchase rights.
1997 employee stock option plan
in august1997, the
companys board of directors approved the 1997 employee stock option plan (the
1997 plan), a non-shareholder approved plan for grants of stock options to
employees who are not officers of the company. based on the terms of individual
option grants, options granted under the 1997 plan generally expire 7 to 10
years after the grant date and generally become exercisable over a period of
4years, based on continued employment, with either annual or quarterly
vesting. in october2003, the company terminated the 1997 employee stock
option plan and cancelled all remaining unissued shares totaling 28,590,702. no new options can be granted from the 1997
plan.
employee stock option exchange program
on march20, 2003,
the company announced a voluntary employee stock option exchange program (the
exchange program) whereby eligible employees, other than executive officers and
members of the board of directors, had an opportunity to exchange outstanding
options with exercise prices at or above $12.50per share for a
predetermined smaller number of new stock options issued with exercise prices
equal to the fair market value of one share of the companys common stock on
the day the new awards were issued, which was to be at least six months plus
one day after the exchange options were cancelled. on april17, 2003, in accordance
with the exchange program, the company cancelled options to purchase 33,138,386
shares of its common stock. on october22, 2003, new stock options
totaling 13,394,736 shares were issued to employees at an exercise price of
$11.38 per share, which is equivalent to the closing price of the companys
stock on that date. no financial or accounting impact to the companys
financial position, results of operations or cash flow was associated with this
transaction.
1997 director stock option plan
in august1997, the
companys board of directors adopted a shareholder approved director stock
option plan (dsop) for non-employee directors of the company. initial grants of
30,000 options under the dsop vest in three equal installments on each of the
first through third anniversaries of the date of grant, and subsequent annual
grants of 10,000 options are fully vested at grant.
rule10b5-1 trading plans
certain of the companys
executive officers, including mr.timothy d. cook, mr.peter
oppenheimer, mr.jonathan rubinstein, mr. philip w. schiller, dr.bertrand
serlet, and dr.avadis tevanian,jr., have entered into trading plans
pursuant to rule10b5-1(c)(1)of the securities exchange act of
1934, as amended. a trading plan is a written document that pre-establishes the
amounts, prices and dates (or formula for determining the amounts, prices and
dates) of future purchases or sales of the companys stock including the
exercise and sale of employee stock options and shares acquired pursuant to the
companys employee stock purchase plan and upon vesting of restricted stock
units.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 8employee
benefit plans (continued)
employee stock purchase plan
the company has a
shareholder approved employee stock purchase plan (the purchase plan), under
which substantially all employees may purchase common stock through payroll
deductions at a price equal to 85% of the lower of the fair market values as of
the beginning and end of six month offering periods. stock purchases under the
purchase plan are limited to 10% of an employees compensation, up to a maximum
of $25,000 in any calendar year. beginning with the six-month offering period
that started on june30, 2003, the number of shares authorized for
issuance is limited to a total of 1 million shares per offering period. during
2005, 2004, and 2003, adjusted for the february2005 stock split 2.3
million, 3.9 million, and 4.3 million shares, respectively, were issued under
the purchase plan. as of september24, 2005, approximately 3.8 million
shares were reserved for future issuance under the purchase plan.
employee savings plan
the company has an
employee savings plan (the savings plan) qualifying as a deferred salary
arrangement under section401(k)of the internal revenue code. under
the savings plan, participating u.s. employees may defer a portion of their
pre-tax earnings, up to the internal revenue service annual contribution limit
($14,000 for calendar year 2005). the company matches 50% to 100% of each
employees contributions, depending on length of service, up to a maximum 6% of
the employees earnings. the companys matching contributions to the savings
plan were approximately $28 million, $24 million, and $21million in 2005,
2004, and 2003, respectively.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 8employee
benefit plans (continued)
stock option activity
a
summary of the companys stock option activity and related information for the
last three fiscal years follows (share amounts are presented in thousands):
shares
outstandingoptions
available
numberof
weightedaverage
for grant
shares
exerciseprice
balance at
september28, 2002
13,142
218,860
$
14.09
restricted stock
granted
(10,000
)
options granted
(8,358
)
8,358
$
8.19
options cancelled
96,886
(96,886
)
$
19.80
options exercised
(4,308
)
$
7.02
plan shares
expired
(10
)
balance at september27, 2003
91,660
126,024
$
9.54
restricted stock
units granted
(5,030
)
options granted
(36,394
)
36,394
$
11.48
options cancelled
6,010
(6,010
)
$
10.35
options exercised
(45,686
)
$
8.60
plan shares
expired
(32,196
)
balance at september25, 2004
24,050
110,722
$
10.52
additional
options authorized
49,000
restricted stock
units granted
(460
)
options granted
(16,214
)
16,214
$
42.52
options cancelled
3,844
(3,844
)
$
13.28
restricted stock units
cancelled
options exercised
(49,871
)
$
10.05
plan shares
expired
(1,493
)
balance at
september24, 2005
58,957
73,221
$
17.79
in conjunction with the amendments to the 2003 plan
that were approved at the annual meeting of shareholders held on april21,
2005, the number of shares available for grant under the 2003 plan will be
reduced by two times the number of restricted shares and restricted stock units
granted. this amendment is effective for all grants made after april21,
2005.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 8employee
benefit plans (continued)
the options outstanding as
of september24, 2005 have been segregated into eight ranges for
additional disclosure as follows (option amounts are presented in thousands):
optionsoutstanding
optionsexercisable
options
outstandingasof
september24,
weighted-
average
remaining
contractual
lifeinyears
weighted
average
exercise
price
options
exercisableasof
september24,
weighted
average
exerciseprice
$0.62-$9.13
10,092
4.29
$
7.33
8,310
$
7.26
$9.14-$10.20
14,954
5.65
$
9.76
13,516
$
9.73
$10.21-$10.80
2,284
5.19
$
10.31
$
10.37
$10.81-$10.90
11,726
5.36
$
10.89
2,858
$
10.89
$10.91-$11.38
9,151
5.10
$
11.37
2,920
$
11.37
$11.39-$23.72
9,622
5.39
$
16.52
5,797
$
17.50
$23.73-$46.10
4,791
6.38
$
36.04
$
31.62
$46.11-$49.87
10,601
6.94
$
46.75
$
$0.62-$49.87
73,221
5.53
$
17.79
34,803
$
10.94
as of september25, 2004, the company had
exercisable options outstanding to purchase 60.0 million shares with a weighted
average exercise price of $10.30 per share. as of september27, 2003, the
company had exercisable options outstanding to purchase 77.5 million shares
with a weighted average exercise price of $9.38 per share.
the company had 5.03
million restricted stock units outstanding as of september24, 2005, which
were excluded from the options outstanding balances in the preceding tables.
none of these restricted stock units was vested as of september24, 2005.
these restricted stock units have been deducted from the shares available for grant
under the companys stock option plans.
note 9stock-based
compensation
the company has provided pro forma disclosures in note
1 of these notes to consolidated financial statements of the effect on net
income and earnings per share as if the fair value method of accounting for
stock compensation had been used for its employee stock option grants and
employee stock purchase plan purchases. these pro forma effects have been
estimated at the date of grant and beginning of the period, respectively, using
the black-scholes option pricing model.
for purposes of the pro forma disclosures provided
pursuant to sfas no.123, the option awards issued in october2003
and the awards cancelled as part of the employee stock option exchange program
have been accounted for using modification accounting. in accordance with sfas
no.123, the grant date of the awards issued is the date of acceptance of
the exchange offer by participating employees. the cancellation of certain of
the companys ceos options and replacement with restricted shares in
march2003 is also being accounted for using modification accounting for
purposes of the pro forma disclosures provided pursuant to sfas no.123.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 9stock-based
compensation (continued)
the
assumptions used for each of the last three fiscal years and the resulting
estimate of weighted-average fair value per share of options granted
during those years are as follows:
expected life of
stock options
3.5 - 3.6 years
3.5 years
3.5 - 4 years
expected life of
stock purchases
6 months
6 months
6 months
interest ratestock
options
3.13% - 3.88
%
2.33% - 3.15
%
2.14% - 2.45
%
interest ratestock
purchases
1.67% - 3.30
%
0.96% - 1.67
%
1.10% - 1.77
%
volatilitystock
options
39% - 40
%
%
40% - 63
%
volatilitystock
purchases
32% - 48
%
32% - 44
%
35% - 44
%
dividend yields
weighted-average
fair value of options granted duringthe year
$
14.41
$
3.69
$
3.32
weighted-average fair
value of stock purchases duringthe year
$
7.55
$
2.78
$
2.12
for purposes of the pro
forma disclosures provided pursuant to sfas no.123, the expected
volatility assumptions used by the company are based on the historical
volatility of the companys common stock over the most recent period
commensurate with the estimated expected life of the companys stock options
and other relevant factors including implied volatility in market traded
options on the companys common stock and the impact of unusual fluctuations
not reasonably expected to recur on the historical volatility of the companys
common stock. the company bases its expected life assumption on its historical
experience and on the terms and conditions of the stock options it grants to
employees.
note 10commitments and contingencies
lease commitments
the company leases various equipment and facilities,
including retail space, under noncancelable operating lease arrangements. the
company does not currently utilize any other off-balance-sheet financing
arrangements. the major facility leases are for terms of 5 to 15 years and
generally provide renewal options for terms of 3 to 5 additional years. leases
for retail space are for terms of 5 to 20 years, the majority of which are for
10 years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. as of september24,
2005, the companys total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable
operating leases were $865 million, of which $606 million related to leases for
retail space.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 10commitments
and contingencies (continued)
rent expense under all
operating leases, including both cancelable and noncancelable leases, was $140
million, $103 million, and $97million in 2005, 2004, and 2003,
respectively. future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating
leases having remaining terms in excess of one year as of september24,
2005, are as follows (in millions):
fiscalyears
$
later years
total minimum lease
payments
$
accrued
warranty and indemnifications
the company offers a basic limited parts and labor
warranty on its hardware products. the basic warranty period for hardware products
is typically one year from the date of purchase by the end-user. the company
also offers a 90-day basic warranty for its service parts used to repair
the companys hardware products. the company provides currently for the
estimated cost that may be incurred under its basic limited product warranties
at the time related revenue is recognized. factors considered in determining
appropriate accruals for product warranty obligations include the size of the
installed base of products subject to warranty protection, historical and
projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and
knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the companys
typical experience. the company assesses the adequacy of its preexisting
warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary based on actual
experience and changes in future estimates.
the
following table reconciles changes in the companys accrued warranties and
related costs (in millions):
beginning accrued
warranty and related costs
$
$
$
cost of warranty
claims
(188
)
(105
)
(71
)
accruals for
product warranties
ending accrued warranty
and related costs
$
$
$
the company generally does
not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software
against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual
property rights. other agreements entered into by the company sometimes include
indemnification provisions under which the company could be subject to costs
and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the company or an
indemnified third-party. however, the company has not been required to make any
significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against
itself or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does
not have a potential liability related to unresolved infringement claims
subject to indemnification that would have a material adverse effect on its
financial condition, liquidity or results of operations. therefore, the company
did not record a liability for infringement costs as of either september24,
2005 or september25, 2004.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 10commitments and contingencies (continued)
concentrations in
the available sources of supply of materials and product
although most components
essential to the companys business are generally available from multiple
sources, other key components (including microprocessors and application-specific
integrated circuits (asics)) are currently obtained by the company from
single or limited sources. some other key components, while currently available
to the company from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry-wide
availability and pricing pressures. in addition, the company uses some
components that are not common to the rest of the personal computer industry,
and new products introduced by the company often initially utilize custom
components obtained from only one source until the company has evaluated
whether there is a need for and subsequently qualifies additional suppliers. if
the supply of a key single-sourced component to the company were to be
delayed or curtailed, or in the event a key manufacturing vendor delays
shipments of completed products to the company, the companys ability to ship
related products in desired quantities and in a timely manner could be
adversely affected. the companys business and financial performance could also
be adversely affected depending on the time required to obtain sufficient
quantities from the original source, or to identify and obtain sufficient
quantities from an alternative source. continued availability of these
components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the
production of common components instead of components customized to meet the
companys requirements. finally, significant portions of the companys cpus,
logic boards, and assembled products are now manufactured by outsourcing
partners, primarily in various parts of asia. although the company works
closely with its outsourcing partners on manufacturing schedules, the companys
operating results could be adversely affected if its outsourcing partners were
unable to meet their production obligations.
long-term supply agreements
subsequent to september24,
2005, the company entered into long-term supply agreements with hynix
semiconductor,inc., intel corporation, micron technology,inc.,
samsung electronics co., ltd., and toshiba corporation to secure supply of nand
flash memory through calendar year 2010. as part of these agreements, the
company intends to prepay a total of $1.25 billion for flash memory components
by the end of the second quarter of 2006.
contingencies
the company is subject to
certain other legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in the ordinary
course of business and have not been fully adjudicated. in the opinion of
management, the company does not have a potential liability related to any
current legal proceedings and claims that would individually or in the
aggregate have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, liquidity,
or results of operations. however, the results of legal proceedings cannot be
predicted with certainty. should the company fail to prevail in any of these
legal matters or should several of these legal matters be resolved against the
company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular
reporting period could be materially adversely affected.
production and marketing
of products in certain states and countries may subject the company to
environmental and other regulations including, in some instances, the
requirement to provide customers the ability to return product at the end of
its useful life, and place responsibility for environmentally safe disposal or
recycling with the company. such laws and regulations have recently been passed
in several jurisdictions in which the company operates including various
european union member countries, japan and certain states within the u.s. although
the company does not anticipate any material adverse effects in the future
based on the nature of its operations and the thrust of such laws, there is no
assurance that
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 10commitments
and contingencies (continued)
such existing laws or
future laws will not have a material adverse effect on the companys financial
condition, liquidity, or results of operations.
note 11segment information and geographic data
in accordance with sfas no.131, disclosures about segments of an enterprise and related information,
the company reports segment information based on the management approach. the
management approach designates the internal reporting used by management for
making decisions and assessing performance as the source of the companys
reportable segments.
the company manages its business primarily on a
geographic basis. the companys reportable operating segments are comprised of
the americas, europe, japan, and retail. the americas, europe, and japan
reportable segments do not include activities related to the retail segment. the
americas segment includes both north and south america. the europe segment
includes european countries as well as the middle east and africa. the retail
segment operates apple-owned retail stores in the u.s., canada, japan, and the
u.k. other operating segments include asia-pacific, which includes australia
and asia except for japan, and the companys subsidiary, filemaker,inc. each
reportable geographic operating segment provides similar hardware and software
products and similar services, and the accounting policies of the various
segments are the same as those described in note 1, summary of significant
accounting policies, except as described below for the retail segment.
the company evaluates the performance of its operating
segments based on net sales. the retail segments performance is also evaluated
based on operating income. net sales for geographic segments are generally
based on the location of the customers. operating income for each segment
includes net sales to third parties, related cost of sales, and operating
expenses directly attributable to the segment. operating income for each
segment excludes other income and expense and certain expenses that are managed
outside the operating segments. costs excluded from segment operating income
include various corporate expenses, manufacturing costs and variances not
included in standard costs, income taxes, and various nonrecurring charges.
corporate expenses include research and development, corporate marketing
expenses, manufacturing costs and variances not included in standard costs, and
other separately managed general and administrative expenses including certain
corporate expenses associated with support of the retail segment. the company
does not include intercompany transfers between segments for management
reporting purposes. segment assets exclude corporate assets. corporate assets
include cash, short-term and long-term investments, manufacturing facilities, miscellaneous
corporate infrastructure, goodwill and other acquired intangible assets, and
retail store construction-in-progress that is not subject to depreciation.
except for the retail segment, capital expenditures for long-lived assets are
not reported to management by segment. capital expenditures by the retail
segment were $132 million, $104 million, and $92 million for 2005, 2004, and
2003 respectively.
operating income for all segments, except retail,
includes cost of sales at manufacturing standard cost, other cost of sales,
related sales and marketing costs, and certain general and administrative
costs. this measure of operating income, which includes manufacturing profit,
provides a comparable basis for comparison between the companys various geographic
segments. certain manufacturing expenses and related adjustments not included
in segment cost of sales, including variances between standard and actual
manufacturing costs and the mark-up above standard cost for product supplied to
the retail segment, are included in corporate expenses.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 11segment
information and geographic data (continued)
management assesses the operating performance of the
retail segment differently than it assesses the operating performance of the
companys geographic segments. the retail segment revenue and operating income
is intended to depict a measure comparable to that of the companys major
channel partners in the u.s. operating retail stores so the company can
evaluate the retail segment performance as if it were a channel partner.
therefore, the company makes three significant adjustments to the retail
segment for management reporting purposes that are not included in the results
of the companys other segments.
first, the retail segments operating income includes
cost of sales for apple products at an amount normally charged to major channel
partners in the u.s. operating retail stores, less the cost of sales programs
and incentives provided to those channel partners and the companys cost to
support those partners. for the years ended september24, 2005, september25,
2004, and september27, 2003, this resulted in the recognition of
additional cost of sales above standard cost by the retail segment and an
offsetting benefit to corporate expenses of approximately $435 million, $213
million, and $106 million, respectively.
second, the companys service and support contracts
are transferred to the retail segment at the same cost as that charged to the
companys major retail channel partners in the u.s., resulting in a measure of
revenue and gross margin for those items that is comparable between the companys
retail stores and those retail channel partners. the retail segment recognizes
the full amount of revenue and cost of sales of the companys service and
support contracts at the time of sale. because the company has not yet earned
the revenue or incurred the costs associated with the sale of these contracts,
an offset to these amounts is recognized in other operating segments net sales
and cost of sales. for the year ended september24, 2005, this resulted in
the recognition of net sales and cost of sales by the retail segment, with
corresponding offsets in other operating segments, of $92 million and $64
million, respectively. for the year ended september25, 2004, the net
sales and cost of sales recognized by the retail segment for sales of service
and support contracts were $54 million and $37 million, respectively. for the
year ended september27, 2003, this resulted in the recognition of net
sales and cost of sales by the retail segment of $30 million and $20 million,
respectively.
third, the company has opened seven high profile
stores in new york, los angeles, chicago, san francisco, tokyo, japan, osaka,
japan, and london, england as of september24, 2005. these high profile
stores are larger than the companys typical retail stores and were designed to
further promote brand awareness and provide a venue for certain corporate sales
and marketing activities, including corporate briefings. as such, the company
allocates certain operating expenses associated with these stores to corporate
marketing expense to reflect the estimated benefit realized company-wide. the
allocation of these operating costs is based on the amount incurred for a high
profile store in excess of that incurred by a more typical company retail
location. expenses allocated to corporate marketing resulting from the
operations of these stores were $31 million, $16 million, and $6 million for
the years ended september24, 2005, september25, 2004, and september27,
2003, respectively.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 11segment
information and geographic data (continued)
summary information by
operating segment follows (in millions):
americas:
net sales
$
6,590
$
4,019
$
3,181
operating income
$
$
$
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets (a)
$
$
$
europe:
net sales
$
3,073
$
1,799
$
1,309
operating income
$
$
$
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets
$
$
$
japan:
net sales
$
$
$
operating income
$
$
$
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets
$
$
$
retail:
net sales
$
2,350
$
1,185
$
operating income (loss)
$
$
$
(5
)
depreciation, amortization, and accretion (b)
$
$
$
segment assets (b)
$
$
$
other segments (c):
net sales
$
$
$
operating income
$
$
$
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets
$
$
$
(a) the americas asset
figures do not include fixed assets held in the u.s. such fixed assets are not
allocated specifically to the americas segment and are included in the
corporate assets figures below.
(b) retail segment
depreciation and asset figures reflect the cost and related depreciation of its
retail stores and related infrastructure. retail store
construction-in-progress, which is not subject to depreciation, is reflected in
corporate assets.
(c) other segments include
asia-pacific and filemaker.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 11segment
information and geographic data (continued)
a reconciliation of the
companys segment operating income and assets to the consolidated financial
statements follows (in millions):
segment operating income
$
1,661
$
$
retail manufacturing
margin (a)
corporate expenses, net
(b)
(446
)
(853
)
(701
)
restructuring costs
(23
)
(26
)
consolidated operating
income (loss)
$
1,650
$
$
(1
)
segment assets
$
1,881
$
1,411
$
1,197
corporate assets
9,670
6,639
$
5,618
consolidated assets
$
11,551
$
8,050
$
6,815
segment depreciation,
amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
corporate depreciation,
amortization, and accretion
consolidated
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
(a) represents the excess of
the retail segments cost of sales over the companys standard cost of sales
for products sold through the retail segment.
(b) corporate expenses
include research and development, corporate marketing expenses, manufacturing
costs and variances not included in standard costs, and other separately
managed general and administrative expenses including certain corporate
expenses associated with support of the retail segment.
no
single customer accounted for more than 10% of net sales in 2005, 2004, or 2003.
net sales and long-lived assets related to operations in the u.s., japan, and
other foreign countries are as follows (in millions):
net sales:
u.s.
$
8,194
$
4,893
$
3,627
japan
1,021
other countries
4,716
2,648
1,882
total net sales
$
13,931
$
8,279
$
6,207
long-lived assets:
u.s.
$
$
$
japan
other countries
total long-lived
assets
$
$
$
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 11segment
information and geographic data (continued)
information regarding net
sales by product is as follows (in millions):
net sales:
desktops (a)
$
3,436
$
2,373
$
2,475
portables (b)
2,839
2,550
2,016
total macintosh net sales
6,275
4,923
4,491
ipod
4,540
1,306
other music
related products and services (c)
peripherals and
other hardware (d)
1,126
software,
service, and other net sales (e)
1,091
total net sales
$
13,931
$
8,279
$
6,207
(a) includes imac, emac, mac
mini, power mac and xserve product lines.
(b) includes ibook and
powerbook product lines.
(c) consists of itunes music
store sales and ipod services, and apple-branded and third-party ipod
accessories.
(d) includes sales of
apple-branded and third-party displays, wireless connectivity and networking
solutions, and other hardware accessories.
(e) includes
sales of apple-branded operating system, application software, third-party
software, applecare, and internet services.
note 12related party transactions and certain other
transactions
in march2002, the company entered into a
reimbursement agreement with its ceo, mr.steven p. jobs, for the
reimbursement of expenses incurred by mr.jobs in the operation of his
private plane when used for apple business. the reimbursement agreement became
effective for expenses incurred by mr.jobs for apple business purposes
since he took delivery of the plane in may2001. the company recognized a
total of $1.1 million, $483,000, and $404,000 in expenses pursuant to the
reimbursement agreement during 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. all expenses
recognized pursuant to the reimbursement agreement have been included in
selling, general, and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of
operations.
subsequent to september24,
2005, the company entered into an agreement with pixar to sell certain of pixars
short films on the itunes music store. mr.steven p. jobs, the companys
ceo is also the ceo, chairman, and a large shareholder of pixar.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note
13selected quarterly financial information (unaudited)
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
(tabularamountsinmillions,exceptpershareamounts)
net sales
$
3,678
$
3,520
$
3,243
$
3,490
gross margin
$
1,035
$
1,044
$
$
net income
$
$
$
$
earnings per common
share:
basic
$
0.52
$
0.39
$
0.36
$
0.37
diluted
$
0.50
$
0.37
$
0.34
$
0.35
net sales
$
2,350
$
2,014
$
1,909
$
2,006
gross margin
$
$
$
$
net income
$
$
$
$
earnings per common
share:
basic
$
0.14
$
0.08
$
0.06
$
0.09
diluted
$
0.13
$
0.08
$
0.06
$
0.08
basic and diluted
earnings per share are computed independently for each of the quarters
presented. therefore, the sum of quarterly basic and diluted per share
information may not equal annual basic and diluted earnings per share.
net income during
the fourth quarter of 2005 benefited by $81 million from the reversal of
certain tax contingency reserves and adjustments to net deferred tax assets,
including reductions to valuation allowances.
net income during the fourth, third, and second quarters
of 2004 included restructuring charges, net of tax, of $4 million, $6 million,
and $7 million, respectively. net income during the fourth quarter of 2004
included after-tax gains related to non-current investments of $3 million.
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
the
board of directors and shareholders
apple computer,inc.:
we have audited the accompanying consolidated balance
sheets of apple computer,inc. and subsidiaries (the company) as of september24,
2005 and september25, 2004, and the related consolidated statements of
operations, shareholders equity and cash flows for each of the years in the
three-year period ended september24, 2005. these consolidated financial
statements are the responsibility of the companys management. our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial
statements based on our audits.
we conducted our audits in accordance with the
standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of
material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial
statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements
referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of the company as of september24, 2005 and september25,
2004, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the
years in the three-year period ended september24, 2005, in conformity
with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles.
we also have audited, in accordance with the standards
of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting as of september24,
2005, based on criteria established in internal
control-integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso), and our report dated november29,
2005 expressed an unqualified opinion on managements assessment of, and the
effective operation of internal control over financial reporting.
as discussed in note 1 to
the consolidated financial statements, the company changed its method of
accounting for asset retirement obligations and for financial instruments with
characteristics of both liabilities and equity in 2003.
/s/ kpmg llp
mountain view,
california
november 29, 2005
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and shareholders
apple computer,inc.:
we have audited managements assessment, included in
the accompanying managements annual report on internal control over financial
reporting, that apple computer,inc. and subsidiaries maintained effective
internal control over financial reporting as of september24, 2005, based
on criteria established in internal
control-integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). apple computer, inc.s
management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over
financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion
on managements assessment and an opinion on the effectiveness of apple
computer, inc.s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
we conducted our audit in accordance with the
standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).
those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting, evaluating
managements assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other procedures as we
considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
a companys internal control over financial reporting
is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that (1)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because of inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk
that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
in our opinion, managements assessment that apple
computer, inc. maintained effective internal control over financial reporting
as of september24, 2005, is fairly stated, in all material respects,
based on criteria established in internal
control-integrated framework issued by coso. also, in our opinion, apple
computer, inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control
over financial reporting as of september24, 2005, based on criteria
established in internal control-integrated framework issued
by coso.
we also have audited, in
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board
(united states), the consolidated balance sheets of apple computer, inc. as of september24,
2005 and september25, 2004, and the related consolidated statements of
operations, shareholders equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the
three-year period ended september24, 2005, and our report dated november29,
2005 expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated financial
statements.
/s/ kpmg llp
mountain view,
california
november 29, 2005
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants
on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item 9a. controls and procedures
evaluation of
disclosure controls and procedures
based on an evaluation
under the supervision and with the participation of the companys management,
the companys principal executive officer and principal financial officer have
concluded that the companys disclosure controls and procedures as defined in rules13a-15(e)and
15d-15(e)under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (exchange
act) were effective as of september24, 2005 to ensure that information
required to be disclosed by the company in reports that it files or submits
under the exchange act is (i)recorded, processed, summarized and reported
within the time periods specified in the securities and exchange commission rulesand
forms and (ii)accumulated and communicated to the companys management,
including its principal executive officer and principal financial officer, as
appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
inherent
limitations over internal controls
the companys
internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation
of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. the companys internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that:
(i) pertain to
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the companys assets;
(ii) provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that the companys receipts and expenditures are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of the companys management
and directors; and
(iii) provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a
material effect on the financial statements.
management, including the
companys chief executive officer and chief financial officer, does not expect that
the companys internal controls will prevent or detect all errors and all
fraud. a control system, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide
only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control
system are met. further, the design of a control system must reflect the fact
that there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be
considered relative to their costs. because of the inherent limitations in all
control systems, no evaluation of internal controls can provide absolute
assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, have been
detected. also, any evaluation of the effectiveness of controls in future
periods are subject to the risk that those internal controls may become inadequate
because of changes in business conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
managements annual
report on internal control over financial reporting
the companys management
is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting (as defined in rule13a-15(f)under the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended). management conducted an
evaluation of the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial
reporting based on the criteria set forth in internal controlintegrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission (coso). based on this evaluation, management has concluded that the
companys internal control over financial reporting was
effective as of september24,
2005. the companys independent registered public accounting firm, kpmgllp,
has issued an attestation report on the companys assessment of its internal
control over financial reporting. the report on the audit of internal control
over financial reporting appears on page99 of this form10-k.
changes in internal
control over financial reporting
there were no significant
changes in the companys internal control over financial reporting identified
in managements evaluation during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005 that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys
internal control over financial reporting.
item 9b. other information
none.
partiii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the
registrant
directors
listed
below are the companys seven directors whose terms expire at the next annual
meeting of shareholders.
name
positionwiththecompany
age
directorsince
fred d. anderson
director
william v.
campbell
co-lead
director
millard s.
drexler
director
albert a.
gore,jr.
director
steven p. jobs
director
and chief executive officer
arthur d.
levinson
co-lead
director
jerome b. york
director
fred d. anderson has been a
founding partner of elevation partners, a private equity firm focused on the
media and entertainment industry, since july2004. previously, mr.anderson
served as the companys executive vice president and chief financial officer
from april1996 to june2004. mr.anderson also serves on the
board of directors of ebayinc.
william v. campbell has been
chairman of the board of directors of intuit,inc. (intuit)
since august1998. from september1999 to january2000, mr.campbell
acted as chief executive officer of intuit. from april1994 to august1998,
mr.campbell was president and chief executive officer and a director of
intuit. from january1991 to december1993, mr.campbell was
president and chief executive officer of go corporation. mr.campbell also
serves on the board of directors of opsware,inc.
millard s. drexler has been
chairman and chief executive officer of j. crew group,inc. since january2003.
previously, mr.drexler was chief executive officer of gapinc. from
1995 and president from 1987 until september2002. mr.drexler was
also a member of the board of directors of gapinc. from november1983
until october2002.
albert a. gore,jr. has
served as a senior advisor to google,inc. since 2001. he has also served
as executive chairman of current tv since 2002 and as chairman of generation
investment management since 2004. he is a visiting professor at middle
tennessee state university. mr.gore was inaugurated as the 45th vice
president of the u.s. in 1993. he was re-elected in 1996 and served for a total
of eight years as president of the senate, a member of the cabinet and the
national security council. prior to 1993, he served eight years in the u.s.
senate and eight years in the u.s. house of representatives.
steven p. jobs is one of the
companys co-founders and currently serves as its chief executive officer. mr.jobs
is also the chairman and chief executive officer of pixar animation studios.
arthurd.levinson,ph.d.
has been chief executive officer and a director of genentech inc. (genentech) since july1995. dr.levinson has been
chairman of the board of directors of genentech since september1999. he
joined genentech in 1980 and served in a number of executive positions,
including senior vice president of r&d from 1993 to 1995. dr.levinson
also serves on the board of directors of google,inc.
jerome b.
york has been chief executive officer of harwinton capital corporation,
a private investment company that he controls, since september2003. from january2000
until september2003, mr.york was chairman and chief executive
officer of microwarehouse,inc., a reseller of computer hardware, software
and peripheral products. from september1995 to october1999, he was
vice chairman of tracinda corporation. from may1993 to september1995
he was senior vice president and chief
financial officer of ibm
corporation, and served as a member of ibms board of directors from january1995
to august1995. mr.york is also a director of tyco
internationalltd. and exide technologies.
role
of the board; corporate governance matters
it is the paramount duty of the board of directors to
oversee the chief executive officer and other senior management in the
competent and ethical operation of the company on a day-to-day basis and to
assure that the long-term interests of the shareholders are being served. to
satisfy this duty, the directors take a proactive, focused approach to their position,
and set standards to ensure that the company is committed to business success
through maintenance of the highest standards of responsibility and ethics.
members of the board bring
to the company a wide range of experience, knowledge and judgment. these varied
skills mean that governance is far more than a check the box approach to
standards or procedures. the governance structure in the company is designed to
be a working structure for principled actions, effective decision-making
and appropriate monitoring of both compliance and performance. the key
practices and procedures of the board are outlined in the corporate governance
guidelines available on the companys website at www.apple.com/investor.
board committees
the board has a standing compensation committee, a
nominating and corporate governance committee (nominating
committee) and an audit and finance committee (audit committee). all committee members are independent
under the listing standards of the nasdaq stock market.
the audit committee is primarily responsible for
overseeing the services performed by the companys independent auditors and
internal audit department, evaluating the companys accounting policies and its
system of internal controls and reviewing significant financial transactions.
members of the audit committee are messrs.campbell and york and dr.levinson.
the compensation committee is primarily responsible
for reviewing the compensation arrangements for the companys executive
officers, including the chief executive officer, and for administering the
companys equity compensation plans. members of the compensation committee are messrs.campbell,
drexler, and gore.
the nominating committee assists the board in
identifying qualified individuals to become directors, determines the
composition of the board and its committees, monitors the process to assess
board effectiveness and helps develop and implement the companys corporate
governance guidelines. the nominating committee also considers nominees
proposed by shareholders. members of the nominating committee are messrs.drexler
and gore and dr.levinson.
the audit, compensation
and nominating committees operate under written charters adopted by the board.
these charters are available on apples website at www.apple.com/investor.
audit committee financial expert
all members of the companys
audit committee, messrs.campbell and york and dr.levinson, qualify
as audit committee financial experts under item 401 (h)of regulation
s-k and are considered independent as the term is used in item 7(d)(3)(iv)of
schedule 14a under the exchange act.
code of ethics
the company has a code of
ethics that applies to all of the companys employees, including its principal
executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer
and its board of directors. a copy of this code, ethics: the way we do
business worldwide is available on the companys
websiteatwww.apple.com/investor.
the company intends to disclose any changes in or waivers from its code of
ethics by posting such information on its website or by filing a form8-k.
executive officers
the following sets forth certain information regarding
executive officers of the company. information pertaining to mr.jobs, who
is both a director and an executive officer of the company, may be found in the
section entitled directors.
timothy d. cook, chief operating
officer (age 45), joined the company in february1998. mr.cook also
served with the company as executive vice president, worldwide sales and
operations from 2002 to 2005. in 2004, his responsibilities were expanded to
include the companys macintosh hardware engineering. from 1998 to 2002, mr.cook
served in the position of senior vice president, worldwide operations, sales,
service and support. prior to joining the company, mr.cook held the
position of vice president, corporate materials for compaq computer corporation
(compaq). previous to his work at
compaq, mr.cook was the chief operating officer of the reseller division
at intelligent electronics. mr.cook also spent 12years with ibm,
most recently as director of north american fulfillment. mr.cook also
serves as a member of the board of directors of nike,inc.
nancy r. heinen, senior vice
president, general counsel and secretary (age 49), joined the company in september1997.
prior to joining the company, ms.heinen held the position of vice
president, general counsel and secretary of the board of directors at next
software,inc. (next) from february1994
until the acquisition of next by the company in february1997.
ronald b. johnson, senior vice
president, retail (age 47), joined the company in january2000. prior to
joining the company, mr.johnson spent 16years with target stores,
most recently as senior merchandising executive.
peter oppenheimer, senior vice
president and chief financial officer (age 42), joined the company in july1996.
mr.oppenheimer also served with the company in the position of vice
president and corporate controller and as senior director of finance for the
americas. prior to joining the company, mr.oppenheimer was cfo of one of
the four business units for automatic data processing,inc. (adp). prior to joining adp, mr.oppenheimer spent six
years in the information technology consulting practice with coopers and lybrand.
jonathan rubinstein, senior vice
president, ipod division (age 49), joined the company in february1997. mr.rubinstein
also served with the company in the position of senior vice president, hardware
engineering. before joining the company, mr.rubinstein was executive vice
president and chief operating officer of firepower systems incorporated, from may1993
to august1996. mr.rubinstein also serves as a member of the board
of directors of immersion corporation.
philip w. schiller, senior vice
president, worldwide product marketing (age 45), rejoined the company in 1997.
prior to rejoining the company, mr.schiller was vice president of product
marketing at macromedia,inc. from december1995 to march1997
and was director of product marketing at firepower systems,inc. from 1993
to december1995. prior to that, mr.schiller spent six years at the
company in various marketing positions.
bertrand serlet, ph.d., senior
vice president, software engineering (age 44), joined the company in february1997
upon the companys acquisition of next. at next, dr.serlet held several
engineering and managerial positions, including director of web engineering.
prior to next, from 1985 to 1989, dr.serlet worked as a research engineer
at xerox parc.
sina tamaddon, senior vice
president, applications (age 48), joined the company in september1997. mr.tamaddon
has also served with the company in the position of senior vice president,
worldwide service and support, and vice president and general manager, newton
group. before joining the
company, mr.tamaddon held the position of vice
president, europe with next from september1996 through march1997.
from august1994 to august1996, mr.tamaddon held the position
of vice president, professional services with next.
avadis tevanian,jr.,
ph.d., senior vice president, chief software technology
officer (age 44), joined the company in february1997 upon the companys
acquisition of next. dr.tevanian served with the company in the position
of senior vice president, software engineering from 1997 to july2003.
with next, dr.tevanian held several positions, including vice president,
engineering, from april1995 to february1997. prior to april1995,
dr.tevanian worked as an engineer with next and held several management
positions.
section16(a)beneficial
ownership reporting compliance
section16(a)of the securities exchange act
of 1934, as amended, requires the companys officers and directors, and persons
who own more than ten percent of a registered class of the companys equity
securities, to file reports of securities ownership and changes in such
ownership with the securities and exchange commission (sec).
officers, directors and greater than ten percent shareholders also are required
by rulespromulgated by the sec to furnish the company with copies of all section16(a)forms
they file.
based solely upon a review
of the copies of such forms furnished to the company or written representations
that no forms 5 were required, the company believes that all section16(a)filing
requirements were met during fiscal year 2005.
item 11. executive compensation
information
regarding executive compensation
the
following table summarizes compensation information for the last three fiscal
years for (i)mr.jobs, chief executive officer and (ii)the
four most highly compensated executive officers other than the chief executive
officer who were serving as executive officers of the company at the end of the
fiscal year (collectively, the named executive officers).
summary
compensation table
annualcompensation
long-term
compensation
nameandprincipalposition
fiscal
year
salary
($)
bonus
($)
restricted
stockaward
($)
securities
underlying
options*
(#)
allother
compensation
($)
steven p. jobs
chief executive officer
74,750,000
(1)
timothy d. cook
602,434
600,239
12,600
(3)
chief operating
officer
602,632
7,650,000
(2)
12,588
(3)
617,673
9,929
(3)
ronald b. johnson
552,795
550,202
senior vice president,
retail
484,836
1,500,000
6,375,000
(2)
452,404
1,500,000
peter oppenheimer
552,189
550,202
21,092
(3)
senior vice
president and
450,739
6,375,000
(2)
3,808
(3)
chief financial
officer
402,237
jonathan rubinstein
552,795
551,239
12,600
(3)
senior vice president,
485,216
6,375,000
(2)
12,300
(3)
ipod division
452,939
11,986
(3)
(1) in march2003, mr.jobs
voluntarily cancelled all of his outstanding options, excluding those granted
to him in his capacity as a director. in march2003, the board awarded mr.jobs
10million (split-adjusted) restricted shares of the companys common
stock that generally vest in full on the third anniversary of the grant date.
(2) market value of
restricted stock units granted on march24, 2004 (based on $12.75 per share,
the closing price of the companys common stock on the nasdaq national market
on the day of grant). restricted stock units generally vest over four years
with 50% of the total number of shares vesting on each of the second and fourth
anniversaries of the grant date.
(3) consists
of matching contributions made by the company in accordance with the terms of
the 401(k)plan.
option grants in last fiscal year
there were no options, restricted stock, or restricted
stock units granted to the named executive officers during fiscal year 2005.
options exercised
and year-end option holdings
the following table
provides information about stock option exercises by the named executive
officers during fiscal year 2005 and stock options held by each of them at
fiscal year-end. the table has been adjusted to reflect the companys
two-for-one stock split in february2005.
aggregated
option exercises in the last fiscal year
and fiscal year-end option values
shares
acquiredon
exercise
value
realized
numberofsecurities
underlyingunexercised
optionsatfiscal
year-end(#)
valueofunexercised
in-the-moneyoptionsat
fiscalyear-end($)(1)
name
(#)
($)
exercisable
unexercisable
exercisable
unexercisable
steven p. jobs
120,000
(2)
(3)
$
5,694,000
(2)
timothy d. cook
500,000
$
13,329,677
(3)
ronald b. johnson
1,350,000
$
32,257,127
2,100,000
150,000
(3)
$
61,910,625
$
6,220,500
peter oppenheimer
1,107,500
37,500
(3)
$
45,994,859
$
1,560,062
jonathan rubinstein
1,800,000
$
31,012,815
(3)
(1) market value of
securities underlying in-the-money options at the end of fiscal year 2005
(based on $53.20 per share, the closing price of common stock on the nasdaq
national market on september23, 2005), minus the exercise price.
(2) consists
of 120,000 options granted to mr.jobs in his capacity as a director
pursuant to the 1997 director stock option plan. since accepting the position
of ceo, mr.jobs is no longer eligible to receive option grants under the director
plan. in march2003, mr.jobs voluntarily cancelled all of his
outstanding options, excluding those granted to him in his capacity as a
director.
(3) this
does not include 10 million restricted shares granted to mr.jobs, 600,000
restricted stock units granted to mr.cook, and 500,000 restricted stock
units granted to each of messrs.johnson, oppenheimer, and rubinstein.
director compensation
the form and amount of
director compensation is determined by the board after a review of
recommendations made by the nominating committee. the current practice of the
board is to base a substantial portion of a directors annual retainer on
equity. in 1998, shareholders approved the 1997 director stock option plan (the
director plan) and 1,600,000 shares were
reserved for issuance thereunder. pursuant to the director plan, the companys
non-employee directors are granted an option to acquire 30,000 shares of common
stock upon their initial election to the board (initial
options). the initial options vest and become exercisable in three
equal annual installments on each of the first through third anniversaries of
the grant date. on the fourth anniversary of a non-employee directors initial
election to the board and on each subsequent anniversary thereafter, the
director will be entitled to receive an option to acquire 10,000 shares of
common stock (annual options). annual options
are fully vested and immediately exercisable on their date of grant. as of the
end of the fiscal year, there were options for 740,000 shares outstanding under
the director plan. since accepting the position of ceo, mr.jobs is no
longer eligible for grants under the director plan. non-employee directors also
receive a $50,000 annual retainer paid in quarterly increments. in addition,
directors receive up to two free computer systems per year and are eligible to
purchase additional equipment at a discount. directors do not receive any
additional consideration for serving on committees or as committee chairperson.
compensation
committee interlocks and insider participation
the current members of the
compensation committee are messrs.campbell, drexler and gore, none of
whom are employees of the company and all of whom are considered independent
directors under the
applicable nasdaq rules.
there were no interlocks or insider participation between any member of the
board or compensation committee and any member of the board of the directors or
compensation committee of another company.
arrangements
with named executive officers
change in control
arrangementsstock options, restricted stock, and restricted stock units
in the event of a change in control of the company,
all outstanding options under the companys stock option plans, except the
director plan, will, unless otherwise determined by the plan administrator,
become fully exercisable, and will be cashed out at an amount equal to the
difference between the applicable change in control price and the exercise
price. the director plan provides that upon a change in control of the company,
all outstanding options held by non-employee directors will automatically
become fully exercisable and will be cashed out at an amount equal to the
difference between the applicable change in control price and the exercise
price of the options. a change in control under these plans is generally
defined as (i)the acquisition by any person of 50% or more of the
combined voting power of the companys outstanding securities or (ii)the
occurrence of a transaction requiring shareholder approval and involving the
sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the company or the merger of
the company with or into another corporation.
in addition, options,
restricted stock grants, and restricted stock units granted to the named
executive officers generally provide that in the event there is a change in
control, as defined in the companys stock option plans, and if in connection
with or following such change in control, their employment is terminated
without cause or if they should resign for good reason, those options,
restricted stock, and restricted stock units outstanding that are not yet
vested as of the date of such change in control shall become fully vested.
further, restricted stock and restricted stock units granted to the named executive
officers also provide that, in the event the company terminates the officer
without cause at any time, the restricted stock units and restricted stock will
vest in full. generally, cause is defined to include a felony conviction,
willful disclosure of confidential information or willful and continued failure
to perform his or her employment duties. good reason includes resignation of
employment as a result of a substantial diminution in position or duties, or an
adverse change in title or reduction in annual base salary.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management
the following table sets
forth certain information as of october31, 2005 (the table date) with respect to the beneficial ownership of the
companys common stock by (i)each person the company believes
beneficially holds more than 5% of the outstanding shares of common stock; (ii)each
director; (iii)each named executive officer listed in the summary
compensation table under the heading executive compensation;
and (iv)all directors and executive officers as a group. on the table
date, 839,776,934 shares of common stock were issued and outstanding. unless
otherwise indicated, all persons named as beneficial
owners of common stock have sole voting power and sole investment power with
respect to the shares indicated as beneficially owned. in addition, unless
otherwise indicated, all persons named below can be reached at apple computer,inc.,
1 infinite loop, cupertino, ca 95014.
security
ownership of 5% holders, directors, nominees and executive officers
nameofbeneficialowner
sharesofcommonstock
beneficiallyowned(1)
percentofcommonstock
outstanding
fidelity
investments
58,552,916
(2)
6.97
%
barclays global
investors
55,223,982
(3)
6.58
%
axa
47,861,070
(4)
5.70
%
steven p. jobs
10,120,004
(5)
1.21
%
fred d. anderson
5,344
*
william v.
campbell
211,004
(6)
*
timothy d. cook
12,597
(7)
*
millard s.
drexler
210,000
(8)
*
albert a.
gore,jr.
40,000
(9)
*
ronald b. johnson
2,112,597
(10)
*
arthur d.
levinson
352,400
(11)
*
peter oppenheimer
396,643
(12)
*
jonathan j.
rubinstein
22,174
(13)
*
jerome b. york
70,000
(14)
*
all executive officers and
directors as a group (16 persons)
16,307,625
(15)
1.94
%
(1) represents shares of
common stock held and/or options held by such individuals that were exercisable
at the table date or within 60days thereafter. this does not include
options or restricted stock units that vest after 60 days. the share numbers
have been adjusted to reflect the companys two-for-one stock split in february2005.
(2) based on a form13f
filed november14, 2005 by fmr corp. fmr corp. lists its address as 82devonshire
street, boston, ma, 02109, in such filing.
(3) based on a form13f
filed november14, 2005, by barclays global investors. barclays global
investors lists its address as 45 fremont street, san francisco, ca 94105.
(4) based on a form13f
filed november14, 2005, by axa. axa lists its address as 25, avenue
matigon, paris, france 10.
(5) includes 120,000 shares
of common stock that mr.jobs has the right to acquire by exercise of
stock options.
(6) includes 210,000 shares
of common stock that mr.campbell has the right to acquire by exercise of
stock options.
(7) excludes 600,000
restricted stock units.
(8) includes 170,000 shares
of common stock that mr.drexler has the right to acquire by exercise of
stock options.
(9) consists of 40,000
shares of common stock that mr.gore has the right to acquire by exercise
of stock options.
(10) includes 2,100,000 shares of
common stock that mr.johnson has the right to acquire by exercise of
stock options and excludes 500,000 restricted stock units.
(11) includes 2,000 shares of common
stock that dr.levinson holds indirectly and 90,000 shares of common stock
that dr.levinson has the right to acquire by exercise of stock options.
(12) includes 382,500 shares of
common stock that mr.oppenheimer has the right to acquire by exercise of
stock options and excludes 500,000 restricted stock units.
(13) excludes 500,000 restricted
stock units.
(14) includes 30,000 shares of
common stock that mr.york has the right to acquire by exercise of stock
options.
(15) includes 5,870,796 shares of
common stock that executive officers or directors have the right to acquire by
exercise of stock options. does not include 4.4 million of restricted stock
units.
* represents
less than 1% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock on the table
date.
equity
compensation plan information
the
following table sets forth certain information, as of september24, 2005,
concerning shares of common stock authorized for issuance under all of the
companys equity compensation plans. the table has been adjusted to reflect the
companys two-for-one stock split in february2005.
(a)
numberofsecurities
tobeissuedupon
exerciseof
outstandingoptions,
warrantsandrights
(b)
weightedaverage
exercisepriceof
outstandingoptions,
warrantsandrights
(c)
numberofsecurities
remainingavailablefor
futureissuanceunder
equitycompensationplans
(excludingsecurities
reflectedincolumn(a))
equity
compensation plans approved by shareholders
42,365,700
$
23.27
62,791,724
(1)
equity compensation
plans not approved by shareholders
30,827,565
$
10.27
total equity
compensation plans(2)
73,193,265
$
17.79
62,791,724
(1) this number includes
3,834,300 shares of common stock reserved for issuance under the employee stock
purchase plan, 440,000 shares available for issuance under the 1997 director
stock option plan, and 58,517,424 shares available for issuance under the 2003
employee stock plan. the grant of 5,260,000 shares of restricted stock units
has been deducted from the number of shares available for future issuance.
shares of restricted stock and restricted stock units granted after april2005
count against the shares available for grant as two shares for every share
granted. this amount does not include
shares under the 1990 stock option plan that was terminated in 1997. no new
options can be granted under the 1990 stock option plan.
(2) this
table does not include 28,082 outstanding options assumed in connection with a
prior acquisition of a company that originally granted those options. these
assumed options have a weighted average exercise price of $3.39 per share. no
additional options may be granted under the assumed plan.
item 13. certain relationships and related
transactions
in march2002, the company entered into a
reimbursement agreement with its chief executive officer, mr.steven p.
jobs, for the reimbursement of expenses incurred by mr.jobs in the
operation of his private plane when used for apple business. the reimbursement
agreement is effective for expenses incurred by mr.jobs for apple
business purposes since he took delivery of the plane in may2001. during
2005, the company recognized a total of $1,075,545 in expenses pursuant to this
reimbursement agreement related to expenses incurred by mr.jobs during
2005.
in october2005, the
company entered into an agreement with pixar to sell certain of pixars short
films on the itunes music store. mr.jobs, the companys chief executive
officer is also the chief executive officer, chairman, and a large shareholder
of pixar.
item 14. principal accountant fees and services
the following table sets
forth the fees paid to the companys independent registered public accounting
firm, kpmg llp, during fiscal years 2005 and 2004.
audit and non-audit
fees
audit fees
$
6,948,800
(1)
$
3,402,300
audit-related
fees
46,700
(2)
57,000
tax fees
923,000
(3)
784,500
all other fees
total
$
7,918,500
$
4,243,800
(1) audit fees relate to
professional services rendered in connection with the audit of the companys
annual financial statements and internal control over financial reporting,
quarterly review of financial statements included in the companys forms 10-q,
and audit services provided in connection with other statutory and regulatory
filings.
(2) audit-related fees
primarily relate to professional services for the audits of employee benefit
plans.
(3) tax
fees include $690,000 for professional services rendered in connection with tax
compliance and preparation relating to the companys expatriate program, tax
audits and international tax compliance; and $233,000 for international tax
consulting and planning services. the company does not engage kpmg to perform
personal tax services for its executive officers.
policy
on audit committee pre-approval of audit and non-audit services performed by
the independent auditors
prior to the enactment of the sarbanes-oxley act
of 2002 (the act), the company adopted an
auditor independence policy that banned its auditors from performing non-financial
consulting services, such as information technology consulting and internal
audit services. this auditor policy also mandates that the audit and non-audit
services and related budget be approved by the audit committee in advance, and
that the audit committee be provided with quarterly reporting on actual
spending. in accordance with this policy, all services to be performed by kpmg
were pre-approved by the audit committee.
subsequent to the enactment of the act, the audit
committee met with kpmg to further understand the provisions of that act as it
relates to auditor independence. kpmg rotated the lead audit partner for fiscal
year 2005 and will rotate other partners as appropriate in compliance with the
act. the audit committee will continue to monitor the activities undertaken by
kpmg to comply with the act.
partiv
item 15. exhibits and financial statement schedules.
(a) index
to exhibits
incorporated
by reference
exhibit
number
exhibitdescription
form
filingdate/
periodenddate
filed
herewith
3.1
restated articles of incorporation, filed with the
secretary of state of the state of california on january 27, 1988.
s-3
7/27/88
3.2
amendment to restated articles of incorporation,
filed with the secretary of state of the state of california on may 4, 2000.
10-q
5/11/00
3.3
by-laws of the company, as amended through june 7,
2004.
10-q
6/26/04
3.4
certificate of amendment to restated articles of
incorporation, as amended, filed with the secretary of state of the state of
california on february 25, 2005.
10-q
3/26/05
4.2
indenture dated as of february 1, 1994, between the
company and morgan guaranty trust company of new york.
10-q
4/01/94
4.3
supplemental indenture dated as of february 1, 1994,
among the company, morgan guaranty trust company of new york, as resigning
trustee, and citibank, n.a., as successor trustee.
10-q
4/01/94
4.5
form of the companys 6 1/2% notes due 2004.
10-q
4/01/94
4.8
registration rights agreement, dated june 7, 1996
among the company and goldman, sachs & co. and morgan stanley & co.
incorporated.
s-3
8/28/96
4.9
certificate of determination of preferences of
series a non-voting convertible preferred stock of apple computer, inc.
10-k
9/26/97
10.a.3
apple computer, inc. savings and investment plan, as
amended and restated effective as of october 1, 1990.
10-k
9/27/91
10.a.3-1
amendment of apple computer, inc. savings and
investment plan dated march 1, 1992.
10-k
9/25/92
10.a.3-2
amendment no. 2 to the apple computer, inc. savings
and investment plan.
10-q
3/28/97
10.a.5
1990 stock option plan, as amended through november
5, 1997.
10-q
12/26/97
10.a.6
apple computer, inc. employee stock purchase plan,
as amended through april 21, 2005.
10-q
3/26/05
10.a.8
form of indemnification agreement between the
registrant and each officer of the registrant.
10-k
9/26/97
10.a.43
next computer, inc. 1990 stock option plan, as
amended.
s-8
3/21/97
10.a.49
1997 employee stock option plan, as amended through
october 19, 2001.
10-k
9/28/02
10.a.50
1997 director stock option plan.
10-q
3/27/98
10.a.51
2003 employee stock plan, as amended through
november 9, 2005.
10.a.52
reimbursement agreement dated as of may 25, 2001 by
and between the registrant and steven p. jobs.
10-q
6/29/02
10.a.53
option cancellation and restricted stock award
agreement dated as of march 19, 2003 by and between the registrant and steven
p. jobs.
10-q
6/28/03
10.a.54
form of restricted stock unit award agreement.
10-q
3/27/04
10.a.54-1
alternative form of restricted stock unit award
agreement.
10.a.55
apple computer, inc. performance bonus plan dated
april 21, 2005.
10-q
3/26/05
10.a.56
form of election to satisfy tax withholding with
stock.
8-k
8/15/05
10.a.57
form of option agreements.
10.b.18*
custom sales agreement effective october 21, 2002
between the registrant and international business machines corporation.
10-k
9/27/03
10.b.19*
purchase agreement effective august 10, 2005 between
the registrant and freescale semiconductor, inc.
14.1
code of ethics of the company.
10-k
9/27/03
subsidiaries of apple computer, inc.
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting
firm.
31.1
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief
executive officer.
31.2
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of chief
financial officer.
32.1
section 1350 certifications of chief executive
officer and chief financial officer.
* confidential treatment
requested as to certain portions of this exhibit.
signatures
pursuant
to the requirements of section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange
act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, this 29th day
of november 2005.
apple computer, inc.
by:
/s/ peter oppenheimer
peter oppenheimer
senior vice president and
chief financial officer
know all persons by these presents, that each person
whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints steven p. jobs and peter
oppenheimer, jointly and severally, his attorneys-in-fact, each
with the power of substitution, for him in any and all capacities, to sign any
amendments to this annual report on form10-k, and to file the same,
with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the
securities and exchange commission, hereby ratifying and confirming all that
each of said attorneys-in-fact, or his substitute or substitutes,
may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has
been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated:
name
title
date
/s/ steven p. jobs
steven
p. jobs
chief executive
officer and director
(principal
executive officer)
november 29,2005
/s/ peter oppenheimer
peter
oppenheimer
senior vice
president and chief
financial officer
(principal
financial and principal accounting
officer)
november 29,2005
/s/ fred anderson
fred
anderson
director
november 29,2005
/s/ william v. campbell
william
v. campbell
director
november 29,2005
/s/ millard s. drexler
millard
s. drexler
director
november 29,2005
/s/ albert gore,jr.
albert
gore, jr.
director
november 29,2005
/s/ arthur d. levinson
arthur
d. levinson
director
november 29,2005
/s/ jerome b. york
jerome b. york
director
november 29,2005
