10-k
a06-25759_210k.htm
annual report pursuant to section 13 and 15(d)
united
states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form10-k
(mark one)
x annual report
pursuant to section13 or 15(d)of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the
fiscal year ended september30, 2006
or
o transition
report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the
transition period from
to
commission
file number 000-10030
apple
computer, inc.
(exact
name of registrant as specified in its charter)
california
(state or other jurisdiction
of incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
1 infinite loop
cupertino, california
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants
telephone number, including area code: (408) 996-1010
securities
registered pursuant to section12(b)of the act:
common stock, no par value
(title of class)
securities
registered pursuant to section12(g)of the act: none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405
of the securities act. yesonox
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13
or section15(d)of the act. yesonox
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to
be filed by section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to
such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yesxnoo
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of
regulation s-k (section 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein,
and will not be contained, to the best of the registrants knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii
of this form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a
large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see
definition of accelerated filer and
large accelerated filer in rule12b-2 of the exchange act. (check
one):
large accelerated filer x
accelerated filer o
non-accelerated filer o
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2
of the act). yesonox
the
aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting stock held by
non-affiliates of the registrant, as of april1, 2006, was approximately
$45,716,583,100 based upon the closing price reported for such date on the nasdaq
global select market. for purposes of this disclosure, shares of common stock
held by persons who hold more than 5% of the outstanding shares of common stock
and shares held by executive officers and directors of the registrant have been
excluded because such persons may be deemed to be affiliates. this
determination of executive officer or affiliate status is not necessarily a conclusive
determination for other purposes.
859,273,757 shares of common
stock issued and outstanding as of december13, 2006
the business section and other parts of this annual
report on form10-k (form10-k) contain forward-looking
statements that involve risks and uncertainties. many of the forward-looking
statements are located in managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations. forward-looking statements provide
current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include
any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. forward-looking
statements can also be identified by words such as anticipates, believes, estimates,
expects, intends, plans, predicts, and similar terms. forward-looking
statements are not guarantees of future performance and the companys actual
results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking
statements. factors that might cause such differences include, but are not
limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled risk factors under parti,
item 1a of this form10-k. the company assumes no obligation to
revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as
required by law.
explanatory note
in this form10-k, apple computer,inc.
(apple or the company) is restating its consolidated balance sheet as of september24,
2005, and the related consolidated statements of operations, shareholders
equity, and cash flows for each of the fiscal years ended september24,
2005 and september25, 2004, and each of the quarters in fiscal year 2005.
this form10-k also reflects the
restatement of selected consolidated financial data in item 6 for the fiscal
years ended september2005, 2004, 2003, and 2002, and managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in
item 7 for the fiscal years ended september24, 2005 and september25,
2004.
previously filed annual reports on form10-k
and quarterly reports on form10-q affected by the restatements have
not been amended and should not be relied on.
on june29, 2006, the company announced that an
internal review had discovered irregularities related to the issuance of
certain stock option grants made between 1997 and 2001, including a grant to
its chief executive officer (ceo) steve jobs. the company also announced that
a special committee of outside directors (special committee) had been formed
and had hired independent counsel to conduct a full investigation of the
companys past stock option granting practices. on october4, 2006, the
company announced the key results of the special committees investigation,
which are set forth in the companys form8-k filed on that date.
as a result of the internal review and the independent
investigation, management has concluded, and the audit and finance committee of
the board of directors agrees, that incorrect measurement dates were used for
financial accounting purposes for certain stock option grants made in prior
periods. therefore, the company has recorded additional non-cash stock-based
compensation expense and related tax effects with regard to past stock option
grants, and the company is restating previously filed financial statements in
this form10-k. these adjustments, after tax, amounted to $4
million, $7 million, and $10 million in fiscal years 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. the adjustment to 2006 was recorded in the fourth quarter of
fiscal year 2006 due to its insignificance.
the independent counsel and its forensic accountants (investigative
team) reviewed the facts and circumstances surrounding stock option grants
made on 259 dates. the investigative team spent over 26,500 person-hours
searching more than one million physical and electronic documents and
interviewing more than 40 current and former directors, officers, employees,
and advisors. based on a review of the totality of evidence and the applicable
law, the special committee found no misconduct by current management. the
special committees investigation identified a number of grants for which grant
dates were intentionally selected in order to obtain favorable exercise prices.
the terms of these and certain other grants, as discussed below, were finalized
after the originally assigned grant dates. the special committee concluded that
the procedures for granting, accounting for, and reporting stock option grants
did not include sufficient safeguards to prevent
manipulation. although the investigation found that ceo steve jobs was aware or
recommended the selection of some favorable grant dates, he did not receive or
financially benefit from these grants or appreciate the accounting
implications. the special committee also found that the investigation had
raised serious concerns regarding the actions of two former officers in
connection with the accounting, recording and reporting of stock option grants.
based on the evidence and findings from the companys
internal review and the special committees independent investigation, an
analysis was performed of the measurement dates for the 42,077 stock option
grants made on 259 dates between october1996 and january2003 (the relevant
period). the company believes that the analysis was properly limited to the
relevant period. in addition to analyzing all grants made during the relevant
period, the company sampled certain grants between 1994 and 1997 and found none
that required accounting adjustments. the first grants for which stock-based
compensation expense is required are dated december29, 1997. the company
also examined grants made after the relevant period and found none that
required accounting adjustments. moreover, in the years after 2002, apple made
significant changes in its stock option granting practices in response to
evolving legal, regulatory and accounting requirements.
consistent with the accounting literature and recent
guidance from the securities and exchange commission (sec), the grants during
the relevant period were organized into categories based on grant type and
process by which the grant was finalized. the company analyzed the evidence
related to each category of grants including, but not limited to, electronic
and physical documents, document metadata, and witness interviews. based on the
relevant facts and circumstances, the company applied the controlling
accounting standards to determine, for every grant within each category, the
proper measurement date. if the measurement date is not the originally assigned
grant date, accounting adjustments were made as required, resulting in
stock-based compensation expense and related tax effects.
the 42,077 grants were classified as follows: (1)17
grants to persons elected or appointed to the board of directors (director
grants); (2)3,892 grants to employees under the monday/tuesday plan
described below (monday/tuesday grants); (3)27,096 grants made in
broad-based awards to large numbers of employees, usually on an annual basis (focal
grants); (4)9,988 other grants ratified at meetings of the board or
compensation committee (meeting grants); (5)1,082 other grants ratified
by unanimous written consent (uwc) of the board or compensation committee (other
uwc grants); and (6)two grants to the ceo (ceo grants). all references
to the number of option shares, option exercise prices, and share prices in
this explanatory note have not been adjusted for any subsequent stock splits.
with the exception of director grants, all stock
option grants were subject to ratification by the board or compensation
committee at a meeting or by uwc. following approval of the grants at a meeting
or by uwc, the companys legal staff would prepare a secretarys certificate
certifying the ratification of the grants. based on the facts and circumstances
described below, the company has concluded that the recipients and terms of
certain grants were fixed for accounting purposes before ratification pursuant
to parameters previously approved by the board or compensation committee
through the monday/tuesday plan and the focal process. as further discussed
below, within these parameters, management had the authority to determine the
recipients and terms for each grant. thus, the company has concluded that the
measurement dates for these grants occurred when managements process for
allocating these grants was completed and the grants were ready for
ratification, which was considered perfunctory. with regard to all other
grants, the company has concluded that the grants were finalized and the
measurement dates occurred when the grants were ratified. for many grants,
however, the dates of ratification cannot be established because the dates the
uwcs were executed by the board or compensation committee members or received
by the company are not available. for such grants, the company has concluded
that the date of the preparation of the secretarys certificate is the best
alternative for determining the actual date of ratification.
as discussed below, the companys analysis determined
that the originally assigned grant dates for 6,428 grants on 42 dates are not
the proper measurement dates. accordingly, after accounting for forfeitures,
the company has recognized stock-based compensation expense of $105 million on
a pre-tax basis over the respective awards vesting terms. no adjustments were
required for the remaining 35,649 grants. the adjustments were determined by
category as follows:
director grantsseventeen director grants were made
during the relevant period. two director grants were made pursuant to a 1997
plan that dated the grants on the enactment of the plan. the remaining fifteen
grants were automatically made under the director stock option plan for
non-employee directors, which was approved by shareholders in 1998, on the date
of a directors election or appointment to the board and on subsequent
anniversaries, beginning on the fourth anniversary. accordingly, the analysis
determined that the originally assigned grant date for each director grant is
the measurement date, and no accounting adjustments are required.
monday/tuesday grantsbeginning in december1998,
3,892 new hire grants and grants for promotion and retention purposes (promotion/retention
grants) were made during the relevant period under the monday/tuesday plan.
under the monday/tuesday plan, new hire grants made within pre-established
guidelines approved by the board or compensation committee were dated on the
monday that the recipient started work (or the following monday, if the
recipient started on another day). the companys analysis showed this process
to be reliable with very low error rates. promotion/retention grants, also
based on pre-established guidelines, were made generally on the first tuesday
of each month. the company has concluded that the new hire and
promotion/retention grants made pursuant to the monday/tuesday plan within
pre-established guidelines do not require adjustment, with the exception of six
grants that were erroneously dated before the employees start dates. for 120
new hire and promotion/retention grants made outside the guidelines, however,
the company has concluded that the measurement dates are the dates of
ratification by the board or compensation committee rather than the dates used
for grants within guidelines. accordingly, based on the methodology described
above, the company has recognized stock-based compensation expense of $6
million from 126 grants. if other dates in the period between the preparation
of the uwc and the preparation of the secretarys certificate had been used as
measurement dates for grants whose actual ratification dates are unknown, the
total stock-based compensation expense would have ranged from approximately $3
million to $7 million.
focal grantsduring the relevant period, 27,096 focal
grants were made to employees typically on an annual basis as part of an
extensive process that required several months to complete. pursuant to limits,
guidelines and practices previously approved by the board or compensation
committee, managers throughout the company would make recommendations for
grants to employees in their areas of responsibility. after senior management
had determined that the grants were made in accordance with these established
limits, guidelines and practices, management treated the grants as final when
they were submitted to the board or compensation committee for ratification. the
company has concluded that for 5,595 grants on five dates, the originally
assigned grant dates are not the proper measurement dates. for these grants,
managements process for finalizing the grants was completed after the originally
assigned grant dates. as a result, the company has recognized $29 million of
stock-based compensation expense. for two of the five grant dates comprising
3,744 grants, the evidence shows that the grants were finalized and the
measurement date occurred one day after the originally assigned grant dates. the
grants on these two dates represent more than $16 million of the total $29
million of stock-based compensation expense resulting from focal grants.
other meeting grantsduring the relevant period,
meetings of the board or compensation committee were held to ratify 9,988
grants that are not monday/tuesday, focal or ceo grants. the grant dates and
measurement dates for these grants are the meeting dates when the grants were
ratified, with the exception of 46 grants. forty-two of these 46 grants are
dated concurrent with a meeting that considered and approved certain grants,
but the evidence indicates that all of the grants may not have been finalized
until a
later date. one of the 46 grants was approved and
dated at another meeting, but the recipient, who was becoming employed by the
company as part of a corporate acquisition, did not start until a later date.
two other grants were approved before the employees start dates. another grant
was mistakenly cancelled and subsequently reinstated, requiring an accounting
adjustment. thus, for these 46 grants the company has concluded that the originally
assigned grant dates are not the proper measurement dates. as a result, the
company has recognized $2 million of stock-based compensation expense.
other uwc grantsduring the relevant period, 1,082
grants were approved by uwcs for a variety of purposes, including executive
recruitment, retention, promotion and new hires outside the monday/tuesday
process. these grants were not made pursuant to pre-established guidelines
adopted by the board or compensation committee. therefore, the company has
concluded that these grants were not finalized for accounting purposes until
ratification by the board or compensation committee. accordingly, for 660
grants, the company has concluded that the originally assigned grant dates are
not the proper measurement dates. as a result, the company has recognized $48
million of stock-based compensation expense. if other dates in the period from
the preparation of the uwc to the preparation of the secretarys certificate
had been used as measurement dates for grants whose actual ratification dates
are unknown, the total stock-based compensation would have ranged from
approximately $35 million to $56 million.
ceo grantsduring the relevant period, the company
made two grants to ceo steve jobs. the first grant, dated january12,
2000, was for 10 million option shares. the second grant, dated october19,
2001, was for 7.5 million option shares. both grants were cancelled in march2003
prior to being exercised, when mr.jobs received 5 million shares of
restricted stock.
with respect to the grant dated january12, 2000,
the board on december2, 1999, authorized a special ceo compensation
committee to grant mr.jobs up to 15 million shares. the evidence
indicates that the ceo compensation committee finalized the terms of the grant
on january12, 2000, although the committees action was memorialized in a
uwc transmitted on january 18, 2000. because the measurement date is the originally
assigned grant date, the company has not recognized any stock-based
compensation expense from this grant. if the company had determined that the
measurement date was the date when the uwc was executed or received, then
additional stock-based compensation would have been recognized.
the grant dated october19, 2001 was originally
approved at a board meeting on august29, 2001, with an exercise price of
$17.83. the terms of the grant, however, were not finalized until december18,
2001. the grant was dated october19, 2001, with an exercise price of
$18.30. the approval for the grant was improperly recorded as occurring at a
special board meeting on october19, 2001. such a special board meeting
did not occur. there was no evidence, however, that any current member of
management was aware of this irregularity. the company has recognized $20
million in stock-based compensation expense for this grant, reflecting the
difference between the exercise price of $18.30 and the share price on december18,
2001 of $21.01.
the
incremental impact from recognizing stock-based compensation expense resulting
from the investigation of past stock option grants is as follows (dollars in
millions):
fiscalyear
pre-tax
expense
(income)
aftertax
expense
$
(1
)
$
total 1998  2003
impact
total
$
$
additionally, the company has restated the pro forma
expense under statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no.123
in note 1 of the notes to consolidated financial statements of this form10-k
to reflect the impact of these adjustments for the years ended september24,
2005 and september25, 2004.
parti
item 1. business
company background
apple computer,inc.
(apple or the company) was incorporated under the laws of the state of
california on january3, 1977. the company designs, manufactures, and
markets personal computers and related software, services, peripherals, and
networking solutions. the company also designs, develops, and markets a line of
portable digital music players along with related accessories and services,
including the online sale of third-party audio and video products. the companys
products and services include the macintosh line of desktop and portable
computers, the mac os x operating system, the ipod line of portable digital
music players, the itunes store, a portfolio of peripherals that support and
enhance the macintosh and ipod product lines, a portfolio of consumer and
professional software applications, a variety of other service and support
offerings, and the xserve and xserve raid server and storage products. the
company sells its products worldwide through its online stores, its retail
stores, its direct sales force, and third-party wholesalers, resellers, and
value-added resellers. in addition, the company sells a variety of third-party
macintosh and ipod compatible products including application software, printers,
storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and
supplies through its online and retail stores. the company sells to education,
consumer, creative professional, business, and government customers. the
companys fiscal year ends on the last saturday of september. unless otherwise
stated, all information presented in this form10-k is based on the
companys fiscal calendar.
business strategy
the company is committed
to bringing the best personal computing and portable digital music experience
to students, educators, creative professionals, businesses, government
agencies, and consumers through its innovative hardware, software, peripherals,
services, and internet offerings. the companys business strategy leverages its
unique ability to design and develop its own operating system, hardware,
application software, and services to provide its customers new products and
solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative
industrial design. the company believes continual investment in research and
development is critical to facilitate innovation of new and improved products
and technologies. besides updates to its existing line of personal computers
and related software, services, peripherals, and networking solutions, the
company continues to capitalize on the convergence of digital consumer
electronics and the personal computer by creating and refining innovations like
the ipod and itunes store. the companys strategy also includes expanding its
distribution network to effectively reach more of its targeted customers and
provide them with a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience.
digital lifestyle
the company believes that
for both professionals and consumers the personal computer has become the center
of an evolving digital lifestyle by integrating and enhancing the utility of
advanced digital devices such as the companys ipods, digital video and still
cameras, televisions, cd and dvd players, cellular phones, personal digital
assistants, and other consumer electronic devices. the attributes of the
personal computer that enable this functionality include a high-quality user
interface, easy access to relatively inexpensive data storage, the ability to
run complex applications, and the ability to connect easily to a wide variety
of other digital devices and to the internet. the company is the only
participant in the personal computer industry that controls the design and
development of the entire personal computerfrom the hardware and operating
system to sophisticated applications. this, along with its products original
industrial designs, intuitive ease-of-use, built-in graphics, multimedia and
networking capabilities, uniquely positions the company to offer innovative
integrated digital lifestyle solutions.
expanded
distribution
the company believes a high-quality buying experience
with knowledgeable salespersons that can convey the value of the companys
products and services greatly enhances its ability to attract and retain
customers. the company sells many of its products and resells certain
third-party products in most of its major markets directly to consumers,
education customers, and businesses through its retail and online stores. the
company has also invested in programs to enhance reseller sales, including the
apple sales consultant program, which places apple employees and contractors at
selected third-party reseller locations. the company believes providing direct
contact with its targeted customers is an efficient way to demonstrate the advantages
of its macintosh computer and other products over those of its competitors. the
company has significantly increased the points of distribution for the ipod
product family in order to make its products available at locations where its
customers shop.
by the end of fiscal 2006, the company had opened a
total of 165 retail stores, including 147 stores in the u.s. and a total of 18
stores in canada, japan, and the u.k. the company opened 5 additional stores in
octoberand november2006. the company has typically located its
stores at high-traffic locations in quality shopping malls and urban shopping
districts.
one of the goals of the retail initiative is to bring new customers to
the company and expand its installed base through sales to computer users who
currently do not own a macintosh computer and first time personal computer
buyers. by operating its own stores and building them in desirable high-traffic
locations, the company is able to better control the customer retail experience
and attract new customers. the stores are designed to simplify and enhance the
presentation and marketing of personal computers and related products. to that
end, retail store configurations have evolved into various sizes in order to
accommodate market demands. the stores employ experienced and knowledgeable
personnel who provide product advice and certain hardware support services. the
stores offer a wide selection of third-party hardware, software, and various
other computing products and supplies selected to complement the companys own
products. additionally, the stores provide a forum in which the company is able
to offer specialized service and personalized training.
education
throughout its history,
the company has focused on the use of technology in education and has been
committed to delivering tools to help educators teach and students learn. the
company believes effective integration of technology into classroom instruction
can result in higher levels of student achievement, especially when used to
support collaboration, information access, and the expression and
representation of student thought and ideas. the company creates solutions that
enable new modes of curriculum delivery, better ways of conducting research,
and opportunities for professional development of faculty, students, and staff.
the company has designed a range of products and services to meet the needs of
education customers. these products and services include the imac and the
macbook, video creation and editing solutions, wireless networking,
professional development solutions, and one-to-one (1:1) learning solutions. a
1:1 learning solution typically consist of a
portable computer for every student and teacher along with the installation of
a wireless network.
creative
professionals
creative professionals constitute one of the companys
most important markets for both hardware and software products. this market is
also important to many third-party developers who provide macintosh-compatible
hardware and software solutions. creative customers utilize the companys
products for a variety of activities including digital video and film
production and editing; digital video and film special effects, compositing and
titling; digital still photography and workflow management; graphic design,
publishing, and print production; music creation and production; audio
production and sound design; and web design, development, and administration.
the company designs its
high-end hardware solutions, including servers, desktops, and portable
macintosh systems, to incorporate the power, expandability, and features
desired by creative professionals. the companys operating system, mac os x,
incorporates powerful graphics and audio technologies and features developer
tools to optimize system and application performance when running creative
solutions provided by the company or third-party developers.
business
organization
the company manages its
business primarily on a geographic basis. the companys reportable operating
segments are comprised of the americas, europe, japan, and retail. the
americas, europe, and japan reportable segments do not include activities
related to the retail segment. the americas segment includes both north and
south america. the europe segment includes european countries as well as the
middle east and africa. the retail segment currently operates apple-owned
retail stores in the u.s., canada, japan, and the u.k. other operating segments
include asia-pacific, which includes australia and asia except for japan, and
the companys subsidiary, filemaker,inc. each reportable geographic
operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar
services. further information regarding the companys operating segments may be
found in partii, item 7 of this form10-k under the heading segment
operating performance, and in partii, item 8 of this form10-k
in the notes to consolidated financial statements at note 11, segment
information and geographic data.
hardware products
the company offers a range
of personal computing products including desktop and notebook computers, server
and storage products, related devices and peripherals, and various third-party
hardware products. the companys macintosh systems, excluding servers and
storage systems, features the companys mac os x version 10.4 tiger and
ilife suite of software for digital photography, music, movies, and music and
website creation.
macintosh
computers
in june2005, the
company announced its plan to begin using intel microprocessors in its
computers. during 2006, the company introduced new intel-based models of the
macbook pro, macbook, mac pro, imac, and mac mini computers. all intel-based
macintosh systems feature a fully native version of mac os x version 10.4
tiger, including the rosetta translation technology, which allows most
powerpc-based macintosh applications to run on intel-based macintosh computers.
the companys transition to intel microprocessors for macintosh systems was
completed in august2006, and its transition for xserve was completed in november2006.
there are potential risks and uncertainties associated with the transition to
intel microprocessors, which are further discussed in item 1a of this 10-k
under the heading risk factors.
macbook pro
the macbook pro family of
notebook computers is designed for professionals and advanced consumer users. introduced
in january2006, the macbook pro includes either a 15-inch or 17-inch
widescreen display, a built-in isight video camera, front row with the apple
remote, and the magsafe power adapter. current macbook pro models include
intel core 2 duo processors at 2.16ghz or 2.33ghz, ati mobility radeon x1600
graphics, 667mhz ddr2 main memory, a serial ata hard drive, and a slot-loading
double-layer superdrive. every macbook pro features a 1-inch thin
aluminum enclosure and includes airport extreme wireless networking, bluetooth
2.0+edr, gigabit ethernet, two or three usb 2.0 ports, firewire 400 and 800
ports, combination analog and optical digital audio input and output ports, a
full-sized dvi video-out port, an expresscard/34 slot, scrolling trackpad, and
backlit keyboard.
macbook
the macbook is designed
for consumer and education users. introduced in may2006, the macbook
includes a 13-inch widescreen display, a built-in isight video camera,
front row with the apple remote, and the magsafe magnetic power adapter. current
macbook models include intel core 2 duo processors at 1.83ghz and 2.0ghz, intel
integrated gma 950 graphics, 667mhz ddr2 main memory, a serial ata hard drive,
and a slot-loading combo optical drive or double-layer superdrive. available in
either black or white, every macbook includes built-in airport extreme wireless
networking, bluetooth 2.0+edr, gigabit ethernet, two usb 2.0 ports, one
firewire 400 port, combination analog and optical digital audio input and
output ports, a mini-dvi video output port, and scrolling trackpad.
mac pro
the mac pro desktop
computer is targeted at business and professional users and is designed to meet
the performance, expansion, and networking needs of the most demanding
macintosh user. introduced in august2006, the mac pro features two intel
xeon dual-core processors running up to 3.0ghz, each with 4mb of shared level 2
cache and independent 1.33ghz front-side buses, 667mhz fully buffered memory,
and a 256-bit wide memory architecture. the mac pro also features a
direct attach storage solution for snap-in installation of up to four 750gb
serial ata hard drives for a total of 3tb of internal storage and support for
two optical drives to simultaneously read and/or write to cds and dvds. every
mac pro includes three full-length pci express expansion slots and one
double-wide pci express graphics slot to support double-wide graphics cards. the
mac pro also includes dual gigabit ethernet ports, optical digital input and
output ports, analog audio input and output ports, and multiple firewire 400,
firewire 800 and usb 2.0 ports.
imac
the imac desktop computer
is targeted at consumer and education markets. introduced in january2006
and updated in september2006, the intel-based imac is currently available
with an integrated 17-inch widescreen lcd display, 512mb or 1gb of 667mhz
ddr2 memory expandable to 2gb or 3gb, a 1.83ghz or 2.0ghz intel core 2 duo
processor, intel integrated gma 950 or ati radeon x1600 graphics, and a 160gb
serial ata hard drive. the imac is also available with a 20-inch or 24-inch
widescreen lcd display, 1gb of 667mhz memory expandable to 3gb, a 2.16ghz
processor, ati radeon x1600 or nvidia geforce 7300 gt graphics, and 250gb
serial ata hard drive. all models include a built-in isight video camera,
mini-dvi video-out port, multiple usb 2.0 and firewire ports, built-in gigabit
ethernet, and airport extreme 802.11g wireless networking. most models also
include built-in bluetooth 2.0+edr, the apple remote, and a slot-loading
double-layer superdrive.
mac mini
in february2006, the
company introduced the intel-based mac mini that includes front row with the
apple remote. the new mac mini offers 512mb of 667mhz memory expandable to 2gb
and either a 1.66ghz or 1.83ghz intel core duo processor. every mac mini now
includes built-in gigabit ethernet, airport extreme 802.11g wireless
networking, bluetooth 2.0+edr, and a total of four usb 2.0 ports. mac mini
includes a full-size dvi interface and a vga-out adapter to connect to a
variety of displays, including televisions, and features both analog and
digital audio outputs.
xserve and xserve
raid storage system
xserve is a rack-mount
server product designed for simple setup and remote management of intensive
input/output (i/o) applications such as digital video, high-resolution digital
imagery, and large databases. in november2006, the company began shipping
xserve, a 64-bit server featuring mac os x server 10.4 on two intel xeon
dual-core processors running at 2.0ghz, 2.66ghz, or 3.0ghz, with support for up
to 32gb of memory. xserve includes pci express and independent 1.33ghz front
side buses with 4mb of shared level 2 memory cache. two eight-lane pci express
expansion slots provide up to 2gb of
throughput each to support
fibre channel, networking, and graphics cards. xserve supports up to 2.25tb of
hot-plug storage. the companys xserve raid storage system delivers up to 7tb
of storage capacity and also expanded support for heterogeneous environments. the
dual independent raid controllers with 512mb cache per controller offer
sustained throughput of over 385 mbps.
music products and services
the company offers its
ipod line of portable digital music players and related accessories to
macintosh and windows users. the company also provides an online service to
distribute third-party music, audio books, music videos, short films,
television shows, movies, and ipod games through its itunes store. in addition
to the companys own ipod accessories, thousands of third-party ipod compatible
products are available, including portable and desktop speaker systems,
headphones, car radio solutions, voice recorders, cables and docks, power
supplies and chargers, and carrying cases and armbands.
ipod
the ipod is the companys
hard-drive based portable digital music player and was updated in september2006.
the ipod is available in a 30gb model capable of holding up to 7,500 songs,
25,000 photos, or 75 hours of video, and an 80gb model capable of holding up to
20,000 songs, 25,000 photos, or 100 hours of video. the ipod features up to 20
hours of battery life and includes a 2.5-inch color screen that can
display album artwork, photos, and video content including music videos, video
and audio podcasts, short films, television shows, movies, and games. other key
features of the ipod include a calendar, contact
utility, and data storage capability. the ipod features the companys
patent-pending click wheel, a touch-sensitive wheel with five push buttons for
one-handed navigation. the ipod also includes the companys patent-pending
auto-sync technology that automatically synchronizes and updates the ipods
digital music and other content whenever it is connected to a macintosh or
windows computer via usb. all ipods work with the companys itunes digital
music management software (itunes software) available
for both macintosh and windows-based computers.
ipod nano
in september2006,
the company introduced the second-generation version of its flash-memory-based
ipod nano featuring an aluminum body and up to 24 hours of battery life. the
second-generation ipod nano includes the click wheel, a smaller and lighter
design, a brighter color screen than its predecessor, and new search and quick
scroll features that make it easier to find content. the ipod nano is available
in 2gb, 4gb and 8gb configurations and in a variety of colors.
ipod shuffle
in september2006,
the company introduced a new version of its flash-memory-based ipod shuffle.
the new ipod shuffle weighs half an ounce and features an all-new aluminum
design and a built-in clip. the new ipod shuffle contains one gigabyte of flash
memory capable of holding up to 240 songs and provides up to 12 hours of
battery life. the ipod shuffle is based on the companys shuffle feature that
allows users to listen to their music in random order. ipod shuffle works with
itunes and its patent-pending autofill option that automatically selects songs
to fill the ipod shuffle from a users itunes library.
itunes store
the companys itunes store, available for both
macintosh and windows-based computers, is a service that allows customers to
find, purchase, and download third-party digital music, audio books, music
videos, short films, television shows and movies, and ipod games. the itunes
store also features the podcast directory that allows customers to search for
and download audio programs to their computers and automatically receive new
episodes over the internet. customers can search the contents of the store
catalog to locate works by title, artist, or album, or browse the entire
contents of the store by genre and
artist. originally introduced in the u.s. in april2003,
the itunes store now serves customers in 22countries.
the itunes store is fully
integrated with itunes software allowing customers to preview, purchase,
download, organize, share, and transfer digital content to an ipod using a
single software application. further discussion of the itunes software may be
found below under the heading software products and computer technologies.
the itunes store offers customers a broad range of personal rights to the
third-party content they have purchased. content purchased through the store
may also be used in certain applications such as iphoto, imovie, and idvd.
additional features of the itunes store include gift certificates that can be
sent via e-mail; prepaid music cards; an allowance feature that enables users
to automatically deposit funds into an itunes store account every month; online
gift options that let customers give specific content to anyone with an email
address; parental controls; and album reviews.
peripheral products
the company sells a
variety of apple-branded and third-party computer hardware peripheral products
directly to end-users through its retail and online stores, including printers,
storage devices, computer memory, digital video and still cameras, and various
other computing products and supplies.
displays
the company manufactures a
family of widescreen flat panel displays including the 30-inch apple
cinema hd display, a widescreen active-matrix lcd with 2560-by-1600
pixel resolution, the 23-inch apple cinema hd display with 1920-by-1200
pixel resolution and the 20-inch apple cinema display with 1680-by-1050
pixel resolution. these displays feature built-in dual firewire and dual usb
2.0 ports and use the industry standard dvi interface for a pure digital
connection with the companys latest mac pro, macbook pro, and macbook systems.
the cinema displays feature an aluminum design with a thin bezel, suspended by
an aluminum stand that allows viewing angle adjustment.
software products
and computer technologies
the company offers a range
of software products for education, creative, consumer, and business customers,
including mac os x, the companys proprietary operating system software for the
macintosh; server software and related solutions; professional application
software; and consumer, education, and business oriented application software.
operating system
software
mac os x is built on an
open-source unix-based foundation. the most recent version, mac os x tiger, is
the fifth major release of mac os x. tiger incorporates innovations including
spotlight, a desktop search technology that lets users find items stored on
their macintosh computers, including documents, emails, contacts, and images;
and dashboard, a way to instantly access information such as weather forecasts
and stock quotes, using a new class of mini-applications called widgets. mac os
x server version 10.4 is the server version of the mac os operating system.
server software and
server solutions
in april2006, the company introduced apple
remote desktop 3, the companys third generation desktop management application.
apple remote desktop 3 is a universal application, meaning that it runs
natively on both intel and powerpc-based macintosh computers (universal) for
asset management and remote assistance that enables spotlight searches across
multiple tiger systems and includes over 30 automator actions for automating
repetitive system administration tasks, a dashboard widget that provides
observation of remote systems, and autoinstall for installing software
automatically on mobile systems when they return online.
xsan, the companys
enterprise-class storage area network (san) file system, is a 64-bit
cluster file system for mac os x that enables organizations to consolidate
storage resources and provide multiple computers with concurrent file-level
read/write access to shared volumes over fibre channel. advanced features such
as metadata controller failover and fibre channel multipathing ensure high
availability; file-level locking allows multiple systems to read and write
concurrently to the same volume which is ideal for complex workflows; bandwidth
reservation provides for effective ingestion of bandwidth-intensive data
streams, such as high resolution video; and flexible volume management results
in more efficient use of storage resources. xsan can be used in heterogeneous
environments that include windows, unix, and linux server operating system
platforms.
professional
application software
in march2006, the company introduced final cut
studio 5.1, the companys high definition (hd)
video production suite. final cut studio features final cut pro 5, soundtrack
pro, motion 2, and dvd studio pro 4. all of these applications are universal.
final cut pro 5.1, the latest version of the companys
video editing software, includes editing tools that work natively with most
formats, from digital video (dv) and high definition video (hdv) to fully
uncompressed hd. with a real-time multi-stream effects architecture, multicam
editing tools, and advanced color correction, final cut pro 5.1 enables users
to view and cut from multiple sources in real time, group up to 128 sources
together into multi-clips, then add or subtract cameras at any time.
dvd studio pro 4 is the latest version of the companys
professional dvd authoring application. with dvd studio pro 4 users can author
standard definition (sd) or hd dvds in a graphic interactive environment. dvd
studio pro 4 includes compressor 2, a full-featured video and audio compression
application. compressor gives users control over encoding, including the
ability to encode several clips in one batch operation to a wide variety of
formats including h.264.
motion 2 is a real-time motion graphics software
application that enables final cut pro editors to add motion graphics to their
projects. motion 2 features interactive animation of text and graphics for dvd
motion menus, video or film in real time, and quick output rendering by
built-in gpu acceleration at 8-bit, 16-bit, or 32-bit float
film quality. with motion 2s design tool, replicator, users can automatically
generate and animate multiple copies of a graphic, shape, or movie.
soundtrack pro is an audio editing and sound design
application that gives audio and video professionals a way to edit, mix, and
repair audio. soundtrack pro features a waveform editor with flexible action
layers that allow users to re-order, bypass, or change any edit, effect, or
process. find-and-fix features identify and repair common audio problems such
as background noise, pops, clicks, and hum. an integrated multitrack mixer
allows editors to apply common effects to multiple tracks and group common
tracks. soundtrack pro also features over 50 professional plug-ins for
enhancing sounds, and over 5,000 music and sound effect loops.
in february2006, the
company introduced logic pro 7.2, a universal version of the companys music
creation and audio production software. logic pro 7.2 is used by musicians
around the world and by professionals in music production and film scoring. it
combines digital music composition, notation, and audio production facilities
in one comprehensive product and includes software instruments such as
sculpture, a component-modeling based synthesizer; ultrabeat, a drum
synthesizer with built-in step sequencer; and digital signal processing (dsp)
plug-ins including guitar amp pro, a full-featured guitar amplifier simulator.
along with workflow enhancements, mastering plug-ins, and support for apple
loops, logic pro 7 adds distributed audio processing, a technology that allows
professionals to utilize multiple macintosh systems to expand available dsp
power via an ethernet network.
consumer,
education, and business oriented application software
ilife 06
in january2006, the company introduced ilife 06,
an upgrade to its consumer-oriented digital lifestyle application suite, which
features iweb, iphoto 6, imovie hd 6, idvd 6, garageband 3, and itunes. all
of these applications are universal.
iweb is a new application in the ilife 06 suite.
iweb allows users to create online photo albums, blogs, and podcasts and
customize websites using editing tools.
iphoto is the companys consumer-oriented digital
photo software application. iphoto 6 adds new photo management and editing
features, supports up to 250,000 photos, and introduces photocasting.
photocasting allows .mac users to share and automatically update photo albums
over the internet with anyone who uses a macintosh or windows-based computer.
imovie hd is the companys consumer-oriented digital
video editing software application. imovie hd 6 includes new real-time effects
that take advantage of core video technology, which uses the computers video
cards graphics processing unit to deliver hardware acceleration to quickly
preview video effects. imovie hd 6 also provides a solution to make video
podcasts, which can be published with iweb, and includes audio enhancement
tools and sound effects.
idvd is the companys consumer-oriented software
application that enables users to turn imovie files, quicktime files, and
digital pictures into dvds that can be played on most consumer dvd players. idvd
6 allows users to take content shot with hdv and widescreen dv cameras and
author custom dvds with widescreen menus, movies, and high resolution
slideshows. idvd 6 features 10 new apple-designed menu themes in both
widescreen (16:9) and standard (4:3) formats.
garageband is the companys consumer-oriented music
creation software application that allows users to play, record and create
music using a simple interface. with garageband, recorded performances, digital
audio and looping tracks can be arranged and edited to create songs. garageband
3 allows users to record, produce, and publish through iweb their own podcasts,
including artwork, sound effects, and music jingles.
ilife 06 also includes
itunes, the companys digital music jukebox software application that allows users
to purchase a variety of digital content available through the companys itunes
store. itunes organizes content using searching, browsing, and playlists, and
also includes features such as imix playlist sharing and provides integration
with the complete family of ipods. in september2006, the company
introduced itunes 7, the latest version of its itunes software. itunes 7
delivers new features such as album and cover flow views of music, television
shows, and movies, enabling users to quickly find titles in their library as
well as casually browse through titles they already own.
iwork 06
in january2006, the company introduced iwork 06,
a new universal version of the companys suite of productivity software
designed to help users create, present, and publish documents and
presentations. iwork 06 includes pages 2 and keynote 3.
pages gives users the tools to create letters,
newsletters, reports, brochures and resumes with advanced typography, multiple
columns, footnotes, tables of content and styles. pages2 features mail
merge with mac os x address book, which allows users to personalize documents
by dragging and dropping individual contacts into documents using templates
with predefined fields. pages2 also features new templates for
newsletters, flyers, posters, school reports, scrapbooks, brochures, business
proposals, and invoices. pages2 allows users to insert tables that have
basic calculation functionality within any document and users can export their pages2
document to other formats.
keynote is the companys presentation software that
gives users the ability to create presentations, portfolios, interactive
slideshows, and storyboards. keynote 3 offers additional ways to create
presentations and interactive slideshows. it features new cinematic transitions
including vertical and horizontal blinds, revolving door, and swoosh. a new
view mode, light table, allows users to view an entire presentation and
reorganize slides using drag and drop.
final cut express hd enables users to capture, edit,
and output dv and hdv over a single firewire cable, and supports digital cinema
desktop with multiple displays. in may2006, the company introduced a
universal version of final cut express hd 3.5. features introduced in this
version include dynamic rt for real-time playback of multi-stream effects,
soundtrack 1.5 with a suite of audio production tools, and livetype 2.1 with
animated text and titles.
in march2006, the company introduced logic
express 7.2, a universal version of the companys streamlined version of logic
pro 7.2 that provides a basic set of professional tools to compose and produce
music for students, educators, and advanced hobbyists. its high-resolution
audio of up to 24-bit/96khz, the adaptive self-configuring track mixer,
and 32-bit floating-point math provides professional sound quality. logic
express 7 comes with support for projects from garageband, offering users a
smooth migration path to high-end audio production.
filemaker,inc., a
wholly owned subsidiary of the company, develops, publishes, and distributes
desktop-based database management application software for both macintosh and
windows-based computers. the filemaker pro database
software and related products offer relational databases and desktop-to-web
publishing capabilities. in july2006, the company introduced filemaker
pro 8.5, a universal version of its database management application. new
features of filemaker pro 8.5 include filemaker web viewer, which allows for a
live web browser to be put into a database.
internet software
and services
the company is focused on
delivering seamless integration with and access to the internet throughout the
companys products and services. the companys internet solutions adhere to
many industry standards to provide an optimized user experience through
interoperability.
safari
safari, the companys mac
os x compatible web browser, uses the advanced interface technologies
underlying mac os x and includes built-in google search; snapback to instantly
return to search results; a way to name, organize and present bookmarks; tabbed
browsing; and automatic pop-up ad blocking.
quicktime
quicktime, the companys multimedia software for
macintosh or windows-based computers, features streaming of live and stored
video and audio over the internet and playback of high-quality audio and video
on computers. quicktime 7 features h.264 encoding and can automatically
determine a users connection speed to ensure they are getting the
highest-quality content stream possible. quicktime 7 also delivers
multi-channel audio and supports audio formats, including aiff, wav, mov, mp4
(aac only), caf, and aac/adts.
the company offers several
other quicktime products. quicktime 7 pro, a suite of software tools, allows
creation and editing of internet-ready audio and video files. quicktime 7 pro
allows users to create h.264 video, capture audio and video, create
multi-channel audio, and export multiple files while playing back or editing
video.
.mac
the companys .mac
offering is a suite of internet services that for an annual fee provides
macintosh users with a powerful set of internet tools. .mac services include:
homepage, for personal web sites; idisk, a
virtual hard drive
accessible anywhere with internet access; .mac sync, which keeps safari
bookmarks, ical calendars, address book information, keychain (passwords),
and mac os x mail preferences up-to-date across multiple macintosh computers
and available via web browser when users are away from their mac; .mac mail, an
ad-free email service; and learning center, featuring tutorials for certain
software applications. the current version of .mac includes .mac groups, a
service that helps members communicate, coordinate schedules, and stay in sync
with private groups of friends or colleagues; an updated version of .mac backup
software that allows members to archive the content of their ilife home folder;
and combined idisk and email storage of up to 1gb for individuals and 2gb for
families.
wireless
connectivity and networking
airport extreme
airport extreme is the
companys wi-fi wireless networking technology. airport extreme is based on the
802.11g standard, which supports speeds up to 54 mbps, and is fully compatible
with most wi-fi devices that use the 802.11b standard. airport extreme base
stations can serve up to 50 macintosh and windows users simultaneously, provide
wireless bridging to extend the range beyond just one base station, and support
usb printer sharing to allow multiple users to wirelessly share usb printers
connected directly to the base station. airport extreme client technology is
built into most macintosh models, and is an available option for all.
airport express
airport express is the
first 802.11g mobile base station that can be plugged directly into the wall
for wireless internet connections and usb printing. airport express also
features analog and digital audio outputs that can be connected to a stereo and
airtunes music networking software that works with itunes, giving users a way
to wirelessly stream itunes music from their macintosh or windows-based
computer to any room in the house. airport express features a single piece
design weighing 6.7 ounces.
other connectivity
and networking solutions
mac os x includes capabilities for bluetooth
technology. bluetooth is an industry standard for wirelessly connecting
computers and peripherals that supports transmission of data at up to 3 mbps
within a range of approximately 30 feet. bluetooth technology for mac os x lets
customers wirelessly share files between macintosh systems, synchronize and
share contact information with palm-os based pdas, and access the internet
through bluetooth-enabled cell phones. bluetooth is built into most macintosh
models.
bonjour, the companys zero configuration networking
technology, is based on open internet engineering task force (ietf) standard
protocols such as ip, arp, and dns and is built into macosx. this
technology uses industry standard networking protocols and zero configuration
technology including ethernet or 802.11-based wireless networks like the
companys airport products. the source code for this technology also includes
software to support unix, linux, and windows-based systems and devices.
the company developed
firewire, a high-speed serial i/o technology for connecting digital devices
such as digital camcorders and cameras to desktop and portable computers.
firewire has high data-transfer speed and hot plug-and-play capability and is
currently integrated in all macintosh systems.
product support and
services
applecare offers a range of support options for the companys
customers. these options include assistance that is built into software
products, printed and electronic product manuals, online support including
comprehensive product information as well as technical assistance, and the
applecare protection plan. the applecare protection plan is a fee-based service
that typically includes three years of phone support and hardware repairs,
dedicated web-based support resources, and user diagnostic tools.
markets and
distribution
the companys customers
are primarily in the education, creative, consumer, and business markets. the
company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and
regional retailers and cataloguers. no individual customer accounted for more
than 10% of net sales in 2006, 2005, or 2004. the company also sells many of
its products and resells certain third-party products in most of its major
markets directly to consumers, education customers, and businesses through its
own sales force and retail and online stores. ten percent of the companys net
sales in 2006 were through its u.s. education channel, including sales to elementary
and secondary schools, higher education institutions, and individual customers.
competition
the company is confronted by aggressive competition in
all areas of its business. the markets for consumer electronics, personal
computers and related software and peripheral products are highly competitive.
these markets are characterized by rapid technological advances in both
hardware and software that have substantially increased the capabilities and
use of personal computers and other digital electronic devices and have
resulted in the frequent introduction of new products with competitive price,
feature, and performance characteristics. over the past several years, price
competition in these markets have been particularly intense. the companys
competitors who sell personal computers based on other operating systems have
aggressively cut prices and lowered their product margins to gain or maintain
market share. the companys results of operations and financial condition can
be adversely affected by these and other industry-wide downward pressures on
gross margins. the principal competitive factors include price, relative
price/performance, product quality and reliability, design innovation,
availability of software, product features, marketing and distribution
capability, service and support, availability of hardware peripherals, and
corporate reputation. further, as the personal computer industry and its
customers place more reliance on the internet, an increasing number of internet
devices that are smaller, simpler, and less expensive than traditional personal
computers may compete for market share with the companys existing products.
the companys music products and services have faced
significant competition from other companies promoting their own digital music
and content products and services, including those offering free peer-to-peer
music and video services. the company believes it currently retains a
competitive advantage from innovation and by more effectively integrating the
entire solution including the hardware (personal computer and ipod), software
(itunes), and distribution of content (itunes store). however, the company
expects competition in this space to intensify as competitors attempt to
imitate the companys approach to tightly integrate these components within
their individual offerings or, alternatively, collaborate with each other to
offer solutions that are more integrated than those they currently offer. some
of these current and potential competitors have substantial resources and may
be able to provide such products and services at little or no profit or even at
a loss to compete with the companys offerings.
the companys future
operating results and financial condition are substantially dependent on the
companys ability to continue to develop improvements to the macintosh platform
and to the companys hardware, software and services related to digital content
to maintain perceived functional and design advantages over competing
platforms.
raw materials
although most components essential to the companys
business are generally available from multiple sources, certain key components
including microprocessors and application-specific integrated circuits (asics)
are currently obtained by the company from single or limited sources. some key
components, while currently available to the company from multiple sources, are
at times subject to industry-wide availability constraints and pricing
pressures. in addition, the company uses some components uncommon to the rest
of the personal computer and consumer electronics industries, and new products
introduced by
the company often initially utilize custom components
obtained from only one source until the company has evaluated whether there is
a need for, and subsequently qualifies, additional suppliers. if the supply of
a key or single-sourced component to the company were to be delayed or
curtailed or in the event a key manufacturing vendor delays shipments of
completed products to the company, the companys ability to ship related
products in desired quantities and in a timely manner could be adversely
affected. the companys business and financial performance could also be
adversely affected depending on the time required to obtain sufficient
quantities from the original source, or to identify and obtain sufficient
quantities from an alternative source. continued availability of these
components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the
production of common components instead of components customized to meet the
companys requirements. the company attempts to mitigate these potential risks
by working closely with these and other key suppliers on product introduction
plans, strategic inventories, coordinated product introductions, and internal
and external manufacturing schedules and levels. consistent with industry
practice, the company acquires components through a combination of formal
purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand
information. the companys purchase commitments typically cover its requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150
days.
the company believes there
are several component suppliers and manufacturing vendors whose loss to the
company could have a material adverse effect upon the companys business and
financial position. at this time, such vendors include agere systems,inc.,
ambit microsystems corporation, amperex technology limited, asustek
corporation, ati technologies,inc., atheros communications inc., au
optronics corporation, broadcom corporation, chi mei optoelectronics
corporation, cypress semiconductor corporation, hitachi global storage
technologies, hon hai precision industry co., ltd., intel corporation, inventec
appliances corporation, lg. phillips co., ltd., matsushita, nvidia corp.,
portalplayer,inc., quanta computer,inc., renesas semiconductor co.
ltd., samsung electronics, sony corporation, synaptics,inc., texas
instruments, and toshiba corporation.
research and
development
because the personal
computer and consumer electronics industries are characterized by rapid
technological advances, the companys ability to compete successfully is
heavily dependent upon its ability to ensure a continuing and timely flow of
competitive products, services, and technologies to the marketplace. the
company continues to develop new products and technologies and to enhance
existing products in the areas of hardware and peripherals, consumer electronic
products, system software, applications software, networking and communications
software and solutions, and the internet. the company may expand the range of
its product offerings and intellectual property through licensing and/or
acquisition of third-party business and technology. the companys research and
development expenditures totaled $712million, $535million (as
restated(1)),
and $491million (as restated(1))
in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively.
patents,
trademarks, copyrights and licenses
the company currently holds rights to patents and
copyrights relating to certain aspects of its computer systems, ipods,
peripherals, software, and services. in addition, the company has registered,
and/or has applied to register, trademarks and service marks in the u.s. and a
number of foreign countries for apple, the apple logo, macintosh, ipod, itunes,
itunes store, and numerous other trademarks and service marks. although the
company believes the ownership of such patents, copyrights, trademarks and
service marks is an important factor in its business and that its success does
depend in part on the ownership thereof, the company relies primarily on the
innovative skills, technical competence, and marketing abilities of its
personnel.
(1) see the explanatory
note immediately preceding parti, item 1 and note 2, restatement of
consolidated financial statements in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
many of the companys
products are designed to include intellectual property obtained from
third-parties. while it may be necessary in the future to seek or renew
licenses relating to various aspects of its products and business methods, the
company believes, based upon past experience and industry practice, such
licenses generally could be obtained on commercially reasonable terms; however,
there is no guarantee that such licenses could be obtained at all. because of
technological changes in the computer industry, current extensive patent
coverage, and the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, it is possible certain
components of the companys products and business methods may unknowingly infringe
existing patents of others. from time to time, the company has been notified
that it may be infringing certain patents or other intellectual property rights
of third-parties.
foreign and
domestic operations and geographic data
the u.s. represents the companys largest geographic
marketplace. approximately 60% of the companys net sales in 2006 came from
sales to customers inside the u.s. final assembly of products sold by the
company is currently performed in the companys manufacturing facility in cork,
ireland, and by external vendors in fremont, california; fullerton, california;
taiwan; the republic of korea; the peoples republic of china; and the czech
republic. currently, manufacturing of many of the components used in the
companys products is performed by third-party vendors in taiwan, china, japan,
korea, and singapore. final assembly of substantially all of the companys
portable products, including macbook pros, macbooks, and ipods, is performed by
third-party vendors in china. margins on sales of the companys products in
foreign countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained
from foreign suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange
rate fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including tariffs and
antidumping penalties.
information regarding
financial data by geographic segment is set forth in partii, item 8 of
this form10-k and in the notes to consolidated financial statements
at note 11, segment information and geographic data.
seasonal business
the company has
historically experienced increased net sales in its first and fourth fiscal
quarters compared to other quarters in its fiscal year due to seasonal demand
related to the holiday season and the beginning of the school year. this
historical pattern should not be considered a reliable indicator of the
companys future net sales or financial performance.
warranty
the company offers a basic
limited parts and labor warranty on its hardware products. the basic warranty
period for hardware products is typically one year from the date of purchase by
the end-user. the company also offers a 90-day basic warranty for its
service parts used to repair the companys hardware products. in addition,
consumers may purchase extended service coverage on most of the companys
hardware products in all of its major markets.
backlog
in the companys experience, the actual amount of
product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its
future business prospects. in particular, backlog often increases in
anticipation of or immediately following new product introductions as dealers
anticipate shortages. backlog is often reduced once dealers and customers
believe they can obtain sufficient supply. because of the foregoing, backlog should
not be considered a reliable indicator of the companys ability to achieve any
particular level of revenue or financial performance.
environmental laws
compliance with federal, state, local, and foreign
laws enacted for the protection of the environment has to date had no material
effect on the companys capital expenditures, earnings, or competitive position.
in the future, these laws could have a material adverse effect on the company.
production and marketing
of products in certain states and countries may subject the company to
environmental and other regulations including, in some instances, the
requirement to provide customers the ability to return product at the end of
its useful life, and place responsibility for environmentally safe disposal or
recycling with the company. such laws and regulations have recently been passed
in several jurisdictions in which the company operates including various
european union member countries, japan and certain states within the u.s. although
the company does not anticipate any material adverse effects in the future
based on the nature of its operations and the thrust of such laws, there is no
assurance that such existing laws or future laws will not have a material
adverse effect on the companys financial condition, liquidity, or results of
operations.
employees
as of september30,
2006, the company had 17,787 full-time equivalent employees and an additional
2,399 temporary equivalent employees and contractors.
available
information
the companys annual
report on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q,
current reports on form8-k, and amendments to reports filed
pursuant to sections 13(a)and 15(d)of the securities exchange act
of 1934, as amended, are filed with the u.s. securities and exchange commission
(sec). such reports and other information filed by the company with the sec are
available on the companys website at http://www.apple.com/investor when such
reports are available on the sec website. the public may read and copy any
materials filed by the company with the sec at the secs public reference roomat
100 f street, ne, room1580, washington, dc 20549. the public may obtain
information on the operation of the public reference roomby calling the
sec at 1-800-sec-0330. the sec maintains an internet site
that contains reports, proxy, and information statements and other information
regarding issuers that file electronically with the sec at http://www.sec.gov. the
contents of these websites are not incorporated into this filing. further, the
companys references to the urls for these websites are intended to be inactive
textual references only.
item 1a. risk
factors
because of the following
factors, as well as other factors affecting the companys operating results and
financial condition, past financial performance should not be considered to be
a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use
historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods.
the matters relating to the investigation by the
special committee of the board of directors and the restatement of the companys
consolidated financial statements may result in additional litigation and governmental
enforcement actions.
on june29, 2006, the company announced that an
internal review had discovered irregularities related to the issuance of
certain stock option grants made between 1997 and 2001, including a grant to
its chief executive officer (ceo), steve jobs. the company also announced a
special committee of outside directors (special committee) had been formed
and had hired independent counsel to conduct a full investigation of the
companys past stock option granting practices.as described in the
explanatory note immediately preceding parti, item1, and in note 2 restatement
of consolidated financial statements in notes to consolidated financial
statements in this form10-k, as a result of the internal review and
independent investigation, management has concluded, and the audit and finance
committee agrees, that incorrect measurement dates were used for financial
accounting purposes for stock option grants made in
certain prior periods. as a result, the company has
recorded additional non-cash stock-based compensation expense, and related tax
effects, with regard to certain past stock option grants, and the company has restated
certain previously filed financial statements included in this form10-k.
the internal review, the independent investigation,
and related activities have required the company to incur substantial expenses
for legal, accounting, tax and other professional services, have diverted
managements attention from the companys business, and could in the future harm
its business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
while the company believes it has made appropriate
judgments in determining the correct measurement dates for its stock option
grants, the sec may disagree with the manner in which the company has accounted
for and reported, or not reported, the financial impact. accordingly, there is
a risk the company may have to further restate its prior financial statements,
amend prior filings with the sec, or take other actions not currently
contemplated.
the companys past stock option granting practices and
the restatement of prior financial statements have exposed the company to
greater risks associated with litigation, regulatory proceedings and government
enforcement actions. as described in parti, item 3, legal proceedings,
several derivative complaints and a class action complaint have been filed in
state and federal courts against the companys directors and certain of its
executive officers pertaining to allegations relating to stock option grants.
the company has provided the results of its internal review and independent
investigation to the sec and the united states attorneys office for the
northern district of california, and in that regard the company has responded
to informal requests for documents and additional information. the company
intends to continue full cooperation. no assurance can be given regarding the
outcomes from litigation, regulatory proceedings or government enforcement
actions relating to the companys past stock option practices. the resolution
of these matters will be time consuming, expensive, and will distract
management from the conduct of the companys business. furthermore, if the
company is subject to adverse findings in litigation, regulatory proceedings or
government enforcement actions, the company could be required to pay damages or
penalties or have other remedies imposed, which could harm its business,
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
in august2006, the
company received a nasdaq staff determination letter stating that, as a result
of the delayed filing of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended july1, 2006 (the third quarter form10-q), the company
was not in compliance with the filing requirements for continued listing as set
forth in marketplace rule4310(c)(14) and was therefore subject to
delisting from the nasdaq stock market.on october24, 2006, the
nasdaq listing qualifications panel granted the companys request for continued
listing, subject to the company filingthe third quarter form10-q,
and any required restatements, with the sec by december29, 2006. on december29,
2006, the company filed the third quarter form10-q with the sec. with
the filing of this form10-k, the company believes that it has
remedied its non-compliance with marketplace rule4310(c)(14), subject to
nasdaqs affirmative completion of its compliance protocols and its
notification of the company accordingly. however, if the sec disagrees with the
manner in which the company has accounted for and reported, or not reported,
the financial impact of past stock option grants, there could be further delays
in filing subsequent sec reports that might result in delisting of the companys
common stock from the nasdaq global select market.
unfavorable results
of legal proceedings could adversely affect the companys results of
operations.
the company is subject to
various legal proceedings and claims that are discussed in parti, item 3
of this form10-k. the company is also subject to certain other
legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in the ordinary course of
business and which have not been fully adjudicated. results of legal
proceedings cannot be predicted with certainty. in addition, litigation may be
disruptive to the companys normal
business operations. should
the company fail to prevail in certain legal matters, the companys financial
condition, liquidity, or results of operations could be adversely affected.
economic conditions and political events could
adversely affect the demand for the companys products and the financial health
of its suppliers, distributors, and resellers.
the companys operating
performance depends significantly on economic conditions in the u.s. and
abroad. at times in the past, demand for the companys products has been
negatively impacted by difficult global economic conditions. uncertainty about
future economic conditions makes it difficult to forecast future demand for the
companys products and related operating results. should global and/or regional
economic conditions deteriorate, demand for the companys products could be
adversely affected, as could the financial health of its suppliers,
distributors, and resellers.
war, terrorism, public health issues, and other
circumstances could disrupt supply, delivery, or demand of products, which
could negatively affect the companys operations and performance.
war, terrorism, public health issues, and other
business interruptions, whether in the u.s. or abroad, have caused and could
cause damage or disruption to international commerce
and global economy, and thus may have a strong negative impact on the global
economy, the company, and the companys suppliers or customers. the
companys major business operations are subject to interruption by earthquake,
other natural disasters, fire, power shortages, terrorist attacks and other
hostile acts, labor disputes, public health issues, and other events beyond its
control. the majority of the companys research and development activities, its
corporate headquarters, information technology systems, and other critical
business operations, including certain component suppliers and manufacturing
vendors, are located near major seismic faults. because the company does not
carry earthquake insurance for direct quake-related losses, the companys
operating results and financial condition could be materially adversely
affected in the event of a major earthquake or other natural or man-made
disaster.
although it is impossible
to predict the occurrences or consequences of any such events, such events
could result in a decrease in demand for the companys products, make it
difficult or impossible for the company to deliver products to its customers or
to receive components from its suppliers, and create delays and inefficiencies
in the companys supply chain. in addition, should major public health issues
including pandemics arise, the company could be negatively affected by more
stringent employee travel restrictions, additional limitations in the
availability of freight services, governmental actions limiting the movement of
products between various regions, delays in production ramps of new products,
and disruptions in the operations of the companys manufacturing vendors and
component suppliers. the companys operating results and financial condition
have been, and in the future may be, adversely affected by such events.
the market for personal computers and related
peripherals and services, as well as digital music devices and related
services, is highly competitive. if the company is unable to effectively
compete in these markets, its results of operations could be adversely affected.
the personal computer industry is highly competitive
and is characterized by aggressive pricing practices, downward pressure on
gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life
cycles, evolving industry standards, continual improvement in product
price/performance characteristics, rapid adoption of technological and product
advancements by competitors, price sensitivity on the part of consumers, and a
large number of competitors. price competition in the market for personal computers
and related peripherals has been particularly intense as competitors who sell
windows and linux based personal computers have aggressively cut prices and
lowered their product margins for personal computing products. the companys
results of operations and financial condition have been, and in the future may
continue to be, adversely affected by these and other industry-wide pricing
pressures and downward pressures on gross margins.
the personal computer industry has also been
characterized by rapid technological advances in software functionality,
hardware performance, and features based on existing or emerging industry
standards. further, as the personal computer industry and its customers place
more reliance on the internet, an increasing number of internet devices that
are smaller and simpler than traditional personal computers may compete for
market share with the companys existing products. several competitors of the
company have targeted certain of the companys key market segments, including
consumer, education, professional and consumer digital video editing, and
design and publishing. several of the companys competitors have introduced
digital music products and/or online stores offering digital music distribution
that mimic many of the unique design, technical features, and solutions of the
companys products. the company has a significant number of competitors, many
of whom have broader product lines and larger installed customer bases than
those of the company. additionally, there has been a trend towards
consolidation in the personal computer industry that has resulted in larger and
potentially stronger competitors in the companys markets.
the company is currently the only maker of hardware
using the mac os. the mac os has a minority market share in the personal
computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers utilizing competing
operating systems, including windows and linux. the companys future operating
results and financial condition are substantially dependent on its ability to
continue to develop improvements to the macintosh platform to maintain
perceived design and functional advantages over competing platforms. additionally,
if unauthorized copies of the mac os are used on other companies hardware
products and result in decreased demand for the companys hardware products,
the companys results of operations may be adversely affected.
the company is currently focused on market
opportunities related to digital music distribution and related consumer
electronic devices, including ipods. the company faces significant competition
from other companies promoting their own digital music products including mp3
players, music enabled cell phones, free peer-to-peer music and video services,
and free streaming of digital content via the internet. these competitors
include both new entrants with different market approaches, such as
subscription services models, and also larger companies that may have
significant technical, marketing, distribution, and other resources, as well as
established hardware, software, and digital content supplier relationships.
failure to effectively compete could negatively affect the companys operating
results and financial position. the company expects competition in this space
to intensify as competitors attempt to imitate the companys approach to
tightly integrating these components within their individual offerings or work
more collaboratively with each other to offer solutions that are more
integrated than those they offer currently. some of these current and potential
competitors have substantial resources and may be able to provide such products
and services at little or no profit or even at a loss to compete with the
companys offerings. there can be no assurance the company will be able to
continue to provide products and services that effectively compete in these
markets. the company may also have to respond to price competition by lowering
prices and/or increasing features which could adversely affect the companys
music product gross margins as well as overall company gross margins.
the company also faces
significant competition in the u.s. education market. u.s. elementary and
secondary schools, as well as college and university customers, remain a core
market for the company. in an effort to gain market share and remain
competitive, the company will continue to pursue one-to-one (1:1) learning
solutions in education. 1:1 learning
solutions typically consist of a
portable computer for every student and teacher along with the installation of
a wireless network. these 1:1
learning solutions and other strategic sales are generally priced more
aggressively and could result in significantly less profitability or financial
losses, particularly for larger deals. although the company believes it has
taken certain steps to strengthen its position in the education market, there
can be no assurance that the company will be able to increase or maintain its
share of the education market or execute profitably on large strategic
arrangements. failure to
do so may have an adverse impact on the companys operating results and
financial condition.
future operating results are dependent upon the
companys ability to obtain a sufficient supply of components, including
microprocessors, some of which are in short supply or available only from
limited sources.
although most components
essential to the companys business are generally available from multiple
sources, certain key components including microprocessors and asics are
currently obtained by the company from single or limited sources. some key
components (including without limitation dram, nand flash-memory, and tft-lcd
flat-panel displays), while currently available to the company from multiple
sources, are at times subject to industry-wide availability and pricing pressures.
in addition, new products introduced by the company often initially utilize
custom components obtained from only one source until the company has evaluated
whether there is a need for, and subsequently qualifies, additional suppliers.
in situations where a component or product utilizes new technologies, initial
capacity constraints may exist until such time as the suppliers yields have
matured. the company and other producers in the personal computer and consumer
electronics industries also compete for various components with other
industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. the
company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal
computer or consumer electronics industries. continued availability of these
components may be affected if producers decided to concentrate on the
production of components other than those customized to meet the companys
requirements. if the supply of a key component were delayed or constrained on a
new or existing product, the companys results of operations and financial
condition could be adversely affected.
the company must successfully manage frequent product
introductions and transitions to remain competitive and effectively stimulate
customer demand.
due to the highly volatile and competitive nature of
the personal computer and consumer electronics industries, which are
characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and rapid technological
advances, the company must continually introduce new products and technologies,
enhance existing products to remain competitive, and effectively stimulate
customer demand for new products and upgraded versions of the companys
existing products. the success of new product introductions is dependent on a
number of factors, including market acceptance; the companys ability to manage
the risks associated with product transitions, including the transition to
intel-based macintosh computers, and production ramp issues; the availability
of application software for new products; the effective management of purchase
commitments and inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand; the
availability of products in appropriate quantities and costs to meet
anticipated demand; and the risk that new products may have quality or other
defects in the early stages of introduction. accordingly, the company cannot
determine in advance the ultimate effect new products will have on its sales or
results of operations.
in june2005, the
company announced its plan to begin using intel microprocessors in its
computers. during 2006, the company introduced new intel-based models of the
macbook pro, macbook, mac pro, imac, and mac mini computers. the companys
transition to intel microprocessors for macintosh systems was completed in august2006,
and its transition for xserve was completed in november2006. this
transition has been and will continue to be subject to numerous risks and
uncertainties including the timely innovation and delivery of related hardware
and software products to support intel microprocessors, market acceptance of
intel-based macintosh computers, and the development and availability on
acceptable terms of components and services essential to enable the company to
timely deliver intel-based macintosh computers. in addition, the company is
dependent on third-party software developers such as microsoft and adobe to
timely develop current and future applications that run on intel-based
macintosh computers. universal versions of microsoft office and adobes
creative suiteapplications are not currently available. additionally,
there can be no assurance that the company will be able to maintain its
historical gross margin
percentages on its products, including intel-based macintosh computers, which
may adversely impact the companys results of operations.
the companys products from time to time experience
quality problems that can result in decreased net sales and operating profits.
the company sells highly
complex hardware and software products that can contain defects in design and
manufacture. sophisticated operating system software and applications, such as
those sold by the company, often contain bugs that can unexpectedly interfere
with the operation of the software. defects may also occur in components and
products the company purchases from third-parties. there can be no assurance
that the company will be able to detect and fix all defects in the hardware and
software it sells. failure to do so could result in lost revenue, loss of
reputation, and significant warranty and other expense to remedy.
because orders for components, and in some cases
commitments to purchase components, must be placed in advance of customer
orders, the company faces substantial inventory risk.
the company records a write-down for inventories of
components and products that have become obsolete or are in excess of
anticipated demand or net realizable value and accrues necessary reserves for
cancellation fees for orders of products and components that have been
cancelled. although the company believes its inventory and related provisions
are currently adequate, given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product
obsolescence in the computer and consumer electronics industries and the
transition to intel-based macintosh computers, no assurance can be given that
the company will not incur additional inventory and related charges. in
addition, such charges have had, and may have, a material effect on the companys
financial position and results of operations.
the company must order
components for its products and build inventory in advance of product
shipments. because the companys markets are volatile and subject to rapid
technology and price changes, and because of the transition to intel-based
macintosh computers, there is a risk the company will forecast incorrectly and
produce or order from third parties excess or insufficient inventories of
particular products. consistent with industry practice, components are normally
acquired through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open
orders based on projected demand information. such purchase commitments
typically cover the companys forecasted component and manufacturing
requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. the companys operating
results and financial condition have been in the past and may in the future be
materially adversely affected by the companys ability to manage its inventory
levels and respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns.
the company is dependent on manufacturing and
logistics services provided by third parties, many of whom are located outside
of the u.s.
most of the companys products are manufactured in
whole or in part by third-party manufacturers. in addition, the company has
outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. while outsourcing
arrangements may lower the cost of operations, they also reduce the companys
direct control over production and distribution. it is uncertain what effect
such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of the products
manufactured or services rendered, or the flexibility of the company to respond
to changing market conditions. in addition, the company is reliant on
third-party manufacturers to adhere to the companys supplier code of conduct. moreover,
although arrangements with such manufacturers may contain provisions for
warranty expense reimbursement, the company may remain at least initially
responsible to the consumer for warranty service in the event of product
defects. any unanticipated product defect or warranty liability, whether
pursuant to arrangements with contract manufacturers or otherwise, could
adversely affect the companys future operating results and financial
condition.
final assembly of products
sold by the company is currently performed in the companys manufacturing
facility in cork, ireland, and by external vendors in fremont, california;
fullerton, california; taiwan; the republic of korea; the peoples republic of
china; and the czech republic. currently, manufacturing of many of the
components used in the companys products is performed by third-party vendors
in taiwan, china, japan, korea, and singapore. final assembly of substantially
all of the companys portable products, including macbook pros, macbooks, and
ipods, is performed by third-party vendors in china. if for any reason
manufacturing or logistics in any of these locations is disrupted by regional
economic, business, labor, environmental, public health, or political issues,
or due to information technology system failures or military actions, the companys
results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected.
the companys future operating performance is
dependent on the performance of distributors and other resellers of the companys
products.
the company distributes its products through
wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers, and cataloguers, many
of whom distribute products from competing manufacturers. in addition, the
company sells many of its products and resells certain third-party products in
most of its major markets directly to end-users, certain education customers,
and certain resellers through its online stores around the world and its retail
stores. many of the companys resellers operate on narrow product margins and
have been negatively impacted in the past by weak economic conditions.
considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral or credit
insurance are outstanding with the companys distribution and retail channel
partners. the companys business and financial results could be adversely
affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakens, if resellers
within consumer channels were to cease distribution of the companys products,
or if uncertainty regarding demand for the companys products caused resellers
to reduce their ordering and marketing of the companys products. the company
has invested and will continue to invest in various programs to enhance
reseller sales, including staffing selected resellers stores with company
employees and contractors. these programs could require a substantial
investment from the company, while providing no assurance of return or
incremental revenue to offset this investment.
over the past several
years, an increasing proportion of the companys net sales have been made by
the company directly to end-users through its online stores around the world
and through its retail stores in the u.s., canada, japan, and the u.k. some of
the companys resellers have perceived this expansion of the companys direct
sales as conflicting with their own businesses and economic interests as
distributors and resellers of the companys products. perception of such a
conflict could discourage the companys resellers from investing additional
resources in the distribution and sale of the companys products or lead them
to limit or cease distribution of the companys products. the companys
business and financial results could be adversely affected if expansion of its
direct sales to end-users causes some or all of its resellers to cease or limit
distribution of the companys products.
the company relies
on third-party digital content, which may not be available to the company on
commercially reasonable terms or at all.
the company contracts with third parties to offer
their digital content to customers through the companys itunes store. the
company pays substantial fees to obtain the rights to offer to its customers
this third-party digital content. the companys licensing arrangements with
these third-party content providers are short-term in nature and do not guarantee
the future renewal of these arrangements at commercially reasonable terms, if
at all. certain parties in the music industry have consolidated and formed
alliances, which could limit the availability and increase the fees required to
offer digital content to customers through the itunes store. some third-party
content providers currently or may in the future offer music products and
services that compete with the companys music products and services, and could
take action to make it more difficult or impossible for the company to license
their digital content in the future. further, other distributors of third-party
content or third-party content owners may seek to limit
the companys access to or increase the total cost of
such content. if the company is unable to continue to offer a wide variety of
digital content at reasonable prices with acceptable usage rules, or continue
to expand its geographic reach outside the u.s., then sales and gross margins
of the companys itunes store, as well as related hardware and peripherals,
including ipods, may be adversely affected.
third-party content
providers and artists require that the company provide certain digital rights
management (drm) solutions and other security mechanisms. if the requirements
from content providers or artists change, then the company may be required to
further develop or license technology to address such new rights and
requirements. in addition, certain countries have passed legislation or may
propose legislation that would force the company to license its drm solutions
so that content would be interoperable with competitor devices, which could
lessen the protection of content subjecting it to piracy and could affect
arrangements with the companys content suppliers. there is no assurance the
company will be able to develop or license such solutions at a reasonable cost
and in a timely manner, if at all, which could have a materially adverse effect
on the companys operating results and financial position.
the companys future performance is dependent upon
support from third-party software developers. if third-party software
applications cease to be developed or available for the companys hardware
products, then customers may choose not to buy the companys products.
the company believes decisions by customers to
purchase the companys personal computers, as opposed to windows-based
systems, are often based on the availability of third-party software
applications such as microsoft office. the company also believes the
availability of third-party application software for the companys
hardware products depends in part on third-party developers perception
and analysis of the relative benefits of developing, maintaining, and upgrading
such software for the companys products versus software for the larger windows
market or growing linux market. this analysis may be based on factors such as
the perceived strength of the company and its products, the anticipated
potential revenue that may be generated, continued acceptance by customers of mac
os x, and the costs of developing such software products. to the extent the
minority market share held by the company in the personal computer market has
caused software developers to question the companys prospects in the personal
computer market, developers could be less inclined to develop new application
software or upgrade existing software for the companys products and more
inclined to devote their resources to developing and upgrading software for the
larger windows market or growing linux market. the companys recent
announcement that it plans to add a feature to the next version of mac os x
that will enable intel-based macintosh systems to run windows xp may deter
developers from creating software applications for mac os x if such
applications are available for the windows platform. moreover, there can be no
assurance software developers will continue to develop software for mac os x on
a timely basis or at all.
in june2005, the company announced its plan to
begin using intel microprocessors in its computers. during 2006, the company
introduced new intel-based models of the macbook pro, macbook, mac pro, imac,
and mac mini computers. the companys transition to intel microprocessors for
macintosh systems was completed in august2006, and its transition for
xserve was completed in november2006. the company depends on third-party
software developers to timely develop current and future applications that run
on intel microprocessors. universal versions of microsoft office and adobes
creative suiteapplications are not currently available. the lack of
applications that run on intel-based macintosh systems, including microsoft
office and adobe creative suite, could have a materially adverse effect on the
companys operating results and financial position.
in addition, past and
future development by the company of its own software applications and
solutions may negatively impact the decision of software developers, such as
microsoft and adobe, to develop, maintain, and upgrade similar or competitive software
for the companys products. the company currently markets and sells a variety
of software applications for use by professionals, consumers, and education
customers that could influence the decisions of third-party software developers
to develop or
upgrade
macintosh-compatible software products. software applications currently
marketed by the company include software for professional film and video
editing, professional compositing and visual effects for large format film and
video productions, professional music production and music post production,
professional and consumer dvd encoding and authoring, professional digital
photo editing and workflow management, consumer digital video and digital photo
editing and management, digital music management, desktop-based database
management, word processing, and high-quality presentations. discontinuance of
third-party software products for the macintosh platform could have an adverse
effect on the companys net sales and results of operations.
the companys business relies on access to patents and
intellectual property obtained from third parties, and the companys future
results could be adversely affected if it is alleged or found to have infringed
on the intellectual property rights of others.
many of the companys products are designed to include
intellectual property obtained from third parties. while it may be necessary in
the future to seek or renew licenses relating to various aspects of its
products and business methods, the company believes that based upon past
experience and industry practice, such licenses generally could be obtained on
commercially reasonable terms. however, there can be no assurance that the
necessary licenses would be available or available on acceptable terms.
because of technological
changes in the computer and consumer electronics industries, current extensive
patent coverage, and the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, it is possible
certain components of the companys products and business methods may
unknowingly infringe existing patents of others. the company has from time to
time been notified that it may be infringing certain patents or other
intellectual property rights of others. responding to such claims, regardless
of their merit, can be time-consuming, result in significant expenses, and
cause the diversion of management and technical personnel. several pending
claims are in various stages of evaluation. the company may consider the
desirability of entering into licensing agreements in certain of these cases.
however, no assurance can be given that such licenses can be obtained on
acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur. in the event there is a
temporary or permanent injunction entered prohibiting the company from
marketing or selling certain of its products or a successful claim of
infringement against the company requiring it to pay royalties to a
third-party, the companys future operating results and financial condition
could be adversely affected. information regarding certain claims and
litigation involving the company related to alleged patent infringement and
other matters is set forth in parti, item 3 of this form10-k.
in the opinion of management, the company does not have a potential liability
for damages or royalties from any current legal proceedings or claims related
to the infringement of patent or other intellectual property rights of others
that would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on
its results of operations or financial condition. however, the results of such
legal proceedings cannot be predicted with certainty. should the company fail
to prevail in any of the matters related to infringement of patent or other
intellectual property rights of others described in parti, item 3 of this
form10-k or should several of these matters be resolved against the
company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular
reporting period could be materially adversely affected.
the companys retail initiative has required and will
continue to require a substantial investment and commitment of resources and is
subject to numerous risks and uncertainties.
through september30, 2006, the company had
opened 165 retail stores. the companys retail initiative has required
substantial investment in equipment and leasehold improvements, information
systems, inventory, and personnel. the company has also entered into
substantial operating lease commitments for retail space with lease terms
ranging from 5 to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years. the company
could incur substantial costs should it choose to terminate these commitments
or close individual stores. such costs could adversely affect the companys
results of operations and financial condition. additionally, a relatively high
proportion of the retail segments costs are fixed because of personnel costs,
depreciation of store construction costs, and lease
expense. as a result, significant losses would result should the retail segment
experience a significant decline in sales for any reason.
certain of the companys stores
have been designed and built to serve as high-profile venues that function
as vehicles for general corporate marketing, corporate events, and brand
awareness. because of their unique design elements, locations and size, these
stores require substantially more investment in equipment and leasehold improvements than the companys more typical
retail stores. the company has opened eight such stores through september2006.
because of their location and size, these high-profile stores also require the
company to enter into substantially larger operating lease commitments compared
to those required for its more typical stores. current leases on such locations
have terms ranging from 10 to 14 years with total remaining commitments per location
ranging from $4 million to $33 million. closure or poor performance of one of
these high-profile stores could have a significant negative impact on the
companys results of operations and financial condition.
many of the general risks
and uncertainties the company faces could also have an adverse impact on its
retail segment. also, many factors unique to retail operations present risks and uncertainties, some of which
are beyond the companys control, that could adversely affect the retail
segments future results, cause its actual results to differ from those
currently expected, and/or have an adverse effect on the companys consolidated
results of operations. potential risks and uncertainties unique to retail
operations that could have an adverse impact on the retail segment include,
among other things, macro-economic factors that have a negative impact on
general retail activity; inability to manage costs associated with store
construction and operation; inability to sell third-party hardware and software
products at adequate margins; failure to manage relationships with existing
retail channel partners; lack of experience in managing retail operations
outside the u.s.; costs associated with unanticipated fluctuations in the value
of apple-branded and third-party retail inventory; and inability to obtain and
renew leases in quality retail locations at a reasonable cost.
investment in new business strategies and initiatives
could disrupt the companys ongoing business and may present risks not originally
contemplated.
the company has and may in
the future invest in new business strategies or engage in acquisitions that
complement the companys strategic direction and product roadmap. such
endeavors may involve significant risks and uncertainties, including
distraction of managements attention away from current business operations;
insufficient revenue generation to offset liabilities assumed and expenses
associated with the strategy; and unidentified issues not discovered in the
companys due diligence process. because these new ventures are inherently
risky, no assurance can be given that such strategies and initiatives will be
successful and will not materially adversely affect the companys business,
operating results or financial condition.
declines in the sales of the companys professional
products, software, accessories, or service and support contracts, or increases
in sales of consumer products, including ipods, may negatively impact the
companys gross margin and operating margin percentages.
the companys professional products, including macbook
pro and mac pro systems, software, accessories, and service and support
contracts, generally have higher gross margins than the companys consumer
products, including the imac, mac mini, macbook, ipod, and content from the
itunes store. a shift in sales mix away from higher margin professional
products towards lower margin consumer products could adversely affect the
companys future gross margin and operating margin percentages. the companys
traditional professional customers may choose to buy consumer products,
specifically the imac and macbook, instead of professional products.
professional users may choose to buy the imac due to its relative price
performance and unique design featuring a flat panel screen. professional users
may also choose to purchase macbooks instead of the companys
professional-oriented portable products due to their price performance and
screen size. additionally, significant future growth in ipod sales without
corresponding growth in higher margin product sales
could also reduce gross margin and operating margin percentages.
the company expects
its quarterly revenue and operating results to fluctuate for a variety of
reasons.
the companys profit
margins vary among its products and its distribution channels. the companys
direct sales, primarily through its retail and online stores, generally have
higher associated profitability than its indirect sales. as a result, the
companys gross margin and operating margin percentages, as well as overall
profitability may be adversely impacted as a result of a shift in product,
geographic or channel mix, or new product announcements, including the
transition to intel-based macintosh computers. in addition, the company
generally sells more product during the third month of each quarter than it
does during either of the first two months, a pattern typical in the personal
computer and consumer electronics industries. this sales pattern can produce
pressure on the companys internal infrastructure during the third month of a
quarter and may adversely impact the companys ability to predict its financial
results accurately. furthermore, the company has typically experienced greater
net sales in the first and fourth fiscal quarters compared to other quarters in
the fiscal year due to seasonal demand related to the holiday season and the
beginning of the school year. developments late in a quarter, such as
lower-than-anticipated demand for the companys products, an internal systems
failure, or failure of one of the companys key logistics, components
suppliers, or manufacturing partners, could have significant adverse impacts on
the company and its results of operations and financial condition.
the company has higher research and development and
selling, general and administrative costs, as a percentage of revenue, than
many of its competitors.
the companys ability to
compete successfully and maintain attractive gross margins and revenue growth
is heavily dependent upon its ability to ensure a continuing and timely flow of
innovative and competitive products and technologies to the marketplace. as a
result, the company generally incurs higher research and development costs as a
percentage of revenue than its competitors who sell personal computers based on
other operating systems. many of these competitors seek to compete aggressively
on price and maintain very low cost structures. further, as a result of the
expansion of the companys retail segment and costs associated with marketing
the companys brand including its unique operating system, the company incurs
higher selling costs as a percentage of revenue than many of its competitors.
if the company is unable to continue to develop and sell innovative new
products with attractive gross margins, its results of operations may be
materially adversely affected by its operating cost structure.
the company is exposed to credit risk on its accounts
receivable and prepayments related to long-term supply agreements. this risk is
heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen.
the company distributes
its products through third-party computer resellers and retailers and directly
to certain educational institutions and commercial customers. a substantial
majority of the companys outstanding trade receivables are not covered by
collateral or credit insurance. the company also has unsecured non-trade
receivables from certain of its manufacturing vendors resulting from the sale
by the company of raw material components to these manufacturing vendors who manufacture
sub-assemblies or assemble final products for the company. in addition, the
company has entered into long-term supply agreements to secure supply of nand
flash-memory and has prepaid a total of $1.25 billion under these agreements.
while the company has procedures in place to monitor and limit exposure to
credit risk on its trade and non-trade receivables as well as long-term
prepayments, there can be no assurance such procedures will be effective in
limiting its credit risk and avoiding losses. additionally, if the global
economy or regional economies deteriorate, the company would be more likely to
incur a material loss or losses as a result of the weakening financial
condition of one or more of its customers or manufacturing vendors.
the companys
success depends largely on its ability to attract and retain key personnel.
much of the future success
of the company depends on the continued service and availability of skilled
personnel, including its chief executive officer, members of its executive
team, and those in technical, marketing and staff positions. experienced
personnel in the information technology industry are in high demand and
competition for their talents is intense, especially in the silicon valley,
where the majority of the companys key employees are located. the company has
relied on its ability to grant stock options as one mechanism for recruiting
and retaining this highly skilled talent. recent accounting regulations
requiring the expensing of stock options have resulted in increased stock-based
compensation expense, which may cause the company to reduce the amount of
stock-based awards issued to employees. there can be no assurance that the
company will continue to successfully attract and retain key personnel.
the company is subject
to risks associated with the availability and coverage of insurance.
for certain risks, the
company does not maintain insurance coverage because of cost and/or
availability. because the company retains some portion of its insurable risks,
and in some cases self insures completely, unforeseen or catastrophic losses in
excess of insured limits may have a material adverse effect on the companys
results of operations and financial position.
failure of information technology systems and breaches
in the security of data upon which the company relies could adversely affect the
companys future operating results.
information technology
system failures and breaches of data security could disrupt the companys
ability to function in the normal course of business by potentially causing
delays or cancellation of customer orders, impeding the manufacture or shipment
of products, or resulting in the unintentional disclosure of customer or
company information. management has taken steps to address these concerns for its
own systems by implementing sophisticated network security and internal control
measures. however, there can be no assurance that a system failure or data
security breach of the company or a third-party vendor will not have a material
adverse effect on the companys results of operations.
the companys
business is subject to the risks of international operations.
a large portion of the companys revenue is derived
from its international operations. as a result, the companys operating results
and financial condition could be significantly affected by risks associated
with international activities, including economic and labor conditions,
political instability, tax laws (including u.s. taxes on foreign subsidiaries),
and changes in the value of the u.s. dollar versus the local currency in which
the products are sold and goods and services are purchased. the companys
primary exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates relate to
non-u.s. dollar denominated sales in europe, japan, australia, canada, and
certain parts of asia and non-dollar denominated operating expenses incurred
throughout the world. weaknesses in foreign currencies, particularly the
japanese yen and the euro, can adversely impact consumer demand for the
companys products and the u.s. dollar value of the companys foreign currency
denominated sales. conversely, a strengthening in these and other foreign
currencies can cause the company to modify international pricing and affect the
value of the companys foreign denominated sales, and in some cases, may also
increase the cost to the company of some product components.
margins on sales of the companys products in foreign
countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained from
foreign suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate
fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including tariffs and
antidumping penalties.
derivative instruments, such as foreign exchange
forward and option positions have been utilized by the company to hedge
exposures to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. the use of such
hedging activities may not offset more than a portion of the adverse financial
impact resulting from unfavorable movements in foreign exchange rates.
further information related
to the companys global market risks may be found in partii, item 7a of
this form10-k under the subheading foreign currency risk and may
be found in partii, item 8 of this form10-k at notes 1 and 3
of notes to consolidated financial statements.
the company is
subject to risks associated with environmental regulations.
production and marketing
of products in certain states and countries may subject the company to
environmental and other regulations including, in some instances, the
requirement to provide customers the ability to return product at the end of
its useful life, and place responsibility for environmentally safe disposal or
recycling with the company. such laws and regulations have recently been passed
in several jurisdictions in which the company operates, including various
european union member countries, japan and certain states within the u.s.
although the company does not anticipate any material adverse effects in the
future based on the nature of its operations and the thrust of such laws, there
is no assurance such existing laws or future laws will not have a material
adverse effect on the companys financial condition, liquidity, or results of
operations.
changes in
accounting rulescould affect the companys future operating results.
financial statements are
prepared in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles.
these principles are subject to interpretation by various governing bodies,
including the financial accounting standards board (fasb) and the sec, who
create and interpret appropriate accounting standards. a change from current
accounting standards could have a significant effect on the companys results
of operations. in december2004, the fasb issued new guidance that
addresses the accounting for share-based payments, statement of financial
accounting standards (sfas) no.123 (revised 2004) (sfasno. 123r),
share-based payment, which the company
adopted in 2006. in 2006, stock-based compensation expense reduced diluted
earnings per common share by approximately $0.14. although the adoption of sfas
no.123r is expected to continue to have a significant impact on the
companys results of operations, future changes to various assumptions used to
determine the fair-value of awards issued or the amount and type of equity
awards granted create uncertainty as to the amount of future stock-based
compensation expense.
changes in the
companys tax rates could affect its future results.
the companys future
effective tax rates could be favorably or unfavorably affected by changes in
the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in
the valuation of the companys deferred tax assets and liabilities, or by
changes in tax laws or their interpretation. in addition, the company is
subject to the continuous examination of its income tax returns by the internal
revenue service and other tax authorities. the company regularly assesses the
likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine
the adequacy of its provision for income taxes. there can be no assurance the
outcomes from these continuous examinations will not have an adverse effect on
the companys results of operations and financial condition.
the companys stock
price may be volatile.
the companys stock has at
times experienced substantial price volatility as a result of variations
between its actual and anticipated financial results and as a result of
announcements by the company and its competitors. the stock market has
experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have affected the market
price of many technology companies in ways that may have been unrelated to the
operating performance of these companies. furthermore, the company believes its
stock price reflects high future growth and profitability expectations. if the
company fails to meet these expectations its stock price may significantly
decline. in addition, increases in the companys stock price may result in
greater dilution of earnings per share.
item 1b. unresolved
staff comments
none.
item 2. properties
the companys headquarters are located in cupertino,
california. the company has a manufacturing facility in cork, ireland. as of september30,
2006, the company leased approximately 3.6 million square feet of space,
primarily in the u.s., and to a lesser extent, in europe, japan, canada, and
the asia pacific region. the major facility leases are for terms of 5 to 15
years and generallyprovide renewal options for terms of 3 to 5 additional
years. leased space includes approximately 1.2 million square feet of retail
space, a majority of which is in the u.s. lease terms for retail space range
from 5 to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain
multi-year renewal options.
the company owns a 352,000 square-foot manufacturing
facility in cork, ireland that also houses a customer support call center. the
company also owns 805,000 square feet of facilities in sacramento, california
that include warehousing and distribution operations as well as a customer
support call center. in addition, the company owns approximately 1.9 million
square feet of facilities for research and development and corporate functions
in cupertino, california, including approximately 948,000 square feet purchased
during 2006 for the future development of the companys second corporate
campus, and approximately 107,000 square feet for a data center in newark,
california. outside the u.s., the company owns additional facilities totaling
approximately 169,000 square feet. the company believes its existing facilities
and equipment are well maintained and in good operating condition.
the company has invested
in internal capacity and strategic relationships with outside manufacturing
vendors, and therefore believes it has adequate manufacturing capacity for the
foreseeable future. the company continues to make investments in capital
equipment as needed to meet anticipated demand for its products.
item 3. legal
proceedings
the company is subject to
various legal proceedings and claims that are discussed below. the company is
also subject to certain other legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in
the ordinary course of business and which have not been fully adjudicated. in
the opinion of management, the company does not have a potential liability
related to any current legal proceedings and claims that would individually or
in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on its financial condition,
liquidity or results of operations. however, the results of legal proceedings
cannot be predicted with certainty. should the company fail to prevail in any
of these legal matters or should several of these legal matters be resolved
against the company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a
particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. the company
settled certain matters during 2006 that did not individually or in the
aggregate have a material impact on the companys results of operations.
allen v. apple
computer,inc.
on january28, 2005,
a plaintiff filed a purported nationwide class action in los angeles superior
court alleging that a defect in the companys 17-inch studio display
monitors results in dimming of half of the screen and constant blinking of the
power light. plaintiff filed an amended complaint on october24, 2005, adding additional named
plaintiffs and expanding the alleged class to include purchasers of the 20-inch
apple cinema display and the 23-inch apple cinema hd display. the amended
complaint alleges that the displays have a purported defect that causes dimming
of one-half of the screen, and that the company misrepresented the quality of
the displays and/or concealed the purported defect. plaintiffs assert claims
under california business& professions code 17200 (unfair
competition); california business& professions code 17500 (false
advertising) and the consumer legal remedies act. the amended complaint seeks
remedies including damages and equitable relief. on november14, 2005, the
company
filed
an answer to the amended complaint as to the allegations regarding the 17-inch
display and a demurrer/motion to strike as to the allegations regarding the 20-inch
and 23-inch displays on the ground that plaintiffs failed to allege that
they purchased those displays. at a status conference on november1, 2005,
the court ordered plaintiffs to amend their complaint. plaintiff filed an
amended complaint on december12, 2005, and the company answered on january5,
2006 denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the
company has reached a settlement in this matter, which was given preliminary
approval by the court on september18, 2006. the final approval hearing is
scheduled for february15, 2007. settlement of this matter will not have a
material effect on the companys financial position or results of operations.
apple computer,inc.
v. burst.com,inc.
the company filed an
action for declaratory judgment against defendant burst.com,inc. on january4,
2006 in the united states district court for the northern district of
california. the company seeks declaratory judgment that u.s. patent nos.
4,963,995, 5,164,839, 5,057,932 and 5,995,705 (burst patents) are invalid and
not infringed by the company. burst filed an answer and counterclaim on april17,
2006. burst alleges that the following apple products and services infringe
u.s. patent nos. 4,963,995, 5,057,932, 5,164,839, and 5,995,705; itunes store,
ipod devices, quicktime products (including quicktime player and quicktime
streaming server), itunes software, other apple software products (final cut
studio, garageband, imovie, idvd, iweb), the use of the .mac services and apple
computers and servers running itunes, quicktime, or the other named apple
software products. the burst patents allegedly relate to methods and devices
used for burst transmission of audio or video files. the case is in discovery.
a claim construction hearing is set for february8, 2007. trial is set for
february26, 2008.
apple
corpsltd. v. apple computer,inc.; apple computer,inc. v.
apple corpsltd.
plaintiff apple corps filed this action on july4,
2003 in the high court of justice, chancery division, in london alleging that
the company has breached a 1991 agreement that resolved earlier trademark
litigation between the parties regarding use of certain apple marks. plaintiff
seeks an injunction, unspecified damages, and other relief. the company filed a
motion on october13, 2003, challenging jurisdiction in the u.k. the court
denied this motion on april7, 2004. the company filed an appeal of the
courts decision but subsequently withdrew the appeal. in november2004,
plaintiff served the company with an amended bill of particulars and on december23,
2004, the company filed a defence. on november24, 2005, plaintiff filed a
re-amended bill of particulars and the company filed its defence on december16,
2005. trial took place from march29, 2006 through april5, 2006. judgment
was given in favor of the company on may8, 2006 and apple corps was
ordered to pay a portion of the companys fees, the amount to be agreed or
determined in a subsequent proceeding. apple corps has filed an appeal, which
is scheduled to be heard in late february2007.
on october8, 2003,
the company filed a lawsuit against apple corps in the united states district
court for the northern district of california requesting a declaratory judgment
that the company has not breached the 1991 agreement. apple corps challenged
jurisdiction in the california case but the court denied that challenge on march25,
2004. apple corps subsequently prevailed on a motion to stay the california
case during the pendency of the u.k. action. the company has dismissed the
california lawsuit without prejudice.
bader v. anderson,
et al.
plaintiff filed this
purported shareholder derivative action against the company and each of its
then current executive officers and members of its board of directors on may19,
2005 in santa clara county superior court asserting claims for breach of
fiduciary duty, material misstatements and omissions, and violations of
california businesses& professions code 17200 (unfair competition).
plaintiff alleges that the companys march14, 2005, proxy statement was
false and misleading for failure to disclose certain information relating to
the apple computer,inc. performance bonus plan, which was approved by
shareholders at the annual
meeting held on april21, 2005. plaintiff, who ostensibly brings suit on
the companys behalf, has made no demand on the board of directors and alleges
that such demand is excused. plaintiff seeks injunctive and other relief for
purported injury to the company. on july27, 2005, plaintiff filed an
amended complaint alleging that, in addition to the purported derivative
claims, adoption of the
bonus plan and distribution of the proxy statement describing that plan also
inflicted injury on her directly as an individual shareholder. on january10,
2006, the court sustained defendants demurrer to the amended complaint, with
leave to amend. plaintiff filed a second amended complaint on february7,
2006, and the company filed a demurrer. after a hearing on june13, 2006,
the court sustained the demurrer without leave to amend as to the non-director
officers and with leave to amend as to the directors. on july24, 2006,
plaintiff filed a third amended complaint, which purports to bring claims
derivatively as well as directly on behalf of a class of common stock holders
who have been or will be harmed by virtue of the allegedly misleading proxy
statement. in addition to reasserting prior causes of action, the third amended
complaint includes a claim that the company violated the terms of the plan, and
a claim for waste related to restricted stock unit grants to certain officers
in 2003 and 2004 and an option grant to the companys ceo in january2000.
a demurrer that the company filed to the third amended complaint as well as a
motion to disqualify the companys lawyers will be heard on january30,
2007.
baghdasarian, et
al. v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiffs filed this
action in los angeles county superior court on october31, 2005, on behalf
of a purported nationwide class of all purchasers of all apple wireless
products (router, modem, or adaptor) sold at any time. the complaint alleges
that the company misrepresented the transmission rates of these products. the
complaint alleges causes of action for breach of express warranty and for
violations of the consumer legal remedies act, california business&
professions code 17200 (unfair competition) and california business&
professions code 17500 (false advertising). the complaint seeks damages and
equitable remedies. on december15, 2005, the company filed an answer
denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the
parties have reached a tentative settlement, which is not expected to have a
material effect on the companys financial position or results of operations.
barry et al. v.
apple computer,inc.
two plaintiffs filed this
purported class action on may16, 2006 in the united states district court
for the northern district of california, san jose division, on behalf of a
nationwide class of ipod purchasers between may2002 and the present. the
complaint alleged various problems with the ipod hard drive, including skipping
and limited lifespan. plaintiffs alleged violations of california business&
professions code 17200 (unfair competition), the consumer legal remedies act,
the song-beverly consumer warranty act and breach of warranties. the complaint
sought damages and equitable relief. the plaintiffs voluntarily dismissed this
case, without prejudice, on september18, 2006.
birdsong v. apple
computer,inc.; patterson v. apple computer,inc.
these federal court complaints allege that the companys
ipod music players, and the ear bud headphones sold with them, are inherently
defective in design and are sold without adequate warnings concerning the risk
of noise-induced hearing loss by ipod users. the birdsong action was initially
filed on january30, 2006 in the united states district court for the
western district of louisiana on behalf of a purported louisiana class of ipod
purchasers and alleges violations of the louisiana products liability act,
breaches of implied warranties, unjust enrichment, and negligent
misrepresentation. the patterson action was filed on january31, 2006 in
the united states district court for the northern district of california on
behalf of a purported class of all ipod purchasers within the four-year period
before january31, 2006. that action alleged breaches of implied and express
warranties, violations of california business& professions code
17200 (unfair competition), california business& professions code
17500 (false advertising), the consumer legal remedies act, breaches of
express and implied warranties, negligent misrepresentation and unjust
enrichment. the birdsong action was transferred to the northern district of
california, and the
patterson action was dismissed. an amended complaint
was subsequently filed in birdsong, dropping the louisiana law-based claims and
adding california law-based claims equivalent to those in patterson. the
company filed a motion to dismiss on november3, 2006. plaintiffs will not
oppose the motion but instead will file a second amended complaint by january15,
2007.
a similar complaint, royer-brennan v. apple computer,inc. and apple canada,inc.,
was filed in montreal, quebec, canada, on february1, 2006, seeking
authorization to institute a class action on behalf of ipod purchasers in
quebec. a hearing on the motion for class certification is scheduled for february8
and9,2007, although plaintiff counsel has now requested that the
hearing be delayed pending a ruling on the motion to dismiss in the u.s. case.
branning et al. v.
apple computer,inc.
plaintiffs originally
filed this purported class action in san francisco county superior court on february17,
2005. the initial complaint alleged violations of california business&
professions code 17200
(unfair competition) and violation of the consumer legal remedies act (clra)
regarding a variety of purportedly unfair and unlawful conduct including, but
not limited to, allegedly selling used computers as new and failing to honor
warranties. plaintiffs also brought causes of action for misappropriation of
trade secrets, breach of contract, and violation of the song-beverly consumer
warranty act. plaintiffs requested unspecified damages and other relief. on may9,
2005, the court granted the companys motion to transfer the case to santa
clara county superior court. on may2, 2005, plaintiffs filed an amended
complaint adding two new named plaintiffs and three new causes of action
including a claim for treble damages under the cartwright act (california
business& professions code 16700
et seq.) and a claim for false advertising. the company filed a demurrer to the
amended complaint, which the court sustained in its entirety on november10,
2005. the court granted plaintiffs leave to amend and they filed an amended
complaint on december29, 2005. plaintiffs
amended complaint added three plaintiffs and alleged many of the same factual
claims as the previous complaints, such as alleged selling of used equipment as
new, alleged failure to honor warranties and service contracts for the consumer
plaintiffs, and alleged fraud related to the opening of the apple retail stores.
plaintiffs continued to assert causes of action for unfair competition
(17200), violations of the clra, breach of contract, misappropriation of trade
secrets, violations of the cartwright act and alleged new causes of action for
fraud, conversion and breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair
dealing. the company filed a demurrer to the amended complaint on january31,
2006, which the court sustained on march3, 2006 on sixteen of seventeen
causes of action. plaintiffs filed an amended complaint adding one new
plaintiff. the company filed a demurrer, which was granted in part on september9,
2006. plaintiffs filed a further amended complaint on september21, 2006. on
october2, 2006, the company filed an answer denying all allegations and
asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the case is in discovery.
butzer, et
al.v. apple computer,inc.;wirges v. apple computer,inc.;
blackwell v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiffs filed the
butzer action on august23, 2005 in the united states district court for
the northern district of california, san jose division, on behalf of a
purported nationwide class of all purchasers of the companys powerbook g4
portable computers. the complaint alleged defects in the memory of the computers.
the complaint alleged that this purported defect extends to other series of the
companys portables and stated that plaintiffs reserved the right to amend the
complaint to include these other series. plaintiffs asserted claims for alleged
violations of california business& professions code 17200 (unfair
competition), california business& professions code 17500 (false
advertising), the consumer legal remedies act (clra) and the song-beverly
consumer warranty act. the complaint sought remedies including restitution
and/or damages and injunctive relief. the wirges action was filed on january20,
2006 in the united states district court for the eastern district of arkansas,
also on behalf of a purported nationwide class, and made similar allegations.
plaintiffs asserted claims for breach of warranties, violation of the magnusonmoss
act, strict products liability and unjust enrichment. the complaint sought restitution,
damages and other remedies. the blackwell action was filed on february10,
2006 in the
united states district
court for the northern district of california, on behalf of a purported
nationwide class, and made identical allegations to those made in the butzer
case. plaintiffs asserted claims for breach of express and implied warranties,
violation of the clra, violation of the song-beverly act, false advertising and
unfair competition. the complaint sought restitution, an injunction and other
remedies. the company filed an answer to the butzer complaint on october19,
2005 denying all material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative
defenses. the company filed an answer to the wirges action on february28,
2006, and also filed a motion to transfer the wirges case to the northern
district of california. the company filed an answer to the blackwell complaint
on march15, 2006 denying all material allegations and asserting numerous
affirmative defenses. the company has reached a settlement with the named
plaintiffs in all three cases and these matters are concluded. settlement of these
matters did not have a material effect on the companys financial position or
results of operations.
charoensak v. apple
computer,inc. (formerly slattery v. apple computer,inc.)
the original plaintiff
(slattery) filed this purported class action on january3, 2005 in the
united states district court for the northern district of california alleging
various claims including alleged unlawful tying of music purchased on the
itunes store with the purchase of ipods and vice versa and unlawful acquisition
or maintenance of monopoly market power. plaintiffs complaint alleged
violations of 1 and 2 of the sherman act (15 u.s.c. 1 and 2), california
business and professions code 16700 et seq. (the cartwright act), california
business and professions code 17200 (unfair competition), common law unjust
enrichment and common law monopolization. plaintiff sought unspecified damages
and other relief. the company filed a motion to dismiss on february10,
2005. on september9, 2005, the court denied the motion in part and granted
it in part. plaintiff filed an amended complaint on september23, 2005 and
the company filed an answer on october18, 2005. on may8, 2006, the
court heard plaintiffs motion for leave to file a second amended complaint to
substitute two new plaintiffs for slattery. in august2006, the court
dismissed slattery without prejudice and allowed plaintiffs to file an amended
complaint naming two new plaintiffs (charoensak and rosen). on november2,
2006, the company filed an answer to the amended complaint denying all material
allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the hearing on class
certification is set for april16, 2007.
contois music
technology llc v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff contois music
technology filed this action on june13, 2005 in the united states
district court for vermont, alleging infringement by the company of u.s. patent
no.5,864,868, entitled computer control system and user interface for
media playing devices.the complaint sought unspecified damages and other
relief. the company filed an answer on november23, 2005 denying all
material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. a markman
hearing was held on june13, 2006 and the court issued a claim
construction ruling on july24, 2006. the parties agreed to a settlement
and the case was dismissed on august18, 2006. this matter is now
concluded. settlement of this matter did not have a material effect on the
companys financial position or results of operations.
creative technology ltd. and creative labs,inc.
v. apple computer,inc. (filed
on may15, 2006, international trade comission), creative
technology ltd. v. apple computer,inc. (filed
on may15, 2006, united states district court for the northern district of
california), apple computer,inc. v. creative technology ltd. and
creative labs,inc. (filed may15,
2006, united states district court for the western district of wisconsin),
apple computer,inc. v. creative technology ltd. and creative labs,inc.
(filed on june1, 2007, international trade
comission), apple computer,inc. v. creative technology ltd. and
creative labs (filed on june1, 2006,
united states district court for the eastern district of texas)
on may15, 2006, creative labs,inc., and
creative technology ltd. (collectively creative) filed a complaint with the
u.s. international trade commission (itc) alleging that the company infringed
u.s. patent number 6,928,433 (433 patent) and seeking an order permanently
barring ipods from importation into the united states. on may15, 2006,
creative also brought suit against the company in
the united states district court for the northern
district of california, also alleging that the ipod infringed the 433 patent. the
district court action was stayed pending resolution of the creative itc action.
on may15, 2006, the company brought suit against
creative in the united states district court for the western district of
wisconsin (wisconsin action), alleging that creative infringed u.s. patent
number 5,479,602 (602 patent), u.s. patent number 5,586,237 (237 patent),
u.s. patent number 5,898,434 (434 patent), and u.s. patent number 6,731,312
(312 patent). on may17, 2006, the company filed an amended complaint
in the wisconsin action alleging that creative also infringed u.s. patent
number 5,341,293 (293 patent), u.s. patent number 6,047,342 (342 patent),
and u.s. patent number 5,799,280 (280 patent).
on june1, 2006, the company brought suit against
creative in the united states district court for the eastern district of texas,
(texas action), alleging that creative infringed u.s. patent number 6,157,363
(363 patent), u.s. patent number 5,640,566 (566 patent), and u.s. patent
number 5,504,852 (852 patent). on june27, 2006, the company filed an
amended complaint in the texas action alleging that creative also infringed
u.s. patent number 7,046,230 (230 patent) and u.s. patent number 6,282,646 (646
patent). at the suggestion of the district court, the company filed separate
actions in the eastern district of texas regarding the companys allegations
relating to the 230 patent and the 646 patent.
on june1, 2006, the company filed a complaint
with the itc alleging that creative infringed the 230 patent, the 293 patent,
and the 434 patent. on june5, 2006, the company filed an amended
complaint with the itc alleging that creative also infringed the 646 patent.
the parties reached a
settlement of all of the above matters and all cases were dismissed as of october13,
2006. these matters are concluded. settlement of these matters did not have a
material effect on the companys financial position or results of operations.
davisv. apple
computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
purported class action in san francisco county superior court on december5,
2002, alleging that the company engaged in unfair and deceptive business
practices relating to its applecare extended service and warranty plan.
plaintiff asserts causes of action for violation of california business&
professions code 17200
(unfair competition), california business& professions code 17500 (false advertising), breach of
the song-beverly warranty act, intentional misrepresentation and concealment.
plaintiff requests unspecified damages and other relief. the company filed a
demurrer and motion to strike, which were granted, in part, and plaintiff filed
an amended complaint. the company filed an answer on april17, 2003
denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. plaintiff
subsequently amended his complaint. on october29, 2003, the company filed
a motion to disqualify plaintiffs counsel in his role as counsel to the
purported class and to the general public. the court granted the motion but
allowed plaintiff to retain substitute counsel. plaintiff did engage new
counsel for the general public, but not for the class. the company moved to
disqualify plaintiffs new counsel and to have the court dismiss the general
public claims for equitable relief. the court declined to disqualify plaintiffs
new counsel or to dismiss the equitable claims, but did confirm that the class
action claims were dismissed. the company appealed the ruling and the case was
stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. the court of appeals denied the
appeal on august17, 2005, affirming the trial courts decision. the
company filed a petition for review with the california supreme court, which
was denied on november23, 2005. the case was remanded back to the trial
court. the parties have reached a settlement and the matter is concluded. settlement
of this matter did not have a material effect on the companys financial
position or results of operations.
european commission
investigation
the european commission
has notified the company it is investigating certain matters relating to the
itunes store in the european union (eu). the european commission is
investigating claims made by which?, a united kingdom (uk) consumer
association, that the company is violating eu competition law by charging more
for online music in the uk than in eurozone countries and preventing uk
consumers from purchasing online music from the itunes store for eurozone
countries. the which? claims were originally lodged with the uk office of fair
trading, which subsequently referred them to the european commission. the
european commission is investigating the charges under articles 81 and 82 of
the european commission treaty.
euro tec
enterprises,inc. et al. v. apple computer,inc. et al.
this is a purported class
action copyright infringement case filed on may16, 2006 in the united states
district court for the central district of california by certain independent
music publishers against the company and several other defendants for allegedly
failing to secure a compulsory license for copyrighted musical compositions
being sold as downloads. plaintiffs complaint seeks an injunction, damages and
other relief. the company filed an answer on july28, 2006 denying all
material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the case is
in discovery and is set for trial on november13, 2007 if no class is
certified or on june10, 2008 if a class is certified. plaintiffs filed an
amended complaint on october23, 2006 and the company filed an amended
answer on november28, 2006 denying all material allegations and asserting
numerous affirmative defenses.
gillis et al. v.
apple computer,inc.
plaintiffs filed this
purported class action on december23, 2005 in san diego county superior
court alleging the company has misrepresented the hard drive capacity of two
powerbook g4 computers: the 12-inch, 1.5ghz computer with 512mb of memory
and a 100gb hard drive; and the 15-inch, 1.67ghz computer with 1gb of
memory and a 100gb hard drive. plaintiffs alleged that the companys standard
disclosure on its packaging regarding hard drive size was not present on the
packaging for these two models. the complaint alleged violations of the
california business& professions code 17200 (unfair competition),
california business& professions code 17500 (false advertising), the
consumer legal remedies act, and causes of action for deceit and negligent
misrepresentation. plaintiffs sought restitution and other relief. on february28,
2006, the company filed a demurrer and a motion to strike. the company withdrew
the demurrer and motion to strike per stipulation. the company has reached a court-approved
settlement with the plaintiffs in this action and the matter is concluded. the
settlement of this matter did not have a material effect on the companys
financial position or results of operations.
goldberg, et al. v.
apple computer,inc., et al.
plaintiffs filed this
purported class action on september22, 2003 in los angeles county
superior court against the company and other members of the computer industry
on behalf of an alleged nationwide class of purchasers of certain computer hard
drives. the case alleged violations of california business&
professions code 17200
(unfair competition), the consumer legal remedies act and false advertising
related to the size of the drives. plaintiffs alleged that calculation of hard
drive size using the decimal method misrepresents the actual size of the drive.
the complaint sought restitution and other relief. plaintiffs filed an amended
complaint on march30, 2004 and the company filed an answer on september23,
2004, denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. defendants
filed a motion to strike portions of the complaint based on sales by resellers
and filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings based upon proposition 64. the
court granted both motions at a hearing on april6, 2005. plaintiffs
thereafter filed an amended complaint on may6, 2005. the defendants filed
a demurrer on june6, 2005, which the court granted in part and denied in
part. plaintiffs filed an amended complaint and the company filed an answer on december15,
2005 denying all allegations and asserting numerous assertive defenses. the
company reached a court-approved settlement with the plaintiffs in this action
and the matter is
concluded. the settlement of this matter did not have a material effect on the
companys financial position or results of operations.
gordon v. apple
computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
purported class action on august31, 2006 in the united states district
court for the northern district of california, san jose division, on behalf of
a purported nationwide class of consumers who purchased 65w power adapters for
ibooks and powerbooks between november2002 and the present. the complaint
alleges various problems with the 65w adapter, including fraying, sparking and
premature failure. plaintiffs allege violations of california business&
professions code 17200 (unfair competition), the consumer legal remedies act,
the song-beverly consumer warranty act and breach of warranties. the complaint
seeks damages and equitable relief. the company filed an answer on october20,
2006 denying the material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative
defenses. mediation is set for march13, 2007.
greaves v. apple
computer,inc.
on june30, 2006
plaintiff filed this purported class action in san diego superior court on
behalf of a purported class of california purchasers alleging discoloration of
the macbook case. plaintiff asserts claims under california business&
professions code 17500 (false advertising), california business&
professions code 17200 (unfair competition), the consumer legal remedies act
and misrepresentation. plaintiffs complaint seeks damages and equitable relief.
plaintiff filed a first amended complaint on august16, 2006. the company
filed an answer on october3, 2006 denying all allegations and asserting
numerous affirmative defenses.
honeywell
international,inc., et al.v. apple computer,inc., et al.
plaintiffs honeywell
international,inc. and honeywell intellectual properties,inc. filed
this action on october6, 2004 in the united states district court in
delaware alleging infringement by the company and other defendants of u.s.
patent 5,280,371 entitled directional diffuser for a liquid crystal display.
plaintiffs seek unspecified damages and other relief. the company filed an
answer on december21, 2004 denying all material allegations and asserting
numerous affirmative defenses. the company has tendered the case to several lcd
manufacturer suppliers. on may18, 2005 the court stayed the case against
the company and the other non-manufacturer defendants. plaintiffs filed an
amended complaint on november7, 2005 adding additional defendants and
expanding the scope of the accused products. given the stay, the companys
response to the amended complaint is not yet due.
in re apple computer,inc. derivative litigation
(formerly karant v. jobs, et al. and related actions) (federalaction)
on june30, 2006, a
putative derivative action captioned karant v. jobs, et. al.,
was filed in the united states district court for the northern district of
california, san jose division. a number of related actions were filed in the
subsequent weeks and have been consolidated into a single action captioned in re apple computer,inc. derivative litigation,
master file no.c-06-04128-jf before the hon. jeremy
fogel. a consolidated shareholder derivative complaint was filed on december18,
2006. the action purports to assert claims on behalf of the company against
several current and former executive officers and members of the board of
directors alleging improper backdating of stock option grants to maximize
certain defendants profits, failing to properly account for and take tax
deductions for those grants, insider trading and issuing false financial statements.
the company is named as a nominal defendant. the consolidated complaint alleges
various causes of action under federal and california law, including claims for
unjust enrichment, breach of fiduciary duty, violation of the california
corporations code, abuse of control, gross mismanagement, rescission,
constructive fraud and waste of corporate assets, as well as claims under
sections 10(b), 14(a)and 20(a)of the securities exchange act.
plaintiffs seek damages, disgorgement, restitution and imposition of a
constructive trust. the actions were filed after the companys
announcement on june29,
2006 that an internal investigation had discovered irregularities related to
the issuance of certain stock option grants made between 1997 and 2001, that a
special committee of the companys outside directors had retained independent
counsel to perform an investigation, and that the company had informed the
securities and exchange commission. the companys response to the consolidated
complaint is not yet due.
in re apple computer,inc. derivative litigation
(formerly plumbers and pipefitters v. jobs, et al. and related actions) (state
action); boston retirement board v. apple computer,inc.
on july5, 2006, a putative derivative action
captioned plumbers and pipefitters v. jobs, et. al.,
was filed in california superior court for the county of santa clara. a number
of related actions were filed in the subsequent weeks, and have been
consolidated into a single action captioned in re apple computer,inc.
derivative litigation, no.1:06cv066692, assigned to the hon.
joseph huber. these actions purport to assert claims on behalf of the company
against several current and former executive officers and members of the board
of directors alleging improper backdating of stock option grants to maximize
certain defendants profits, failing to properly account for and take tax
deductions for those grants and issuing false financial statements. the company
is named as a nominal defendant. a consolidated complaint was filed on october5,
2006, alleging a variety of causes of action under california law, including
claims for unjust enrichment, breach of fiduciary duty, violation of the
california corporations code, abuse of control, accounting, constructive trust,
rescission, deceit, gross mismanagement and waste of corporate assets. on december7,
2006, the court granted the companys motion to stay these actions.
on november3, 2006,
the boston retirement board, a purported shareholder, filed a petition for writ
of mandate against the company in california superior court for the county of
santa clara county (boston retirement board v.
apple computer inc.). the petition seeks to compel the company to
allow inspection of certain corporate records relating to the companys option practices
and the special committees investigation. the companys response to the
petition is not yet due.
lenzi v. apple canada,inc.; wolfe v. apple
computer,inc. and apple canada,inc.; hirst v. apple canada,inc.;
hamilton v. apple computer,inc. and apple canada,inc.
plaintiff filed a purported class action on june7,
2005, in superior court, in montreal, quebec, canada allegedly
on behalf of quebec customers claiming false advertising and breach of warranty
relating to ipod battery life. plaintiff sought authorization to institute a class action on
behalf of generations 1, 2 and 3 ipod owners in quebec. on february2,
2006, the court dismissed plaintiffs motion for authorization to institute a
class action. plaintiff has appealed this ruling, and the appeal will be heard
on february22,2007.
two similar complaints
relative to ipod battery life, wolfe v. apple
and hirst v. apple, were filed in toronto,
ontario, canada on august15, 2005 and september12, 2005,
respectively. both actions define the purported class as a national class
consisting of all persons in canada who have purchased or who own an ipod.
counsel has proposed an amended complaint to which the company has not
consented. in addition, a similar complaint regarding ipod battery life, hamilton v. apple computer,inc. and apple canada,inc.
was filed in alberta, calgary, canada on october5, 2005, purportedly on
behalf of all purchasers of ipods in alberta, canada. that complaint has not
been served.
mactech systemsv. apple computer,inc.;
macadamv. apple computer,inc.; computer international,inc.v.
apple computer,inc.; elite computers and software,inc.v.
apple computer,inc.; the neighborhood computer storev. apple
computer,inc.; macaccessory center,inc. v. apple computer,inc.;
creative online computer services,inc., dba maconline v. apple computer,inc.;
macguys,inc. v. apple computer,inc. (all in santa clara county superior court)
eight resellers filed similar lawsuits against the
company between late 2002 and early 2006 asserting various causes of action
including breach of contract, fraud, negligent and intentional interference
with
economic relationship, negligent misrepresentation,
trade libel, unfair competition and false advertising. plaintiffs requested
unspecified damages and other relief. the company answered the computer
international complaint on november12, 2003, denying all allegations and
asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the company filed an answer in the
macadam case on december3, 2004 denying all allegations and asserting
numerous defenses. three of the other plaintiffs filed amended complaints on february7,
2005, and on march16, 2005 the company filed answers to these claims
denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. a sixth
plaintiff, macaccessory center, filed a complaint on february23, 2005. the
company filed an answer to this complaint on april20, 2005 denying all
allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. on february28,
2006, macguys and creative online filed complaints against the company. all of
these cases with the exception of macadam were coordinated for discovery (along
with the branning class action) in santa clara superior court. the elite,
neighborhood computer store, mactech and macaccessory cases were set for trial
on november27, 2006. the company has reached settlements with computer
international, mactech systems, elite computers and software,inc.,
macaccessory center,inc., the neighborhood computer store, creative
online computer services,inc., and macguys,inc. and these matters
are concluded. these settlements did not have a material effect on the companys
financial position or results of operations.
on october1, 2003, one of the reseller
plaintiffs, macadam, was deauthorized as an apple reseller. macadam filed a
motion for a temporary order to reinstate it as a reseller, which the court
denied. the court denied macadams motion for a preliminary injunction on december19,
2003. on december6, 2004, macadam filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in the
northern district of california, which placed a stay on the litigation as to
macadam only. the company filed a claim in the bankruptcy proceedings on february16,
2005. the macadam bankruptcy case was converted to chapter 7 (liquidation) on april29,
2005. the company has reached a settlement of the macadam case with the chapter
7 bankruptcy trustee. the bankruptcy court approved the settlement on july17,
2006 over the objection of tom santos, macadams principal. santos has appealed
the ruling approving the settlement.
on december19, 2005,
tom santos, who was an original plaintiff in the macadam case, filed a fifth
amended complaint on his own behalf (not on behalf of macadam) alleging fraud,
violations of california business& professions code 17200 (unfair
competition), california business& professions code 17500 (false
advertising) and the consumer legal remedies act. the company filed a demurrer
to santos amended complaint and a special motion to strike the defamation
cause of action on january20, 2006. those motions were heard on february17,
2006, and the court sustained the demurrer without leave to amend as to one
cause of action, overruled the demurrer as to one cause of action and sustained
the demurrer with leave to amend as to two causes of action. the court also
denied the special motion to strike. santos filed a further amended complaint
on july14, 2006. the company filed a demurrer, which was granted on september9,
2006. santos filed an amended complaint. the company filed a motion to strike,
which was granted in part and denied in part on december15, 2006. the
company also filed a cross complaint against santos on january20, 2006
alleging violations of california business& professions code 17200
and california penal code 502, fraud and deceit, and breach of contract.
macsolutions,inc.
v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff macsolutions,inc.,
a former apple authorized reseller, filed this lawsuit against the company on january20,
2006 alleging breach of contract, fraud, misappropriation of trade secrets,
intentional interference with economic advantage, violation of the cartwright
act, violation of california business& professions code 17200
(unfair competition) and fraudulent concealment. the factual allegations in
this complaint are similar to those in the eight other reseller cases and the
branning class action. principally, plaintiffs allege that the company treated
macsolutions unfairly compared to other resellers, that the company has
competed unfairly in opening the apple retail stores, and has allegedly sold
used goods as new. macsolutions filed an amended complaint on june5,
2006, adding tech data corporation as a
defendant. the company
filed an answer on july5, 2006 generally denying all allegations and
asserting numerous affirmative defenses. the case is in discovery. the case is
set for trial on june18, 2007.
phatrat technology
llc v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff phatrat
technology llc filed this action on october24, 2006 in the united states
district court for the district of colorado alleging infringement of u.s.
patent number 6,499,000 entitled system and method for determining loft time,
speed, height and distance, u.s. patent number 6,885,971 entitled methods and
systems for assessing athletics performance, u.s. patent number 6,963,818
entitled mobile speedometer systems and associated methods, and u.s. patent
number 7,092,846 entitled systems and methods for determining performance
data, as well as allowed u.s. patent application number 11/358,508 entitled shoes
employing monitoring devices, and associated methods. plaintiff asserts that
the nike+ipod products infringe these patents. the companys response to the
complaint is not yet due.
premier
international associates llc v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff premier
international associates llc filed this action on november3, 2005 in the
united states district court for the eastern district of texas, marshall
division, alleging infringement by the company of u.s. patent numbers 6,243,725
and 6,763,345 both entitled list building system. the complaint seeks
unspecified damages and other relief. the company filed an answer on january13,
2006 denying all material allegations and asserting numerous affirmative
defenses. the company also asserted counter claims for a declaratory judgment
of noninfringement and invalidity. a markman hearing is set for may17,
2007 and trial is scheduled for december3, 2007.
quantum technology
management, ltd. v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
action on december21, 2005 in the united states district court for the
district of maryland against the company and fingerworks, ltd., alleging
infringement of u.s. patent number 5,730,165 entitled time domain capacitive
field detector. the complaint seeks unspecified damages and other relief. on may11,
2006, quantum filed an amended complaint adding cypress
semiconductor/microsystems,inc. as a defendant. on july31, 2006,
the company filed an answer denying all material allegations and asserting
numerous affirmative defenses and also filed counterclaims for non-infringment
and invalidity. on november30, 2006 plaintiff filed a reply to the
companys counterclaims and a more definite statement.
st-germain v. apple
canada,inc.
plaintiff filed this case
in montreal, quebec, canada, on august5, 2005, seeking authorization to
institute a class action for the refund by the company of the canadian private
copying levy that was applied to the ipod purchase price in quebec between december12,
2003 and december14, 2004 but later declared invalid by the canadian
court. the company has completed a refund program for this levy. a class
certification hearing took place january13, 2006. on february24,
2006, the court granted class certification and notice was published during the
last week of march2006. discovery is closed and the case is prepared for
trial, which the company anticipates will take place in 2007.
tse v. apple
computer,inc. et al.
plaintiff ho keung tse
filed this action against the company and other defendants on august5,
2005 in the united states district court for the district of maryland alleging
infringement by the company of u.s. patent number 6,665,797 entitled
protection of software again [sic] against unauthorized use. the complaint
seeks unspecified damages and other relief. the company filed an answer on
october31, 2005 denying all material allegations and asserting numerous
affirmative defenses. on october28, 2005, the company and the other
defendants filed a motion to transfer the case to the northern district of
california, which was granted on august31, 2006.
tucker v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
purported class action on july21, 2006 in the united states district
court for the northern district of california alleging various claims including
alleged unlawful tying of music and videos purchased on the itunes store with
the purchase of ipods and vice versa and unlawful acquisition or maintenance of
monopoly market power. the complaint alleges violations of 1 and 2 of the
sherman act (15 u.s.c. 1 and 2), california business& professions
code 16700 et seq. (the cartwright act), california business&
professions code 17200 (unfair competition), and the california consumer legal
remedies act. plaintiff seeks unspecified damages and other relief. on november3,
2006, the company filed a motion to dismiss the complaint, which was heard on november20,
2006. on december 20, 2006, the court denied the motion to dismiss.
union federale des
consummateurs - que choisir v. apple computer france s..r.l. and itunes
s..r.l.
plaintiff, a consumer
association in france, filed this complaint on february9, 2005 alleging
that the above-listed entities are violating consumer law by (1)omitting
to mention that the ipod is allegedly not compatible with music from online
music services other than the itunes store and that the music from the itunes
store is only compatible with the ipod and (2)allegedly tying the sales
of ipods to the itunes store and vice versa. plaintiff seeks damages,
injunctive relief and other relief. the first hearing on the case took place on
may24, 2005. the companys response to the complaint was served on november8,
2005. plaintiffs responsive pleading was filed on february10, 2006. the
company filed a reply on june6, 2006 and ufc filed a response on september19,
2006.
vitt v. apple computer,inc.
plaintiff filed this
purported class action on november7, 2006 in the united states district
court for the central district of california on behalf of a purported
nationwide class of all purchasers of the ibook g4 alleging that the computers
logic board fails at an abnormally high rate. the complaint alleges violations
of california business& professions code 17200 (unfair competition)
and california business& professions code 17500 (false advertising).
plaintiff seeks unspecified damages and other relief. the companys response to
the complaint is not yet due.
vogel v. jobs et
al.
plaintiff filed this purported class action on august24,
2006, in the united states district court for the northern district of
california against the company and certain of the companys current and former
officers and directors alleging improper backdating of stock option grants to
maximize certain defendants profits, failing to properly account for those
grants and issuing false financial statements. the lawsuit purports to be
brought on behalf of all purchasers of the companys stock from december1,
2005 through august11, 2006, and asserts claims under sections 10(b)and
14(a)of the securities exchange act as well as control person claims. a
motion for appointment of lead plaintiff and counsel was scheduled to be heard
on december4, 2006 but was taken off calendar when the case was
re-assigned to the hon. jeremy fogel. the motion therefore is still pending. defendants
responses to the complaint are not yet due.
wimmer v. apple
computer,inc. (originally
filed as tomczak v. apple computer,inc. on october19, 2005 in the united states district court for the
northern district of california, san jose division; amended complaint filed october26,
2005); moschella, et al., v. apple computer,inc. (filed october26, 2005 united states district
court for the northern district of california, san jose division);
calado, et al. v. apple computer,inc. (filed
october26, 2005, los angeles county superior court); kahan, et
al., v. apple computer,inc. (filed october31,
2005, united states district court for the southern district of new york);
jennings, et al., v. apple computer,inc. (filed
november4, 2005, united states district court for the northern district
of california, san jose division); rappel v. apple computer,inc. (filed on november23, 2005, united states
district court for the district of new jersey); mayo v. apple computer,inc.
(filed on december7, 2005, united states
district court for the middle district of louisiana); valencia v. apple
computer,inc. (filed on december22,
2005, united states district court for
the northern district of
california); williamson v. apple computer,inc. (filed on december29, 2005, united states
district court for the middle district of louisiana); sioson v. apple
computer,inc. (filed on february9,
2006, san mateo county superior court; first amended complaint filed march16,
2006)
these federal and state court complaints allege that
the companys ipod nano was defectively designed so that it scratches
excessively during normal use, rendering the screen unreadable. the federal
actions were coordinated in the united states district court for the northern
district of california and assigned to the hon. ronald whyte pursuant to an april17,
2006, order of the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation. plaintiffs filed
a first consolidated and amended master complaint on september21, 2006, alleging
violations of california and other states consumer protection and warranty
laws and claiming unjust enrichment. the master complaint alleges two putative
plaintiff classes: (1)all u.s. residents (excluding california residents)
who purchased an ipod nano that was not manufactured or designed using
processes necessary to ensure normal resistance to scratching of the screen;
and (2)all ipod nano purchasers other than u.s. residents who purchased
an ipod nano that was not manufactured or designed using processes necessary to
ensure normal resistance to scratching of the screen. pursuant to stipulation,
the wimmer, valencia, and rappel federal complaints were dismissed without
prejudice and the mayo and williamson complaints were administratively closed
without prejudice. the company answered the master complaint on november20,
2006.
the two california state actions were coordinated on may4,
2006, and assigned to the hon. west in los angeles superior court. plaintiffs
filed a consolidated amended classaction complaint on june8, 2006,
alleging violations of california state consumer protection, unfair
competition, false advertising, and warranty laws and claiming unjust
enrichment. the consolidated complaint alleges a putative plaintiff class of
all california residents who own an ipod nano containing a manufacturing defect
that results in the nano being susceptible to excessive scratching. the company
answered the consolidated amended complaint on october6, 2006.
two similar complaints, carpentier v. apple canada,inc., and royer-brennan v. apple computer,inc. and apple canada,inc. were
filed in montreal, quebec, canada on october27, 2005 and november9,
2005, respectively, seeking authorization to institute class actions on behalf
of ipod nano purchasers in quebec. the royer-brennan file was stayed in may2006
in favor of the carpentier file, in whichapples preliminary motion for
leave to file evidence will be heard on december18, 2006. no further
dates have been set. a similar complaint, mund v. apple canada inc.
and apple computer,inc., was filed in ontario, canada on january9,
2006 seeking authorization to institute a class action on behalf of ipod nano
purchasers in canada. in the two quebec class actions, a motion to stay the
royer-brennan case is stayed in favor of the previously filed carpentier case. in
the ontario action, apple canadainc. and apple computer, inc., have
servednotices of intent to defend. on december18, 2006, plaintiffs
counsel advised that a substitution of attorneys will occur, most likely in january2007.
the file is now stayed, and the companys motion to examine petitioner and for
leave to file evidence at certification will be set after the new counsel
appears.
item 4. submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
no matters were submitted to a vote of security
holders during the fourth quarter of the companys fiscal year ended september30,
2006.
partii
item 5. market for registrants common equity, related
shareholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the companys common stock
is traded on the over-the-counter market and is quoted on the
nasdaq global select market under the symbol aapl and on the frankfurt stock
exchange under the symbol apcd.
price range of
common stock
the price range per share of common stock presented
below represents the highest and lowest sales prices for the companys common
stock on the nasdaq global select market during each quarter of the two most
recent fiscal years.
on february28,
2005, the company effected a two-for-one stock split to shareholders of record
as of february18, 2005. all share and per share information has been
retroactively adjusted to reflect the stocksplit.
fourth quarter
third quarter
second quarter
first quarter
fiscal 2006 price
range per common share
$
77.78-$50.16
$
73.80-$55.41
$
86.40-$57.67
$
75.46-$47.87
fiscal 2005 price
range per common share
$
53.20-$36.37
$
43.74-$34.13
$
45.06-$31.58
$
34.22-$18.65
holders
as of december13,
2006, there were 29,317 shareholders of record.
dividends
the company did not
declare or pay cash dividends in either 2006 or 2005. the company anticipates
that, for the foreseeable future, it will retain any earnings for use in the
operation of its business.
securities
authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans
the description of equity
compensation plans required by regulation s-k, item 201(d)is incorporated
herein by reference to partiii, item 12 of this form10-k.
purchases of equity
securities by the issuer and affiliated purchasers
none.
item 6. selected
financial data
the consolidated balance sheet as of september24,
2005 and the consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal years ended september24,
2005 and september25, 2004 have been restated as set forth in the 2006 form10-k.
the data for the consolidated balance sheets as of september2004, 2003,
and 2002 and the consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal years
ended september2003 and 2002 have been restated to reflect the impact of
the stock-based compensation adjustments, but such restated data have not been
audited and is derived from the books and records of the company. the information
set forth below is not necessarily indicative of results of future operations,
and should be read in conjunction with item 7, managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations and the consolidated
financial statements and related notes thereto included in item 8 of this form10-k
to fully understand factors that may affect the comparability of the
information presented below. the information presented in the following tables
has been adjusted to reflect the restatement of the companys financial
results, which is more fully described in the explanatory note immediately
preceding parti, item 1 and in note 2, restatement of consolidated
financial statements in notes to consolidated financial statements of this form10-k.
the company has not
amended its previously-filed annual reports on form10-k or
quarterly reports on form10-q for the periods affected by this
restatement. the financial information that has been previously filed or
otherwise reported for these periods is superseded by the information in this
annual report on form10-k, and the financial statements and related
financial information contained in such previously-filed reports should no
longer be relied upon.
fivefiscalyearsendedseptember30,2006(inmillions,exceptshareandpershareamounts)
as
restated(1)
as
restated(1)
as
restated(2)
as
restated(2)
net sales
$
19,315
$
13,931
$
8,279
$
6,207
$
5,742
net income
$
1,989
$
1,328
$
$
$
earnings per
common share:
basic
$
2.36
$
1.64
$
0.36
$
0.08
$
0.06
diluted
$
2.27
$
1.55
$
0.34
$
0.08
$
0.06
cash dividends
declared per common share
$
$
$
$
$
shares used in
computing earnings per share (in thousands):
basic
844,058
808,439
743,180
721,262
710,044
diluted
877,526
856,878
774,776
723,352
721,445
cash, cash
equivalents, and short-term investments
$
10,110
$
8,261
$
5,464
$
4,566
$
4,337
total assets
$
17,205
$
11,516
$
8,039
$
6,817
$
6,305
long-term
debt (including current
maturities)
$
$
$
$
$
total liabilities
$
7,221
$
4,088
$
2,976
$
2,594
$
2,205
shareholders equity
$
9,984
$
7,428
$
5,063
$
4,223
$
4,100
net gains before
taxes related to the companys non-current debt and equity investments of $4
million and $10 million were recognized in 2004 and 2003, respectively. a net
loss before taxes related to the companys non-current debt and equity
investments of $42 million was recognized in 2002. net charges related to
company restructuring actions of $23 million, $26 million, and $30 million were
recognized in 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively. in 2003, settlement of the
companys forward stock purchase agreement resulted in a gain of $6 million.
net income during 2005 benefited by $81 million from the reversal of certain
tax contingency reserves and adjustments to net deferred tax assets, including
reductions to valuation allowances. favorable cumulative-effect type
adjustments from the adoption of new accounting standards, net of taxes of $1
million was recognized in 2003.
(1) see the explanatory
note immediately preceding parti, item 1 and note 2, restatement of
consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
(2) the selected financial
data for 2003 and 2002 has been restated to reflect adjustments related to
stock-based compensation expense and the associated tax impact as further
described in the explanatory note immediately preceding parti, item 1
of this form10-k. as a result of these adjustments, net income was
reduced by $12 million and $23 million for the years ended september27,
2003 and september28, 2002, respectively as follows:
fiscalyearendedseptember27,
fiscalyearendedseptember28,
as
reported
adjustments
as
restated
as
reported
adjustments
as
restated
net sales
$
6,207
$
$
6,207
$
5,742
$
$
5,742
cost of sales
4,499
4,500
4,139
4,142
gross margin
1,708
(1
)
1,707
1,603
(3
)
1,600
total operating expenses
1,709
1,724
1,586
1,612
operating income (loss)
(1
)
(16
)
(17
)
(29
)
(12
)
income before accounting
changes
(12
)
(23
)
cumulative effects of
accounting changes, net of income taxes
net income
$
$
(12
)
$
$
$
(23
)
$
earnings (loss) per
common share before accounting changes:
basic
$
0.09
$
(0.01
)
$
0.08
$
0.09
$
(0.03
)
$
0.06
diluted
$
0.09
$
(0.01
)
$
0.08
$
0.09
$
(0.03
)
$
0.06
earnings per common
share:
basic
$
0.10
$
(0.02
)
$
0.08
$
0.09
$
(0.03
)
$
0.06
diluted
$
0.09
$
(0.01
)
$
0.08
$
0.09
$
(0.03
)
$
0.06
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations
this section and
other parts of this form10-k contain forward-looking
statements that involve risks and uncertainties. forward-looking statements can
also be identified by words such as anticipates, expects, believes, plans,
predicts, and similar terms. forward-looking statements are not guarantees of
future performance and the companys actual results may differ significantly
from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. factors
that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those
discussed in the subsection entitled risk factors above. the following
discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto included in item 8 of this form10-k.
all information presented herein is based on the companys fiscal calendar.
unless otherwise stated, references in this report to particular years or
quarters refer to the companys fiscal years ended in septemberand the
associated quarters of those fiscal years. the company assumes no obligation to
revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as
required by law.
the following information
has been adjusted to reflect the restatement of the companys financial
results, which is more fully described in the explanatory note immediately
preceding parti, item 1 and in note2, restatement of consolidated
financial statements in notes to consolidated financial statements of this form10-k.
the net of tax impact of the adjustments, which amounted to $4 million in 2006,
was recorded by the company in its fourth quarter of 2006. the net of tax
impact of the restatements on the companys results of operations amounted to
$7 million and $10 million in 2005 and 2004,
respectively. the impact
of these adjustments was not significant to the companys operating results,
trends, or liquidity for the annual or quarterly periods in 2006, 2005, and
2004.
executive overview
the company designs, manufactures, and markets
personal computers and related software, services, peripherals, and networking
solutions. the company also designs, develops, and markets a line of portable
digital music players along with related accessories and services including the
online distribution of third-party music, audio books, music videos, short
films, television shows, movies, and ipod games. the companys products and
services include the macintosh line of desktop and notebook computers, the ipod
line of portable digital music players, the xserve server and xserve raid
storage products, a portfolio of consumer and professional software
applications, the mac os x operating system, the itunes store, a portfolio of
peripherals that support and enhance the macintosh and ipod product lines, and
a variety of other service and support offerings. the company sells its
products worldwide through its online stores, its retail stores, its direct
sales force, and third-party wholesalers, resellers, and value-added resellers.
in addition, the company sells a variety of third-party macintosh and ipod
compatible products including application software, printers, storage devices,
speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and supplies through its
online and retail stores. the company sells to education, consumer, creative
professional, business, and government customers. a further description of the
companys products may be found in parti, item 1 of this form10-k
under the heading business.
the company believes that for both professionals and
consumers the personal computer has become the center of an evolving digital
lifestyle by integrating and enhancing the utility of advanced digital devices
such as the companys ipods, digital video and still cameras, televisions, cd
and dvd players, cellular phones, personal digital assistants, and other
consumer electronic devices. the attributes of the personal computer that
enable this functionality include a high-quality user interface, easy access to
relatively inexpensive data storage, the ability to run complex applications,
and the ability to connect easily to a wide variety of other digital devices
and to the internet. the company is the only participant in the personal
computer industry that controls the design and development of the entire
personal computerfrom the hardware and operating system to sophisticated
applications. this, along with its products innovative industrial designs,
intuitive ease-of-use, built-in graphics, multimedia and networking
capabilities, uniquely positions the company to offer innovative integrated
digital lifestyle solutions.
the companys business strategy leverages its ability,
through the design and development of its own operating system, hardware, and many
software applications and technologies, to bring to its customers around the
world compelling new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless
integration, and innovative industrial design.
the company participates in several highly competitive
markets, including personal computers with its macintosh line of computers,
consumer electronics with its ipod line of portable digital music players, and
distribution of third-party digital content through its online itunes store. while
the company is widely recognized as an innovator in the personal computer and
consumer electronic markets as well as a leader in the emerging market for
distribution of digital content, these are all highly competitive markets that
are subject to aggressive pricing and increased competition. to remain
competitive, the company believes increased investment in research and
development (r&d) and marketing and advertising is necessary to maintain
and extend its position in the markets where it competes. the companys r&d
spending is focused on delivering timely updates and enhancements to its
existing line of personal computers, displays, operating systems, software
applications, and portable digital music players; developing new digital
lifestyle consumer and professional software applications; and investing in new
product areas such as rack-mount servers, raid storage systems, and wireless
technologies. the company also believes investment in marketing and advertising
programs is critical to increasing product and brand awareness.
in june2005, the company announced its plan to
begin using intel microprocessors in its computers. during 2006, the company
introduced new intel-based models of the macbook pro, macbook, mac pro, imac,
and mac mini computers. the companys transition to intel microprocessors for
macintosh systems was completed in august2006, and its transition for
xserve was completed in november2006. the macbook pro, macbook, mac pro,
imac, and mac mini feature mac os x version 10.4 tiger, ilife 06, and the
companys new translation technology, rosetta, which allows most powerpc-based
macintosh applications to run on intel-based macintosh computers. there are
potential risks and uncertainties that may occur due to this transition, which
are further discussed in item 1a under the heading risk factors.
the company utilizes a variety of direct and indirect
distribution channels. the company believes sales of its innovative and
differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can
convey the value of the hardware, software, and peripheral integration,
demonstrate the unique digital lifestyle solutions that are available only on
macintosh computers, and demonstrate the compatibility of the macintosh with
the windows platform and networks. the company further believes providing a
high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting
and retaining customers. to ensure a high-quality buying experience for its
products in which service and education are emphasized, the company has
expanded and improved its distribution capabilities by opening its own retail
stores in the u.s. and internationally. the company had 165 stores open as of september30,
2006.
the company also staffs selected third-party stores
with the companys own employees to improve the buying experience through
reseller channels. the company has deployed apple employees and contractors in
reseller locations around the world including the u.s., europe, japan, and
australia. the company also sells to customers directly through its online
stores around the world.
to improve access to the
ipod product line, the company has significantly expanded the number of
distribution points where ipods are sold. the ipod product line can be
purchased in certain department stores, member-only warehouse stores, large
retail chains, and specialty retail stores, as well as through the channels
listed above.
critical accounting
policies and estimates
the preparation of financial statements and related
disclosures in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles
and the companys discussion and analysis of its financial condition and
results of operations require the companys management to make judgments,
assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated
financial statements and accompanying notes. note 1 of the notes to
consolidated financial statements of this form10-k describes the
significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the
companys consolidated financial statements. management bases its estimates on
historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be
reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for
making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. actual
results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material.
management believes the
companys critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to
revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuation and
inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, stock-based compensation, and
income taxes. management believes these policies to be critical because they
are both important to the portrayal of the companys financial condition and
results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about
matters that are inherently uncertain. the companys senior management has
reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the
audit and finance committee of the companys board of directors.
revenue recognition
net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale
of hardware, software, peripherals, digital content, and service and support
contracts. the company recognizes revenue pursuant to applicable accounting
standards, including american institute of certified
public accountants statement of position (sop) no.97-2, software revenue recognition, as amended, and sec staff
accounting bulletin (sab) no.104, revenue recognition.
the company recognizes revenue when persuasive
evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is
fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. product is considered
delivered to the customer once it has been shipped, and title and risk of loss
have been transferred. for most of the companys product sales, these criteria
are met at the time the product is shipped. for online sales to individuals,
for some sales to education customers in the u.s., and for certain other sales,
the company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the
company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. if
at the outset of an arrangement the company determines the arrangement fee is
not, or is presumed not to be, fixed or determinable, revenue is deferred and
subsequently recognized as amounts become due and payable and all other
criteria for revenue recognition have been met.
the company records
reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and
for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and
other sales programs and volume-based incentives. for transactions involving
price protection, the company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to
be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably
estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. if
refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable
estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. for customer incentive
programs, the estimated cost of these programs is recognized at the later of
the date at which the company has sold the product or the date at which the
program is offered. the company also records reductions to revenue for expected
future product returns based on the companys historical experience. future
market conditions and product transitions may require the company to increase
customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations
that could result in additional reductions to revenue at the time such programs
are offered. additionally, certain customer incentive programs require
management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the
incentive based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions
of particular incentive programs. if a greater than estimated proportion of
customers redeem such incentives, the company would be required to record
additional reductions to revenue, which could have a material adverse impact on
the companys results of operations.
allowance for
doubtful accounts
the company distributes its products through
third-party distributors and resellers and directly to certain education,
consumer, and commercial customers. the company generally does not require
collateral from its customers; however, the company will require collateral in
certain instances to limit credit risk. in addition, when possible, the company
does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance
for certain customers in latin america, europe, asia, and australia and by
arranging with third-party financing companies to provide flooring arrangements
and other loan and lease programs to the companys direct customers. these
credit-financing arrangements are directly between the third-party financing
company and the end customer. as such, the company generally does not assume
any recourse or credit risk sharing related to any of these arrangements.
however, considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral,
third-party flooring arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the
companys distribution and retail channel partners.
the
allowance for doubtful accounts is based on managements assessment of
the collectibility of specific customer accounts and includes consideration of
the credit worthiness and financial condition of those specific customers. the company records an allowance to reduce
the specific receivables to the amount that is reasonably believed to be
collectible. the company also records an
allowance for all other trade receivables based on multiple factors including historical
experience with bad debts, the general economic
environment, the financial
condition of the companys distribution channels, and the aging of such receivables. if there is a deterioration of a major
customers financial condition, if the company becomes aware of additional
information related to the credit worthiness of a major customer, or if future
actual default rates on trade receivables in general differ from those
currently anticipated, the company may have to adjust its allowance for
doubtful accounts, which would affect earnings in the period the adjustments
were made.
inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments
the company must order components for its products and
build inventory in advance of product shipments. the company records a
write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party
products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated
demand or net realizable value. the company performs a detailed review of
inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand
forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales
levels, and component cost trends. the personal computer and consumer
electronic industries are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product
and component obsolescence and demand changes. if future demand or market
conditions for the companys products are less favorable than forecasted or if
unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component
inventory, the company may be required to record additional write-downs which
would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the write-downs were
recorded.
the company accrues
reserves for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have
been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. consistent with industry
practice, the company acquires components through a combination of purchase
orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand
information. these commitments typically cover the companys requirements for
periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. if there is an abrupt and substantial
decline in demand for one or more of the companys products or an unanticipated
change in technological requirements for any of the companys products, the
company may be required to record additional reserves for cancellation fees
that would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the cancellation
fees are identified.
warranty costs
the company provides currently for the estimated cost
for hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is
recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical
and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that
are outside of the companys typical experience. each quarter, the company
reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty
liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to
warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. if actual product failure rates or repair costs
differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be
required and could negatively affect the companys results of
operations.
the company periodically
provides updates to its applications and system software to maintain the
softwares compliance with specifications. the estimated cost to develop such
updates is accounted for as warranty costs that are recognized at the time
related software revenue is recognized. factors considered in determining
appropriate accruals related to such updates include the number of units
delivered, the number of updates expected to occur, and the historical cost and
estimated future cost of the resources necessary to develop these updates.
stock-based
compensation
the company accounts for stock-based compensation in
accordance with sfas no.123r. under the provisions of sfas no.123r,
stock-based compensation cost is estimated at the grant date based on the awards
fair value as calculated by the black-scholes-merton (bsm) option-pricing
model and is recognized as expense ratably over the requisite service period. the
bsm model requires various highly
judgmental assumptions including volatility,
forfeiture rates, and expected option life. if any of the assumptions used in
the bsm model change significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ
materially in the future from that recorded in the current period.
in connection with the
companys restatement of its consolidated financial statements, the company has
applied judgment in choosing whether to revise measurement dates for prior
option grants. information regarding the restatement, including ranges of
possible additional stock-based compensation expense if other measurement dates
had been selected for certain grants, is set forth in the explanatory note
immediately preceding parti, item 1 and in note 2, restatement of
consolidated financial statements in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
income taxes
the company records a tax provision for the
anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. in
accordance with sfas no.109, accounting for income
taxes, the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset
and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are
recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between
the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for
operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. deferred tax assets and
liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to
taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected
to be realized or settled. the company records a valuation allowance to reduce
deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be
realized.
management believes it is more likely than not that
forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of
certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred
tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax
assets. in the event that all or part of the net deferred tax assets are
determined not to be realizable in the future, an adjustment to the valuation
allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made.
similarly, if the company subsequently realizes deferred tax assets that were
previously determined to be unrealizable, the respective valuation allowance
would be reversed, resulting in a positive adjustment to earnings in the period
such determination is made. in addition, the calculation of tax liabilities
involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the
application of complex tax laws. resolution of these uncertainties in a manner
inconsistent with managements expectations could have a material impact on the
companys results of operations and financial position.
net sales
net
sales and macintosh unit sales by operating segment and net sales and unit
sales by product follow (net sales in millions and unit sales in thousands):
september30,
september24,
september25,
change
change
net sales by operating segment:
americas net sales
$
9,307
%
$
6,590
%
$
4,019
europe net sales
4,094
%
3,073
%
1,799
japan net sales
1,208
%
%
retail net sales
3,359
%
2,350
%
1,185
other segments net sales (a)
1,347
%
%
total net sales
$
19,315
%
$
13,931
%
$
8,279
unit
sales by operating segment:
americas macintosh unit sales
2,432
%
2,184
%
1,682
europe macintosh unit sales
1,346
%
1,138
%
japan macintosh unit sales
(3
)%
%
retail macintosh unit sales
%
%
other segments macintosh unit sales(a)
%
%
total macintosh unit sales
5,303
%
4,534
%
3,290
net
sales by product:
desktops (b)
$
3,319
(3
)%
$
3,436
%
$
2,373
portables (c)
4,056
%
2,839
%
2,550
total macintosh net sales
7,375
%
6,275
%
4,923
ipod
7,676
%
4,540
%
1,306
other music related products and services(d)
1,885
%
%
peripherals and other hardware (e)
1,100
(2
)%
1,126
%
software, service, and other sales (f)
1,279
%
1,091
%
total net sales
$
19,315
%
$
13,931
%
$
8,279
unit
sales by product:
desktops (b)
2,434
(3
)%
2,520
%
1,625
portables (c)
2,869
%
2,014
%
1,665
total macintosh unit sales
5,303
%
4,534
%
3,290
net sales per macintosh unit sold (g)
$
1,391
%
$
1,384
(7
)%
$
1,496
ipod unit sales
39,409
%
22,497
%
4,416
net sales per ipod
unit sold (h)
$
(3
)%
$
(32
)%
$
notes:
(a) other segments include asia pacific and filemaker.
(b) includes imac, emac, mac mini, mac pro, power mac, and
xserve product lines.
(c) includes macbook, ibook, macbook pro, and powerbook
product lines.
(d) consists of itunes store sales, ipod services, and
apple-branded and third-party ipod accessories.
(e) includes sales of apple-branded and third-party
displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware
accessories.
(f) includes sales of apple-branded operating system,
application software, third-party software, applecare, and internet services.
(g) derived by dividing total macintosh net sales by total
macintosh unit sales.
(h) derived by dividing total ipod net sales
by total ipod unit sales.
fiscal year 2006 versus 2005
net sales during
2006 increased 39% or $5.4 billion from 2005. this increase was due in part to
the fact that 2006 spanned 53 weeks while 2005 spanned 52 weeks. several other
factors contributed to these increases including the following:
net sales of ipods increased $3.1 billion or 69% during 2006
compared to 2005. unit sales of ipods totaled 39.4 million in 2006, which
represents an increase of 75% from 22.5 million ipod units sold in 2005. strong
ipod sales during 2006 reflected significant sales of both the hard-drive based ipod that supports video,
first introduced in octoberof 2005 and the ipod nano, introduced in september2005,
as well as continued expansion of ipod distribution points. during 2006,
the net sales per ipod unit sold decreased by 3% compared to 2005 primarily due
to an overall decrease in average selling prices for all ipods as well as a
shift in product mix to the ipod nano. from the introduction of the ipod in
2002 through 2006, the company has sold approximately 68 million ipods.
macintosh net sales
increased $1.1 billion or 18% during 2006 compared to 2005. macintosh unit
sales increased by 769,000 units or 17% during 2006 compared to 2005. these increases were mainly due to strong demand
for the intel-based macbook and macbook pro systems and reflect a shift in
product mix to portable products in all of the companys operating segments. net
sales and unit sales of the companys portable products increased 43% and 42%,
respectively, during 2006 compared to 2005. macintosh desktop net sales and
unit sales both decreased by 3% during 2006 compared to 2005. the decrease in
sales of the companys macintosh desktops was due to declines in sales of the
companys professional-oriented desktop products. the company believes the
decline in the companys professional-oriented desktop products was due to
customers delaying purchases of such products in anticipation of the release of
the intel-based mac pro, which did not begin shipping until august2006,
and updated software applications capable of running on intel-based macintosh
computers, and the trend toward portable computers. a slight increase of 1%
during 2006 in net sales per macintosh unit sold was due to a shift in mix to
higher-priced portable products, partially offset by price reductions on
certain macintosh systems.
other
music related products and services consists of sales associated with the
itunes store and ipod services and accessories. net sales of other music
related products and services increased $986 million or 110% during 2006
compared to 2005. the increase was primarily due to increased net sales from
the itunes store and apple-branded and third-party ipod accessories and
services. the increase in sales from the itunes store stemmed from significant
growth in u.s. sales and the opening of the itunes store in japan during august2005
and australia during october2005. the increased sales from the itunes
store were also attributable to the availability of videos, television shows,
and feature-length movie downloads.
net sales of software,
service, and other sales increased $188 million or 17% during 2006 compared to
2005. the growth was primarily attributable to increased net sales of applecare protection plan (app) extended service
and support contracts and application software, partially offset by a
decrease in sales of mac os x. mac os x
sales were particularly high in 2005 due to the release of mac os x tiger in april2005.
offsetting the
favorable factors discussed above, the companys net sales during 2006 were
negatively impacted by the following:
net sales of peripherals and other hardware declined $26 million
or 2% compared to 2005 primarily due to price decreases and a decrease in net
sales of displays relating to a shift in mix from desktop to portable systems. the
decrease in net sales of displays for 2006 is consistent with the overall
decrease in unit sales of macintosh professional desktop systems.
fiscal year 2005 versus 2004
during 2005, net
sales increased 68% or $5.7 billion from 2004. several factors contributed
favorably to net sales during 2005:
net sales of ipods rose $3.2 billion or 248% during 2005 compared
to 2004. unit sales of ipods totaled 22.5 million in 2005, which represented an
increase of 409% from the 4.4 million ipod units sold in 2004. strong sales of
ipods during 2005 were experienced in all of the companys operating segments
and was driven by strong demand for the ipod
shuffle introduced in january2005, the release of an updated version of
the ipod mini in february2005, the release of the ipod nano in september2005,
and expansion of the ipods distribution network. net sales per ipod
unit sold decreased 32% primarily due to the introduction of the lower priced
ipod shuffle in january2005 and ipod mini pricing reductions in february2005.
from the introduction of the ipod in 2002 through 2005, the company had sold
approximately 28 million ipods.
net
sales of other music related products and services increased $621 million or
223% during 2005 compared to 2004. the company experienced strong growth in
sales of ipod services and accessories consistent with the increase in overall
ipod unit sales for 2005. the increased sales from the itunes store were
primarily due to substantial growth of net sales in the u.s. and expansion in
europe, canada, and japan.
total
macintosh net sales increased $1.4 billion or 27% during 2005 compared to 2004.
unit sales of macintosh systems increased 1.2 million units or 38% during 2005
compared to 2004. the increases in macintosh net sales and unit sales related
primarily to strong demand for the companys desktop products, which was
experienced in all of the companys operating segments. the company believes
that the success of the ipod had a positive impact on macintosh net sales by
introducing new customers to the companys other products. desktop demand was
stimulated in 2005 due to the imac g5 and the introduction of the mac mini in january2005.
net sales and unit sales of desktop products increased 45% and 55%,
respectively, during 2005 compared to 2004. macintosh net sales and unit sales
also included sales of the companys portable products, which increased 11% and
21%, respectively, compared to 2004.
net sales per macintosh
unit sold decreased 7% on a year-over-year basis. the decrease was the result
of changes in the overall unit mix towards relatively lower-priced consumer
products, specifically the impact of the mac mini product, and desktop and
portable price reductions. this decrease was partially offset by an increase in
the proportion of direct sales.
net
sales of peripherals and other hardware rose by 18% during 2005 compared to
2004 primarily due to an increase in net sales of displays and other computer
accessories. net sales of other
hardware include airport cards and base stations, xserve raid storage, isight
digital video cameras, and third-party hardware products.
net sales of software, service and other sales
rose $270 million or 33% during 2005 compared to 2004. this growth was
primarily attributable to increased net sales in app extended service and
support contracts, driven primarily by higher associated macintosh computer
sales. additionally, the company experienced increases in net sales of .mac
internet service, professional and consumer applications, third-party software,
and mac os x that was primarily attributable to the release of version 10.4
tiger in april2005.
segment operating
performance
the company manages its
business primarily on a geographic basis. the companys reportable operating
segments are comprised of the americas, europe, japan, and retail. the
americas, europe, and japan reportable segments do not include activities
related to the retail segment. the americas segment includes both north and
south america. the europe segment includes european countries as well as the
middle east and africa.
the retail segment operated apple-owned retail stores in the u.s., canada,
japan, and the u.k. during 2006. each reportable geographic operating segment
provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. further
information regarding the companys operating segments may be found in note 11,
segment information and geographic data in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
americas
during 2006, net sales in the americas segment
increased $2.7 billion, or 41%, compared to 2005. the main factors for this
increase were significant increases in net sales of ipods, other music related
products and services, macintosh portable systems, and app. sales of ipods
increased primarily due to the introduction of the updated ipod with
video-playing capabilities in october2005 and the ipod nano during september2005.
the increase in other music related products and services was due to increases
in sales of apple-branded and third-party ipod accessories and sales from the
itunes store. the increase in sales of macintosh portable systems in the
americas was due to strong sales of the intel-based macbook and macbook pro
during 2006. the overall increase in net sales was partially offset by a
decline in net sales of desktops, displays, and mac os x. the decrease in
desktop products and displays net sales reflects the overall shift in product
mix toward portable macintosh systems. mac os x sales decreased from 2005 since
the company has not released a new version of mac os x since tiger began
shipping in april2005. during 2006, the americas segment represented
approximately 48% of the companys total net sales as compared to 47% in the
same period of 2005. during 2006, u.s. education channel net sales and
macintosh unit sales increased by 13% and 11%, respectively, compared to 2005.
net sales from the higher education market grew 22% during 2006 compared to
2005 due to strong sales of macintosh portable products and ipods. net sales
were relatively flat for k-12 due to continued budget constraints.
during 2005, net sales in
the americas segment grew 64% or $2.6 billion compared to 2004. the increase in
net sales during 2005 was primarily attributable to the significant
year-over-year increase in ipod sales, sales of other music related products
and services, and strong sales of desktop and portable macintosh systems. this
increase was partially offset by a shift in sales to the retail segment, which
had 117 stores in the u.s. and canada as of the end of 2005. macintosh unit
sales also increased by 30% in 2005 compared to 2004, driven primarily by
strong sales of desktop systems largely attributable to strong sales from the
updated imac, which began shipping in september2004, and the mac mini,
which was introduced in january2005. during 2005 and 2004, the americas
segment represented approximately 47% and 49%, respectively, of the companys
total net sales and represented approximately 48% and 51%, respectively, of
total macintosh unit sales. the company experienced an increase in both u.s.
education channel net sales and unit sales of 21% for 2005 compared to 2004.
strength in higher education sales related primarily to strong imac and
portable system shipments. this strength drove year-over-year growth in net
sales of 32% for the higher education channel during 2005. despite challenges
in the k-12 market from continued budget constraints and competitive
pressures, the companys k-12 net sales grew year-over-year by 11% during
2005 due to increased ibook sales and 1:1 education sales.
europe
europe segment net sales increased $1.0 billion or 33%
during 2006 compared to 2005. consistent with the americas segment, these
increases were a result of strong growth in ipod sales, other music related
products and services, and macintosh portable systems. sales of ipods increased
primarily due to the introduction of the updated ipod with video-playing
capabilities in october2005 and the ipod nano during september2005.
the increase in other music related products and services was due to increases
in sales of apple-branded and third-party ipod accessories and sales from the
itunes store. the increase in sales of portable systems in europe was due to
strong sales of the intel-based macbook and macbook pro that were introduced
during 2006. in addition, europe also reported increased sales in app related
to the increase in macintosh unit sales. these increases were partially offset
by a decrease in desktop and
macosx net sales during 2006 compared to
2005. the decrease in desktop net sales was due to the shift in product mix toward
portable macintosh systems. mac os x sales have decreased from 2005 since the
company has not released a new version of mac os x since tiger began shipping
in april2005.
during 2005, net sales in
the europe segment grew $1.3 billion or 71% from 2004. total macintosh unit
sales in europe also experienced growth during the current year by increasing
47% in 2005 compared to 2004. consistent with the americas segment, europe
experienced strong net sales of desktop products, ipod, other music related
products and services, and software and service sales. demand in europe during
2005 was particularly strong for the companys desktop computers, which
experienced a year-over-year increase of 56% from 2004. similar to the results
of the companys other segments, net sales of ipods, peripherals and software
were strong in 2005.
japan
japans net sales increased $288 million or 31% during
2006 compared to 2005. the japan segment experienced increased net sales in
ipods, macintosh portable products,
and other music related products and services. consistent with the companys
other segments, japan experienced increases in sales of ipods due to the
introduction of the ipod with video-playing capabilities and the ipod nano in octoberand
septemberof 2005, respectively. japan also experienced strong sales of
the intel-based macbook and increased sales from the itunes store. these
increases were partially offset by decreases in net sales of macintosh desktop
products, displays, and mac os x. the decreases in desktop products and
displays reflect the overall shift in product mix toward portable macintosh
systems. mac os x sales have decreased from
2005 since the company has not released a new version of mac os x since tiger
began shipping in april2005. total macintosh unit sales during
2006 remained relatively flat compared to 2005. the relatively flat growth in
macintosh unit sales is partially attributable to japans overall slow consumer
pc market growth. the company is continuing to evaluate ways to improve its
indirect and direct channel sales in japan.
japans net sales and
macintosh unit sales were up 36% and 8%, respectively, during 2005 compared to
2004. japan experienced increased net sales in desktop products, ipod, and
other music related products and services. desktop net sales and unit sales
increased by 31% and 41%, respectively, and ipod sales increased by 220% during
2005 compared to 2004. the overall increase in net sales was partially offset
by a decline in portable system net sales during 2005 compared to 2004, which
the company believes might have been attributable to a shift in sales from
portables to the imac g5 and mac mini, and a shift to the retail segment as a
result of opening two additional stores in japan during 2005.
retail
the company opened 41 new retail stores during 2006,
including a total of 10 international stores in the u.k., japan, and canada,
bringing the total number of open stores to 165 as of september30, 2006. this
compares to 124 open stores as of september24, 2005 and 86 open stores as
of september25, 2004.
the retail segments net sales increased by 43% to
$3.4 billion during 2006 compared to 2005. retail segment macintosh unit sales
increased 45% during 2006 compared to 2005.
with an average of 142 stores open during 2006, average revenue per store
increased to $23.6 million compared to $22.4 million during 2005 and $15.6
million in 2004. the current year increase was primarily due to strong
sales of macintosh portable and desktop products, ipods, and other music
related products and services. sales of
ipods increased primarily due to the introduction of the updated ipod with
video-playing capabilities in october2005 and the ipod nano during september2005.
the increase in other music related products and services was due to increased
sales of apple-branded and third-party ipod accessories. macintosh portable and
desktop sales increased due to strong sales of the intel-based macbook, macbook
pro, and imac.
as measured by the companys operating segment
reporting, the retail segment reported operating income of $198 million during
2006 as compared to operating income of $151 million during 2005 and
operating income of $39 million during 2004. this
improvement was primarily attributable to the impact of opening new stores and
the segments year-over-year increase in average revenue per store, which
resulted in higher leverage on occupancy, depreciation, and other fixed costs.
expansion of the retail
segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in
fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments,
personnel, and other operating expenses. capital expenditures associated with
the retail segment were $200 million in 2006, bringing the total capital
expenditures since inception of the retail segment to approximately $729
million. as of september30, 2006, the retail segment had approximately
5,787 employees and had outstanding operating lease commitments associated with
retail store space and related facilities of approximately $887 million. the
company would incur substantial costs if it were to close its retail stores.
such costs could adversely affect the companys results of operations and
financial condition.
gross margin
gross
margin for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions,
except gross margin percentages):
september30,
september24,
september25,
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
net sales
$
19,315
$
13,931
$
8,279
cost of sales
13,717
9,889
6,022
gross margin
$
5,598
$
4,042
$
2,257
gross margin percentage
29.0
%
29.0
%
27.3
%
(1) see the explanatory
note immediately preceding parti, item 1 and note 2, restatement of
consolidated financial statements in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
gross margin percentage of 29.0% in 2006 remained flat
as compared to 2005. the company experienced more favorable pricing on certain
commodity components including lcd flat-panel displays and dram memory and
higher overall revenue that provided for more leverage on fixed production
costs, offset by an increase in lower margin ipod sales and other music-related
services.
the company anticipates that its gross margin and the
gross margins of the personal computer and consumer electronics industries will
be under pressure due to price competition. the company expects gross margin
percentage to decline sequentially in the first quarter of 2007 primarily as a
result of a shift in the mix of revenue toward lower margin products such as
the ipod and content from the itunes store.
the foregoing statements regarding the companys
expected gross margin percentage are forward-looking. there can be no assurance
that current gross margin percentage will be maintained or targeted gross
margin percentage levels will be achieved. in general, gross margins and
margins on individual products, including ipods, will remain under significant
downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry
wide global pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life
cycles, potential increases in the cost and availability of raw material and
outside manufacturing services, and potential changes to the companys product
mix, including higher unit sales of consumer products with lower average
selling prices and lower gross margins. in response to these competitive
pressures, the company expects it will continue to take pricing actions with
respect to its products. gross margins could also be affected by the companys
ability to effectively manage product quality and warranty costs and to
stimulate demand for certain of its products. due to the companys significant
international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in
the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates.
the company orders components for its products and
builds inventory in advance of product shipments. because the companys markets
are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a
risk the company will forecast incorrectly and produce
or order from third-parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular
products or components. the companys operating results and financial condition
in the past have been and may in the future be materially adversely affected by
the companys ability to manage its inventory levels and outstanding purchase
commitments and to respond to short-term shifts in customer demand
patterns.
gross margin percentage
increased in 2005 to 29.0% of net sales from 27.3% of net sales in 2004. the
companys gross margin during 2005 increased due to more favorable pricing on
certain commodity components including lcd flat-panel displays and dram memory;
an increase in higher margin software sales; a favorable shift in direct sales
related primarily to the companys retail and online stores; and higher overall
revenue that provided for more leverage on fixed production costs. these
increases to gross margin were partially offset by an increase in lower margin
ipod sales.
operating expenses
operating
expenses for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions,
except for percentages):
september30,
september24,
september25,
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
research and
development
$
$
$
percentage of net sales
%
%
%
selling, general,
and administrative expenses
$
2,433
$
1,864
$
1,430
percentage of net sales
%
%
%
restructuring costs
$
$
$
(1) see
the explanatory note immediately preceding parti, item 1 and note 2, restatement
of consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
research and
development (r&d)
expenditures for r&d
increased 33% or $177 million to $712 million in 2006 compared to $535 million
in 2005. the increase was due primarily to an increase in r&d headcount in
the current year to support expanded r&d activities, an increase of $46
million in stock-based compensation recognized as r&d expense resulting
from the adoption of sfas no.123r, and higher overall expenses due to the 14th week added to the first fiscal quarter of
2006 to realign the companys fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. in addition, during 2005, the company
capitalized approximately $29.7 million of costs associated with the
development of mac os x tiger. no software development costs were capitalized
during 2006. further information related to the companys capitalization of
software development costs may be found in partii, item 8 of this form10-k
at note 1 of notes to consolidated financial statements. despite the increase
in expenditures, r&d as a percentage of net sales remained relatively flat
in 2006 as compared to 2005 due to the significant increase in revenue. the
company continues to believe that focused investments in r&d are critical
to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are
directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are
central to the companys core business strategy. as such, the company expects
to make further investments in r&d to remain competitive.
selling, general,
and administrative expense (sg&a)
expenditures for sg&a increased $569 million or
31% during 2006 compared to 2005. these increases are due primarily to the
companys continued expansion of its retail segment in both domestic and
international markets, an increase of $50 million in stock-based compensation
expense recognized as
sg&a expense resulting from the adoption of sfas no.123r,
a current year increase in discretionary spending on marketing and advertising,
higher direct and channel selling expenses resulting from the increase in net
sales and employee salary merit increases, and the expenses associated with the 14th week added to the first fiscal
quarter of 2006. despite the increase in expenditures, sg&a as a
percentage of total net sales in 2006 remained flat as compared to 2005.
expenditures for sg&a
increased $434 million or 30% during 2005 compared to 2004. these increases are
due primarily to the companys continued expansion of its retail segment in
both domestic and international markets, a current year increase in
discretionary spending on marketing and advertising, and higher direct and
channel selling expenses resulting from the increase in net sales and employee
salary merit increases. sg&a as a percentage of total net sales in 2005 was
13%, down from 17% in 2004, which is due to the increase in total net sales of
68% for the company during 2005.
fiscal 2004 restructuring
actions
during 2004, the company
recorded total restructuring charges of approximately $23.0 million, including
approximately $14.0 million in severance costs, $5.5 million in asset
impairments, and $3.5 million for lease cancellations. the lease cancellations
relate to vacating a leased sales facility as a result of a european workforce
reduction during 2004. of the $23.0 million charges, $21.3 million had been
utilized by the end of 2006, with the remainder consisting of $1.7 million for
lease cancellations. these actions resulted in the termination of 452
positions.
other income and
expense
other
income and expense for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in
millions):
september30,
september24,
september25,
gains on
non-current investments, net
$
$
$
interest income
$
$
$
interest expense
(3
)
other income
(expense), net
(29
)
(18
)
(8
)
interest and
other income, net
$
$
$
total other
income and expense
$
$
$
gains and losses on
non-current investments
the company previously
held significant investments in arm holdings plc (arm), akamai technologies,inc. (akamai), and earthlink network,inc.
(earthlink). the company sold all of the remaining holdings in these
non-current investments in 2004 and 2003. pretax gains recorded upon the sale
of these non-current investments were $4 million in 2004.
interest and other
income, net
total interest and other income, net increased $200
million or 121% to $365million during 2006 compared to $165 million in
2005 and $53 million in 2004. these increases are attributable primarily to
higher cash and short-term investment balances and increasing investment yields
resulting from higher market interest rates and the 14th week added to the first fiscal quarter of 2006. the
weighted average interest rate earned by the company on its cash, cash
equivalents, and short-term investments increased to 4.58% in 2006 compared to
the 2.70% and 1.38% rates earned during 2005 and 2004, respectively. the
current year increase in other income was partially offset by higher foreign
currency hedging expenses.
interest expense in 2004
consisted primarily of interest on the companys $300million aggregate
principal amount unsecured notes, which were repaid upon their maturity in february2004.
the unsecured notes
were sold at 99.925% of
par for an effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. total deferred gain resulting
from the closure of debt swaps of approximately $23 million was fully amortized
as of the notes maturity in february2004.
provision for
income taxes
the companys effective tax rate for the year ended september30,
2006 was approximately 29%. the companys effective rate differs from the
statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed
foreign earnings for which no u.s. taxes are provided because such earnings are
intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the u.s. in addition, the
company recorded a tax benefit of $20 million due to settlement of prior year
tax audits in the u.s., and a net benefit of $20 million resulting from the
dividend repatriation under the american jobs creation act of 2004 (ajca) and
international tax planning strategies associated with the repatriation as
further discussed below.
as of september30, 2006, the company had
deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses,
and tax credits of $739 million before being offset against certain deferred
liabilities and a valuation allowance for presentation on the companys balance
sheet. management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income,
including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning
strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will
be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. as of september30,
2006 and september24, 2005, a valuation allowance of $5 million was
recorded against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of state operating
losses that may not be realized. the company will continue to evaluate the
realizability of the deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for
and amount of the valuation allowance.
on october22, 2004, the ajca was signed into law.
the ajca included a provision for the deduction of 85% of certain foreign
earnings that were repatriated, as defined in the ajca, within a specified time
frame. among other requirements, dividends qualifying for the 85% deduction
must be reinvested in the united states in certain qualified investments
pursuant to a domestic reinvestment plan approved by the ceo and board of
directors. during 2006, the company repatriated approximately $1.6 billion of
foreign earnings. of the earnings repatriated, $755 million is eligible for the
reduced tax rate provided by the ajca. accordingly, the company recorded a tax
charge of $51 million related to the repatriation of foreign earnings under the
provisions of the ajca. in addition, the company recorded a tax benefit of $71million
resulting from the implementation of tax planning strategies to recognize
deferred tax assets that were previously not recognizable within certain
foreign subsidiaries.
the internal revenue service (irs) has substantially
completed its field audit of the companys federal income tax returns for the
years 2002 through 2003 and proposed certain adjustments. the company intends
to contest certain of these adjustments through the irs appeals office. substantially
all irs audit issues for years prior to 2002 have been resolved. in addition,
the company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. management
believes that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may
result from tax examinations. however, the outcome of tax audits cannot be
predicted with certainty. should any issues addressed in the companys tax
audits be resolved in a manner not consistent with managements expectations,
the company could be required to adjust its provision for income tax in the
period such resolution occurs.
quarterly financial
information
the
following tables set forth a summary of the companys quarterly financial
information for each of the four quarters in the years ended september30,
2006 and september24, 2005 (in millions, except share and per share amounts):
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
net sales
$
4,837
$
4,370
$
4,359
$
5,749
cost of sales (1)
3,425
3,045
3,062
4,185
gross margin
1,412
1,325
1,297
1,564
operating expenses:
research and development (1)
selling, general, and administrative(1)
total operating expenses
operating income
other income and
expense
income before
provision for income taxes
provision for
income taxes
net income
$
$
$
$
earnings per common
share:
basic
$
0.63
$
0.55
$
0.49
$
0.68
diluted
$
0.62
$
0.54
$
0.47
$
0.65
shares used in computing
earnings pershare (in thousands):
basic
854,187
851,375
840,910
830,781
diluted
878,757
876,368
878,537
874,207
(1) includes stock-based
compensation expense, which was allocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
$
research and development
$
$
$
$
selling, general,
and
administrative
$
$
$
$
the net of tax impact of
the stock-based compensation adjustments in 2006, which amounted to $4 million,
was recorded by the company in its fourth quarter of 2006 and are described in
the explanatory note immediately preceding parti, item 1 and note 2, restatement
of consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
net sales
$
3,678
$
3,520
$
3,243
$
3,490
cost of sales (2)
2,643
2,476
2,275
2,495
gross margin
1,035
1,044
operating
expenses:
research and development (2)
selling, general, and administrative (2)
total operating expenses
operating income
other income and
expense
income before
provision for income taxes
provision for
income taxes
net income
$
$
$
$
earnings per common share:
basic
$
0.52
$
0.39
$
0.36
$
0.37
diluted
$
0.49
$
0.37
$
0.34
$
0.35
shares used in
computing earnings per share (in thousands):
basic
821,420
815,092
808,172
789,032
diluted
866,483
860,803
857,568
838,805
(1) see
the explanatory note immediately preceding parti, item 1 and note 2,
restatement of consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated
financial statements of this form10-k.
(2) includes stock-based
compensation expense, which was allocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
$
research and development
$
$
$
$
selling, general,
and administrative
$
$
$
$
the impact of the stock-based compensation adjustments
as described in the explanatory note immediately preceding parti, item 1
and note 2, restatement of consolidated financial statements, in notes to
consolidated financial statements of this form10-k was not
significant to the interim balance sheets of 2006 and 2005.
the following tables
present the effects of adjustments made to the companys previously reported
quarterly financial information during 2005 (in millions, except per share
amounts):
threemonthsendedseptember24,2005
threemonthsendedjune25,2005
as
reported
adjustments
(1)
as
restated
as
reported
adjustments
(1)
as
restated
net sales
$
3,678
$
$
3,678
$
3,520
$
$
3,520
cost of sales (2)
2,643
2,643
2,476
2,476
gross margin
1,035
1,035
1,044
1,044
operating
expenses:
research and development (2)
selling, general, and administrative(2)
total operating expenses
operating income
(1
)
(1
)
other income and expense
income before
provision for incometaxes
(1
)
(1
)
provision for
income taxes
net income
$
$
(2
)
$
$
$
(1
)
$
earnings per
common share:
basic
$
0.52
$
$
0.52
$
0.39
$
$
0.39
diluted
$
0.50
$
(0.01
)
$
0.49
$
0.37
$
$
0.37
shares used in computing
earnings per share (in thousands):
basic
821,420
821,420
815,092
815,092
diluted
866,404
866,483
860,688
860,803
(1) see the explanatory
note immediately preceding parti, item 1 and note 2, restatement of
consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
(2) includes
stock-based compensation expense, which was allocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
$
$
$
research and development
$
$
$
$
$
$
selling, general, and administrative
$
$
$
$
$
$
threemonthsendedmarch26,2005
threemonthsendeddecember25,2004
as
reported
adjustments
(1)
as
restated
as
reported
adjustments(1)
as
restated
net sales
$
3,243
$
$
3,243
$
3,490
$
$
3,490
cost of sales (2)
2,275
2,275
2,494
2,495
gross margin
(1
)
operating
expenses:
research and development (2)
selling, general, and administrative (2)
total operating expenses
operating income
(2
)
(3
)
other income and expense
income before
provision for income taxes
(2
)
(3
)
provision for
income taxes
(1
)
net income
$
$
(2
)
$
$
$
(2
)
$
earnings per
common share:
basic
$
0.36
$
$
0.36
$
0.37
$
$
0.37
diluted
$
0.34
$
$
0.34
$
0.35
$
$
0.35
shares used in computing
earnings per share (in thousands):
basic
808,172
808,172
789,032
789,032
diluted
857,011
857,568
838,174
838,805
(1) see the explanatory
note immediately preceding parti, item 1 and note 2, restatement of
consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
(2) includes
stock-based compensation expense, which was allocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
$
$
$
research and
development
$
$
$
$
$
$
selling, general, and
administrative
$
$
$
$
$
$
recent accounting
pronouncements
in september2006, the sec issued sab no.108,
considering the effects of prior year misstatements
when quantifying misstatements in current year financial statements. sab
no.108 provides guidance on how prior year misstatements should be
considered when quantifying misstatements in current year financial statements
for purposes of determining whether the current years financial statements are
materially misstated. sab no.108 is effective for fiscal years ending
after november15, 2006. although the company will continue to evaluate
the application of sab no.108, management does not currently believe
adoption will have a material impact on the companys results of operations or
financial position.
in september2006, the fasb issued sfas no.157,
fair value measurements, which defines
fair value, provides a framework for measuring fair value, and expands the
disclosures required for fair value measurements. sfas no.157 applies to
other accounting pronouncements that require fair value measurements; it does
not require any new fair value measurements. sfas no.157 is effective for
fiscal years beginning after november15, 2007 and is required to be
adopted by the company beginning in the
first quarter of fiscal 2009. although the company
will continue to evaluate the application of sfas no.157, management does
not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the companys
results of operations or financial position.
in june2006, the fasb issued fasb interpretation
no.(fin) 48, accounting for uncertainty
in income taxes-an interpretation of fasb statement no.109. fin
no.48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes by
creating a framework for how companies should recognize, measure, present, and
disclose in their financial statements uncertain tax positions that they have
taken or expect to take in a tax return. fin no.48 is effective for
fiscal years beginning after december15, 2006 and is required to be
adopted by the company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2008. although
the company will continue to evaluate the application of fin no.48,
management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on
the companys results of operations or financial position.
in may2005, the fasb
issued sfas no.154, accounting changes and
error corrections, which replaces apb opinion no.20, accounting changes and sfas no.3, reporting
accounting changes in interim financial statementsan amendment of apb opinion no.28.
sfasno.154 requires retrospective application to prior periods
financial statements of a voluntary change in accounting principal unless it is
not practicable. sfasno.154 is effective for accounting changes and
corrections of errors made in fiscal years beginning after december15,
2005 and is required to be adopted by the company in the first quarter of
fiscal 2007. although the company will continue to evaluate the application of
sfas no.154, management does not currently believe adoption will have a
material impact on the companys results of operations or financial position.
liquidity and
capital resources
the
following table presents selected financial information and statistics for each
of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions):
september30,
september24,
september25,
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
cash, cash
equivalents, and short-term investments
$
10,110
$
8,261
$
5,464
accounts
receivable, net
$
1,252
$
$
inventory
$
$
$
working capital
$
8,038
$
6,813
$
4,403
days sales in
accounts receivable (dso) (a)
days of supply in
inventory (b)
days payables
outstanding (dpo) (c)
annual operating cash
flow
$
2,220
$
2,535
$
(1) see the explanatory
note immediately preceding parti, item 1 and note 2, restatement of
consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements of this form10-k.
(a) dso is based on ending
net trade receivables and most recent quarterly net sales for each period.
(b) days supply of inventory
is based on ending inventory and most recent quarterly cost of sales for each
period.
(c) dpo is based on ending
accounts payable and most recent quarterly cost of sales adjusted for the
change in inventory.
as of september30,
2006, the company had $10.11 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term
investments, an increase of $1.85 billion over the same balances at the end of
2005. the principal
components of this
increase were cash generated by operating activities of $2.22 billion, proceeds
of $318 million from the issuance of common stock under stock plans, and excess
tax benefits from stock-based compensation of $361 million, partially offset by
cash used to purchase property, plant, and equipment of $657 million and
repurchases of common stock of $355 million in conjunction with net-share
settlements on vested restricted stock and restricted stock units. cash
generated from operating activities includes the impact of the $1.25 billion
prepayment for nand flash memory components. the companys short-term
investment portfolio is primarily invested in high credit quality, liquid
investments. as of september30, 2006, approximately $4.1 billion of the
companys cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments were held by
foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in u.s. dollar-denominated
holdings. amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to u.s.
income taxation on repatriation to the u.s.
the company believes its
existing balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments
will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital expenditures,
stock repurchase activity, outstanding commitments, and other liquidity
requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months.
capital
expenditures
the companys total
capital expenditures were $657 million during 2006, consisting of $200 million
for retail store facilities and equipment related to the companys retail
segment, $263 million for real estate acquisitions for the companys second corporate campus and for a new data center,
and $194 million for corporate infrastructure, including information systems
enhancements. the company currently
anticipates it will utilize approximately $675 million for capital expenditures
during 2007, including approximately $360 million for expansion of the companys
retail segment, approximately $50 million for real estate acquisitions
including the companys second corporate campus and its new data center, and
approximately $265 million to support normal replacement of existing capital
assets and enhancements to general information technology infrastructure.
stock repurchase
plan
in july1999, the
companys board of directors authorized a plan for the company to repurchase up
to $500 million of its common stock. this repurchase plan does not obligate the
company to acquire any specific number of shares or acquire shares over any
specified period of time. the company has repurchased a total of 13.1 million
shares at a cost of $217 million under this plan and was authorized to
repurchase up to an additional $283 million of its common stock as of september30,
2006.
off-balance sheet
arrangements and contractual obligations
the company has not entered into any transactions with
unconsolidated entities whereby the company has financial guarantees,
subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent
arrangements that expose the company to material continuing risks, contingent
liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an
unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or
credit risk support to the company.
the
following table presents certain payments due by the company under contractual
obligations with minimum firm commitments as of september30, 2006 and
excludes amounts already recorded on the companys balance sheet as current
liabilities (in millions):
total
paymentsdue
inless
than1year
payments
duein
1-3years
paymentsdue
in
4-5years
paymentsdue
inmore
than5years
operating leases
$
1,154
$
$
$
$
purchase
obligations
2,306
2,306
asset retirement
obligations
other obligations
total
$
3,518
$
2,472
$
$
$
lease commitments
as of september30,
2006, the company had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating
leases of approximately $1.2 billion, $887 million of which related to the
lease of retail space and related facilities. lease terms on the companys existing
major facility operating leases range from 5 to 15 years.
purchase
commitments with contract manufacturers and component suppliers
the company utilizes several contract manufacturers to
manufacture sub-assemblies for the companys products and to perform final
assembly and test of finished products. these contract manufacturers acquire
components and build product based on demand information supplied by the
company, which typically covers periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. the
company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety
of individual suppliers. consistent with industry practice, the company
acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier
contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. such purchase
commitments typically cover the companys forecasted component and
manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. as of september30,
2006, the company had outstanding third-party manufacturing commitments and component
purchase commitments of approximately $2.3 billion.
during 2006, the company
entered into long-term supply agreements with hynix semiconductor,inc.,
intel corporation, micron technology,inc., samsung electronics co., ltd.,
and toshiba corporation to secure supply of nand flash memory through calendar
year 2010. as part of these agreements, the company prepaid $1.25 billion for
flash memory components during 2006. these prepayments will be applied to
inventory purchases made over the life of each respective agreement.
asset retirement
obligations
the companys asset
retirement obligations are associated with commitments to return property
subject to operating leases to original condition upon lease termination. as of
september30, 2006, the company estimates that gross expected future cash
flows of approximately $19 million will be required to fulfill these
obligations.
other obligations
the companys other
obligations of approximately $39 million are primarily related to internet and
telecommunications services.
indemnifications
the company generally does not indemnify end-users of
its operating system and application software against legal claims that the
software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. other agreements
entered into by the company sometimes include indemnification provisions under
which the company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an
infringement claim against the company or an indemnified third-party. however,
the company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting
from such an infringement claim asserted against itself or an indemnified
third-party and, in the opinion of management, does not have a liability
related to unresolved infringement claims subject to indemnification that would
have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, liquidity or results
of operations.
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
interest rate and
foreign currency risk management
the company regularly
reviews its foreign exchange forward and option positions and its interest rate
swap and option positions, both on a stand-alone basis and in conjunction
with its underlying foreign currency and interest rate related exposures.
however, given the effective horizons of the companys risk management
activities and the anticipatory nature of the exposures, there can be no
assurance the hedges will offset more than a portion of the financial impact
resulting from movements in either foreign exchange or interest rates. in
addition, the timing of the accounting for recognition of gains and losses
related to mark-to-market instruments for any given period may not
coincide with the timing of gains and losses related to the underlying economic
exposures and, therefore, may adversely affect the companys operating results
and financial position.
interest rate risk
while the company is exposed to interest rate
fluctuations in many of the worlds leading industrialized countries, the
companys interest income and expense is most sensitive to fluctuations in the
general level of u.s. interest rates. in this regard, changes in u.s. interest
rates affect the interest earned on the companys cash, cash equivalents, and
short-term investments as well as costs associated with foreign currency
hedges.
the companys short-term investment policy and
strategy is to ensure the preservation of capital, meet liquidity requirements,
and optimize return in light of the current credit and interest rate
environment. a portion of the companys cash is managed by external managers
within the guidelines of the companys investment policy and to an objective
market benchmark. the companys internal portfolio is benchmarked against
external manager performance, allowing for differences in liquidity needs.
the companys exposure to market risk for changes in
interest rates relates primarily to the companys investment portfolio. the
company places its short-term investments in highly liquid securities issued by
high credit quality issuers and, by policy, limits the amount of credit
exposure to any one issuer. the companys general policy is to limit the risk of
principal loss and ensure the safety of invested funds by limiting market and
credit risk. all highly liquid investments with initial maturities of three
months or less are classified as cash equivalents; highly liquid investments
with initial maturities greater than three months are classified as short-term
investments. as of september30, 2006, approximately $921 million of the
companys short-term investments had underlying maturities ranging from 1 to 5
years. as of september24, 2005, $287 million of the companys short-term
investments had underlying maturities ranging from 1 to 5 years. the remainder
all had underlying maturities of less than 12 months. the company may sell its
investments prior to their stated maturities for strategic purposes, in anticipation
of credit deterioration or for duration management. the company recognized net
losses before taxes of $434,000 and $137,000 in 2006 and 2005, respectively,
and a net gain before taxes of $1 million in 2004 as a result of such sales.
to provide a meaningful
assessment of the interest rate risk associated with the companys investment
portfolio, the company performed a sensitivity analysis to determine the impact
a change in interest rates would have on the value of the investment portfolio
assuming a 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve. based on
investment positions as of september30, 2006, a hypothetical 100 basis
point increase in interest rates across all maturities would result in a $15.2
million decline in the fair market value of the portfolio. as of september24,
2005, a similar 100 basis point shift in the yield curve would have resulted in
a $19.9 million decline in fair value. such losses would only be realized if
the company sold the investments prior to maturity.
foreign currency
risk
in general, the company is a net receiver of foreign
currencies. accordingly, changes in exchange rates, and in particular a
strengthening of the u.s. dollar, may negatively affect the companys net sales
and gross margins as expressed in u.s. dollars. there is also a risk the
company will have to adjust local currency product pricing due to competitive
pressures when there has been significant volatility in foreign currency
exchange rates.
the company may enter into foreign currency forward and
option contracts with financial institutions to protect against foreign
exchange risks associated with existing assets and liabilities, certain firmly
committed transactions, forecasted future cash flows, and net investments in
foreign subsidiaries. generally, the companys practice is to hedge a majority
of its existing material foreign exchange transaction exposures. however, the
company may not hedge certain foreign exchange transaction exposures due to
immateriality, prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular exposures, and
limited availability of appropriate hedging instruments.
to provide a meaningful assessment of the foreign
currency risk associated with certain of the companys foreign currency
derivative positions, the company performed a sensitivity analysis using a
value-at-risk (var) model to assess the potential impact of fluctuations in
exchange rates. the var model consisted of using a monte carlo simulation to
generate 3,000 random market price paths. the var is the maximum expected loss
in fair value, for a given confidence interval, to the companys foreign
exchange portfolio due to adverse movements in rates. the var model is not
intended to represent actual losses but is used as a risk estimation and
management tool. the model assumes normal market conditions. forecasted
transactions, firm commitments, and assets and liabilities denominated in
foreign currencies were excluded from the model. based on the results of the
model, the company estimates with 95% confidence a maximum one-day loss in fair
value of $9.2 million as of september30, 2006 compared to a maximum
one-day loss of $10.0 million as of september24, 2005. because the
company uses foreign currency instruments for hedging purposes, losses incurred
on those instruments are generally offset by increases in the fair value of the
underlying exposures.
actual future gains and losses associated with the
companys investment portfolio and derivative positions may differ materially
from the sensitivity analyses performed as of september30, 2006 due to
the inherent limitations associated with predicting the changes in the timing
and amount of interest rates, foreign currency exchanges rates, and the companys
actual exposures and positions.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
indextoconsolidatedfinancialstatements
page
consolidated
balance sheets as of september30, 2006 and september24, 2005
consolidated
statements of operations for the three fiscal years ended september30,
consolidated
statements of shareholders equity for the three fiscal years ended
september30,2006
consolidated
statements of cash flows for the three fiscal years ended september30,
notes
to consolidated financial statements
selected
quarterly financial information (unaudited)
reports of independent
registered public accounting firm, kpmg llp
all financial statement schedules have been omitted,
since the required information is not applicable or is not present in amounts
sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the information
required is included in the consolidated financial statements and notes
thereto.
consolidated balance sheets
(inmillions, except share amounts)
september30,2006
september24,2005
asrestated(1)
assets:
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
6,392
$
3,491
short-term investments
3,718
4,770
accounts receivable, less allowances of $52 and $46,
respectively
1,252
inventories
deferred tax assets
other current assets
2,270
total current assets
14,509
10,300
property, plant, and equipment, net
1,281
goodwill
acquired intangible assets, net
other assets
1,238
total assets
$
17,205
$
11,516
liabilities
and shareholders equity:
current liabilities:
accounts payable
$
3,390
$
1,779
accrued expenses
3,081
1,708
total current liabilities
6,471
3,487
non-current
liabilities
total liabilities
7,221
4,088
commitments and
contingencies
shareholders
equity:
common stock, no par value; 1,800,000,000 shares
authorized; 855,262,568 and 835,019,364 shares issued and outstanding,
respectively
4,355
3,564
deferred stock compensation
(61
)
retained earnings
5,607
3,925
accumulated other comprehensive income
total shareholders equity
9,984
7,428
total liabilities
and shareholders equity
$
17,205
$
11,516
(1) see note 2, restatement
of consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements.
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
consolidated statements of operations
(inmillions, except share and per share amounts)
threefiscalyearsendedseptember30,2006
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
net sales
$
19,315
$
13,931
$
8,279
cost of sales(2)
13,717
9,889
6,022
gross margin
5,598
4,042
2,257
operating expenses:
research and development(2)
selling, general, and administrative(2)
2,433
1,864
1,430
restructuring costs
total operating expenses
3,145
2,399
1,944
operating income
2,453
1,643
other income and
expense
income before
provision for income taxes
2,818
1,808
provision for
income taxes
net income
$
1,989
$
1,328
$
earnings per
common share:
basic
$
2.36
$
1.64
$
0.36
diluted
$
2.27
$
1.55
$
0.34
shares used in
computing earnings per share (in thousands):
basic
844,058
808,439
743,180
diluted
877,526
856,878
774,776
(1) see note 2, restatement
of consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements.
(2) includes
stock-based compensation expense, which was allocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
research and
development
$
$
$
selling, general, and
administrative
$
$
$
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial
statements.
consolidated statements of shareholders equity
(inmillions, except share amounts which are in thousands)
accumulated
other
total
commonstock
deferredstock
retained
comprehensive
shareholders
shares
amount
compensation
earnings
income(loss)
equity
as
restated(1)
as
restated(1)
as
restated(1)
as
restated(1)
balances as of september27, 2003 as previously
reported
733,454
$
1,926
$
(62
)
$
2,394
$
(35
)
$
4,223
adjustments to opening shareholders equity
(22
)
(63
)
balance as of september27, 2003 as restated
733,454
$
2,011
$
(84
)
$
2,331
$
(35
)
$
4,223
components
of comprehensive income:
net income
change in foreign currency translation
change in unrealized gain on available-for-sale
securities, net of tax
(5
)
(5
)
change in unrealized loss on derivative investments,
netof tax
total comprehensive income
issuance of stock-based compensation awards
(63
)
adjustment to common stock related to a prior year
acquisition
(159
)
(2
)
(2
)
stock-based compensation
common stock issued under stock plans
49,592
tax benefit related to stock options
balances as of september25, 2004
782,887
$
2,582
$
(101
)
$
2,597
$
(15
)
$
5,063
components of
comprehensive income:
net income
1,328
1,328
change in foreign currency translation
change in unrealized gain on derivative investments,
net of tax
total comprehensive income
1,343
issuance of stock-based compensation awards
(7
)
stock-based compensation
common stock issued under stock plans
52,132
tax benefit related to stock options
balances as of september24, 2005
835,019
$
3,564
$
(61
)
$
3,925
$
$
7,428
components of
comprehensive income:
net income
1,989
1,989
change in foreign currency translation
change in unrealized gain on available-for-sale
securities, net of tax
change in unrealized loss on derivative investments,
net of tax
(1
)
(1
)
total comprehensive income
2,011
common stock repurchased
(4,574
)
(48
)
(307
)
(355
)
stock-based compensation
deferred compensation
(61
)
common stock issued under stock plans
24,818
tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
balances as of
september30, 2006
855,263
$
4,355
$
$
5,607
$
$
9,984
(1) see note 2, restatement
of consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements.
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
consolidated statements of cash flows
(inmillions)
threefiscalyearsendedseptember30,2006
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of the year
$
3,491
$
2,969
$
3,396
operating activities:
net income
1,989
1,328
adjustments to reconcile
net income to cash generated by operating activities:
depreciation, amortization and accretion
stock-based compensation expense
provision for deferred income taxes
excess tax benefits from stock options
gain on sale of powerschool net assets
(4
)
loss on disposition of property, plant, and equipment
gains on sales of investments, net
(5
)
changes in operating
assets and liabilities:
accounts receivable
(357
)
(121
)
(8
)
inventories
(105
)
(64
)
(45
)
other current assets
(1,626
)
(150
)
(176
)
other assets
(1,040
)
(35
)
(25
)
accounts payable
1,611
other liabilities
1,296
cash generated by operating activities
2,220
2,535
investing activities:
purchases of short-term investments
(7,255
)
(11,470
)
(3,270
)
proceeds from maturities of short-term
investments
7,226
8,609
1,141
proceeds from sales of investments
1,086
purchases of long-term investments
(25
)
proceeds from sale of powerschool net assets
purchases of property, plant, and equipment
(657
)
(260
)
(176
)
other
(58
)
(21
)
cash generated by (used for) investing activities
(2,556
)
(1,488
)
financing activities:
payment of long-term debt
(300
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock
excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
repurchases of common stock
(355
)
cash generated by financing activities
increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
2,901
(427
)
cash and cash equivalents, end of the year
$
6,392
$
3,491
$
2,969
supplemental cash
flow disclosures:
cash paid during the year for interest
$
$
$
cash paid
(received) for income taxes, net
$
$
$
(7
)
(1) see note 2, restatement
of consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated financial
statements.
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
notes to consolidated financial statements
note 1summary of
significant accounting policies
apple computer,inc.
and its wholly-owned subsidiaries (the company) designs, manufactures, and
markets personal computers and related software, services, peripherals, and
networking solutions. the company also designs, develops, and markets a line of
portable digital music players along with related accessories and services
including the online sale of third-party audio and video products. the company
sells its products worldwide through its online stores, its retail stores, its
direct sales force, and third-party wholesalers, resellers, and value-added
resellers. in addition, the company sells a variety of third-party macintosh
and ipod compatible products including application software, printers, storage
devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and supplies
through its online and retail stores. the company sells to education, consumer,
creative professional, business, and government customers.
basis of
presentation and preparation
the accompanying consolidated financial statements
include the accounts of the company. intercompany accounts and transactions
have been eliminated. the preparation of these consolidated financial
statements in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts
reported in these consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.
actual results could differ materially from those estimates. certain prior year
amounts in the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto have been
reclassified to conform to the current year presentation.
typically, the companys
fiscal year ends on the last saturday of september. fiscal years 2005 and 2004 were each 52-week
years. however, approximately every six years, the company reports a 53-week
fiscal year to align its fiscal quarters with calendar quarters by adding a
week to its first fiscal quarter. the company added this additional week in the
first fiscal quarter of its fiscal year 2006. all information presented herein
is based on the companys fiscal calendar.
common stock split
on february28, 2005,
the company effected a two-for-one stock split to shareholders of record as of february18,
2005. all share and per share information has been retroactively adjusted to
reflect the stock split.
financial
instruments
cash equivalents
and short-term investments
all highly liquid
investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase are
classified as cash equivalents. highly liquid investments with maturities
greater than three months at the date of purchase are classified as short-term
investments. the companys debt and marketable equity securities have been
classified and accounted for as available-for-sale. management
determines the appropriate classification of its investments in debt and
marketable equity securities at the time of purchase and reevaluates the
available-for-sale designations as of each balance sheet date. these securities
are carried at fair value, with the unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes,
reported as a component of shareholders equity. the cost of securities sold is
based upon the specific identification method.
derivative
financial instruments
the company accounts for its derivative instruments as
either assets or liabilities and carries them at fair value. derivatives that
are not defined as hedges in statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)
no.133, accounting for derivative instruments and
hedging activities, as amended, must be adjusted to fair value
through earnings. if the derivative is a hedge, depending on the nature of the
hedge,
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
changes in fair value will either be offset against
the change in fair value of the hedged assets, liabilities, or firm commitments
through earnings, or recognized in other comprehensive income until the hedged
item is recognized in earnings.
for derivative instruments
that hedge the exposure to variability in expected future cash flows that are
designated as cash flow hedges, the effective portion of the gain or loss on
the derivative instrument is reported as a component of accumulated other
comprehensive income in shareholders equity and reclassified into earnings in
the same period or periods during which the hedged transaction affects
earnings. the ineffective portion of the gain or loss on the derivative
instrument is recognized in current earnings. to receive hedge accounting
treatment, cash flow hedges must be highly effective in offsetting changes to
expected future cash flows on hedged transactions. for derivative instruments
that hedge the exposure to changes in the fair value of an asset or a liability
and that are designated as fair value hedges, the net gain or loss on the
derivative instrument as well as the offsetting gain or loss on the hedged item
attributable to the hedged risk are recognized in earnings in the current
period. the net gain or loss on the effective portion of a derivative
instrument that is designated as an economic hedge of the foreign currency
translation exposure of the net investment in a foreign operation is reported
in the same manner as a foreign currency translation adjustment. for forward contracts
designated as net investment hedges, the company excludes changes in fair value
relating to changes in the forward carry component from its definition of
effectiveness. accordingly, any gains or losses related to this component are
recognized in current earnings.
inventories
inventories are stated at
the lower of cost, computed using the first-in, first-out method, or market. if
the cost of the inventories exceeds their market value, provisions are made
currently for the difference between the cost and the market value. the companys
inventories consist primarily of finished goods for all periods presented.
property, plant,
and equipment
property, plant, and
equipment are stated at cost. depreciation is computed by use of the straight-line
method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which for buildings is
the lesser of 30 years or the remaining life of the underlying building, up to
5 years for equipment, and the shorter of lease terms or 10 years for leasehold
improvements. the company capitalizes eligible costs to acquire or develop
internal-use software that are incurred subsequent to the preliminary project
stage. capitalized costs related to internal-use software are amortized using
the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which
range from 3 to 5 years. depreciation and amortization expense on property and
equipment was $180 million, $141 million, and $126 million during 2006, 2005,
and 2004, respectively.
asset retirement
obligations
the company records obligations associated with the
retirement of tangible long-lived assets and the associated asset retirement
costs in accordance with sfas no.143, accounting for asset
retirement obligations. the company reviews legal obligations
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets that result from the
acquisition, construction, development and/or normal use of the assets. if it
is determined that a legal obligation exists, the fair value of the liability
for an asset retirement obligation is recognized in the period in which it is
incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. the fair value of
the liability is added to the carrying amount of the associated asset and this
additional carrying amount is depreciated over the life of the asset. the
difference between the gross expected future cash flow and its
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
present value is accreted over the life of the related
lease as an operating expense. all of the companys existing asset retirement
obligations are associated with commitments to return property subject to
operating leases to original condition upon lease termination.
the following table
reconciles changes in the companys asset retirement liabilities for fiscal
2006 and 2005 (in millions):
asset retirement
liability as of september25, 2004
$
8.2
additional asset retirement obligations recognized
2.8
accretion recognized
0.7
asset retirement liability as of september24,
$
11.7
additional asset retirement obligations recognized
2.5
accretion recognized
0.5
asset retirement
liability as of september30, 2006
$
14.7
long-lived
assets including goodwill and other acquired intangible assets
the company reviews property, plant, and equipment and
certain identifiable intangibles, excluding goodwill, for impairment in
accordance with sfas no.144, accounting for the
impairment of long-lived assets and for long-lived assets to be disposed of.
long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. recoverability
of these assets is measured by comparison of its carrying amount to future
undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. if property,
plant, and equipment and certain identifiable intangibles are considered to be
impaired, the impairment to be recognized equals the amount by which the
carrying value of the assets exceeds its fair market value. for the three
fiscal years ended september30, 2006, the company had no material
impairment of its long-lived assets, except for the impairment of certain
assets in connection with the restructuring actions described in note 6 of
these notes to consolidated financial statements.
sfas no.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets requires that goodwill and intangible assets with
indefinite useful lives should not be amortized but rather be tested for
impairment at least annually or sooner whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that they may be impaired. the company performs its
goodwill impairment tests on or about august30 of each year. the company
did not recognize any goodwill or intangible asset impairment charges in 2006,
2005, or 2004. the company established reporting units based on its current
reporting structure. for purposes of testing goodwill for impairment, goodwill
has been allocated to these reporting units to the extent it relates to each
reporting unit.
sfas no.142 also
requires that intangible assets with definite lives be amortized over their
estimated useful lives and reviewed for impairment in accordance with sfas no.144.
the company is currently amortizing its acquired intangible assets with
definite lives over periods ranging from 3 to 10 years.
foreign currency
translation
the company translates the assets and liabilities of
its international non-u.s. functional currency subsidiaries into u.s. dollars
using exchange rates in effect at the end of each period. revenue and expenses
for these subsidiaries are translated using rates that approximate those in
effect during the period. gains and losses from these translations are credited
or charged to foreign currency translation
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
included in accumulated
other comprehensive income in shareholders equity. the companys foreign
manufacturing subsidiaries and certain other international subsidiaries that
use the u.s. dollar as their functional currency remeasure monetary assets and
liabilities at exchange rates in effect at the end of each period, and inventories, property, and
nonmonetary assets and liabilities at historical rates. gains and losses from
these translations were insignificant and have been included in the companys
results of operations.
revenue recognition
net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale
of hardware, software, peripherals, digital content, and service and support
contracts. the company recognizes revenue pursuant to applicable accounting
standards, including american institute of certified public accountants
statement of position (sop) no.97-2, software
revenue recognition, as amended, and securities and exchange
commission (sec) staff accounting bulletin (sab) no.104, revenue recognition.
the company recognizes revenue when persuasive
evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is
fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. product is considered
delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss
have been transferred. for most of the companys product sales, these criteria
are met at the time the product is shipped. for online sales to individuals,
for some sales to education customers in the u.s., and for certain other sales,
the company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the
company legally retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during
transit. if at the outset of an arrangement the company determines the
arrangement fee is not, or is presumed not to be, fixed or determinable,
revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and
payable.
revenue from service and support contracts is deferred
and recognized ratably over the service coverage periods. these contracts
typically include extended phone support, repair services, web-based support
resources, diagnostic tools, and extend the service coverage offered under the
companys one-year limited warranty.
the company sells software and peripheral products
obtained from other companies. the company establishes its own pricing and
retains related inventory risk, is the primary obligor in sales transactions
with its customers, and assumes the credit risk for amounts billed to its
customers. accordingly, the company recognizes revenue for the sale of products
obtained from other companies based on the gross amount billed.
revenue on arrangements
that include multiple elements such as hardware, software, and services is
allocated to each element based on the relative fair value of each element.
each elements allocated revenue is recognized when revenue recognition
criteria for that element have been met. fair value is generally determined by
vendor specific objective evidence (vsoe), which is based on the price
charged when each element is sold separately. if the company cannot objectively
determine the fair value of any undelivered element included in a
multiple-element arrangement, the company defers revenue until all elements are
delivered and services have been performed, or until fair value can objectively
be determined for any remaining undelivered elements. when the fair value of a
delivered element has not been established, the company uses the residual method
to recognize revenue if the fair value of all undelivered elements is
determinable. under the residual method, the fair value of the undelivered
elements is deferred and the remaining portion of the arrangement fee is
allocated to the delivered elements and is recognized as revenue.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
the company records reductions to revenue for
estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive
programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and
volume-based incentives. the estimated cost of these programs is accrued as a
reduction to revenue in the period the
company has sold the product and committed to a plan. the company also records
reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the companys
historical experience.
generally, the company
does not offer specified or unspecified upgrade rights to its customers in
connection with software sales or the sale of extended warranty and support
contracts. when the company does offer specified upgrade rights, the company
defers revenue for the fair value of the specified upgrade right until the
future obligation is fulfilled or when the right to the specified upgrade
expires. additionally, a limited number of the companys software products are
available with maintenance agreements that grant customers rights to
unspecified future upgrades over the maintenance term on a when and if
available basis. revenue associated with such maintenance is recognized ratably
over the maintenance term.
allowance for
doubtful accounts
the company records its
allowance for doubtful accounts based upon its assessment of various factors. the
company considers historical experience, the age of the accounts receivable
balances, credit quality of the companys customers, current economic
conditions, and other factors that may affect customers ability to pay.
shipping costs
for all periods presented,
amounts billed to customers related to shipping and handling are classified as
revenue, and the companys shipping and handling costs are included in cost of
sales.
warranty expense
the company provides for
the estimated cost of hardware and software warranties at the time the related
revenue is recognized. the company assesses the adequacy of its preexisting
warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary based on actual
experience and changes in future estimates.
software
development costs
research and development costs are expensed as
incurred. development costs of computer software to be sold, leased, or
otherwise marketed are subject to capitalization beginning when a products
technological feasibility has been established and ending when a product is
available for general release to customers pursuant to sfas no.86, computer software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed.
in most instances, the companys products are released soon after technological
feasibility has been established. therefore, costs incurred subsequent to
achievement of technological feasibility are usually not significant, and
generally all software development costs have been immediately expensed.
in 2004, the company began
incurring substantial development costs associated with mac os x version 10.4
tiger (tiger) subsequent to achievement of technological feasibility as
evidenced by public demonstration in august2004 and the subsequent
release of a developer beta version of the product. the company capitalized
approximately $29.7 million and $4.5 million during 2005 and 2004,
respectively, of costs associated with the development of tiger. in accordance
with sfas no.86, amortization of this asset to cost of sales began in april2005
when the company began shipping tiger and is being recognized on a
straight-line basis over a three-year estimated useful life.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
during 2004, the company incurred substantial
development costs associated with filemaker pro 7 subsequent to achievement of
technological feasibility as evidenced by public demonstration and release of a
developer beta version, and prior to the release of the final version of the
product in march2004. therefore, during 2004, the company capitalized
approximately $2.3 million of costs associated with the development of
filemaker pro 7. in accordance with sfas no.86, amortization of this
asset to cost of sales began in march2004 when the company began shipping
filemaker pro 7 and is being recognized on a straight-line basis over a
three-year estimated useful life.
total amortization related
to capitalized software development costs was $17.8 million, $15.7 million, and
$10.7 million in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively.
advertising costs
advertising costs are
expensed as incurred. advertising expense was $338 million, $287 million, and
$206million for 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively.
stock-based
compensation
on september25, 2005, the company adopted sfas no.123
(revised 2004) (sfas no.123r), share-based payment,
which addresses the accounting for stock-based payment transactions in which an
enterprise receives employee services in exchange for (a)equity
instruments of the enterprise or (b)liabilities that are based on the
fair value of the enterprises equity instruments or that may be settled by the
issuance of such equity instruments. in january2005, the sec issued sab no.107,
which provides supplemental implementation guidance for sfas no.123r.
sfas no.123r eliminates the ability to account for stock-based
compensation transactions using the intrinsic value method under accounting
principles board (apb) opinion no.25, accounting
for stock issued to employees, and instead generally requires that
such transactions be accounted for using a fair-value-based method. the company
uses the black-scholes-merton (bsm) option-pricing model to determine the
fair-value of stock-based awards under sfas no.123r, consistent with that
used for pro forma disclosures under sfas no.123, accounting
for stock-based compensation. the company has elected to use the
modified prospective transition method as permitted by sfas no.123r and
accordingly prior periods have not been restated to reflect the impact of sfas no.123r.
the modified prospective transition method requires that stock-based
compensation expense be recorded for all new and unvested stock options,
restricted stock, restricted stock units, and employee stock purchase plan
shares that are ultimately expected to vest as the requisite service is
rendered beginning on september25, 2005, the first day of the companys
fiscal year 2006. stock-based compensation expense for awards granted prior to september25,
2005 is based on the grant-date fair-value as determined under the pro forma
provisions of sfas no.123. the company recognized incremental stock-based
compensation expense of $117 million during 2006 as a result of the adoption of
sfas no.123r. diluted earnings per common share was reduced by $0.10 for
the year ended september30, 2006 due to the adoption of sfas
no.123r. in accordance with sfas no.123r, beginning in 2006 the
company has presented excess tax benefits from the exercise of stock-based
compensation awards as a financing activity in the consolidated statement of
cash flows.
no stock-based
compensation costs have been capitalized as of september30, 2006. the
income tax benefit related to stock-based compensation expense was $39 million
for the year ended september30, 2006. as of september30, 2006,
$375.2 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to stock options
and restricted stock units is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average
period of 2.91 years.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
sfas no.123r prohibits recognition of a deferred
tax asset for an excess tax benefit that has not been realized. the company
will recognize a benefit from stock-based compensation in equity if an
incremental tax benefit is realized by following the ordering provisions of the
tax law. in addition, the company accounts for the indirect effects of
stock-based compensation on the research tax credit, the foreign tax credit,
and the domestic manufacturing deduction through the income statement.
prior to the adoption of sfas no.123r, the
company measured compensation expense for its employee stock-based compensation
plans using the intrinsic value method prescribed by apb opinion no.25.
the company applied the disclosure provisions of sfas no.123 as amended
by sfas no.148, accounting for stock-based
compensationtransition and disclosure, as if the fair-value-based
method had been applied in measuring compensation expense. under apb opinion no.25,
when the exercise price of the companys employee stock options was equal to
the market price of the underlying stock on the date of the grant, no
compensation expense was recognized.
the following table
illustrates the effect on net income after taxes and net income per common
share as if the company had applied the fair value recognition provisions of
sfas no.123 to stock-based compensation during 2005 and 2004 (in
millions, except per share amounts):
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
net income
$
1,328
$
add: stock-based employee compensation expense
included in reported net income, net of tax
deduct:
stock-based employee compensation expense determined under the fair value
based method for all awards, net of tax
(118
)
(148
)
net incomepro
forma
$
1,255
$
net income per common share
basic
$
1.64
$
0.36
diluted
$
1.55
$
0.34
net income per common sharepro forma
basic
$
1.55
$
0.22
diluted
$
1.47
$
0.21
(1) see note 2, restatement
of consolidated financial statements.
further information
regarding stock-based compensation can be found in note 9.
earnings per common
share
basic earnings per common share is computed by
dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted-average number
of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. diluted earnings per
common share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by
the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the
period increased to include the number of additional shares of common stock
that would have been outstanding if the dilutive potential shares of common
stock had been issued. the dilutive effect of outstanding options, restricted
stock, and restricted stock units is reflected in diluted earnings per share by
application of the treasury stock method. under the
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 1summary
of significant accounting policies (continued)
treasury stock method, an increase in the fair market
value of the companys common stock can result in a greater dilutive effect
from outstanding options, restricted stock, and restricted stock units. additionally,
the exercise of employee stock options and the vesting of restricted stock and
restricted stock units can result in a greater dilutive effect on earnings per
share.
the following table sets
forth the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share:
threefiscalyearsendedseptember30,2006
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
numerator (in millions):
net income
$
1,989
$
1,328
$
denominator (in
thousands):
weighted-average shares outstanding, excluding
unvested restricted stock
844,058
808,439
743,180
effect of dilutive options, restricted stock units
and unvested restricted stock
33,468
48,439
31,596
denominator for diluted earnings per share
877,526
856,878
774,776
basic earnings per share
$
2.36
$
1.64
$
0.36
diluted earnings
per share
$
2.27
$
1.55
$
0.34
potentially
dilutive securities representing approximately 3.9 million, 12.7 million (as
restated(1)), and 8.9million (as restated(1)) shares of common stock for
the years ended september30, 2006, september24, 2005, and
september25, 2004, respectively, were excluded from the computation of
diluted earnings per share for these periods because their effect would have
been antidilutive. these potentially dilutive securities include stock options,
unvested restricted stock, and restricted stock units.
(1) see
note 2, restatement of consolidated financial statements..
comprehensive
income
comprehensive income
consists of two components: net income and other comprehensive income. other
comprehensive income refers to revenue, expenses, gains, and losses that under
generally accepted accounting principles are recorded as an element of
shareholders equity but are excluded from net income. the companys other
comprehensive income is comprised of foreign currency translation adjustments
from those subsidiaries not using the u.s. dollar as their functional currency,
unrealized gains and losses on marketable securities categorized as
available-for-sale, and net deferred gains and losses on certain derivative instruments
accounted for as cash flow hedges.
segment information
the company reports segment information based on the
management approach. the management approach designates the internal
reporting used by management for making decisions and assessing performance as
the source of the companys reportable segments. information about the
companys products, major customers, and geographic areas on a company-wide
basis is also disclosed.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2restatement of
consolidated financial statements
the company is restating its consolidated balance
sheet as of september24, 2005, and the related consolidated statements of
operations, shareholders equity, and cash flows for each of the fiscal years
ended september24, 2005 and september25, 2004, and each of the
quarters in fiscal year 2005.
previously filed annual reports on form10-k
and quarterly reports on form10-q affected by the restatements have
not been amended and should not be relied on.
on june29, 2006, the company announced that an
internal review had discovered irregularities related to the issuance of
certain stock option grants made between 1997 and 2001, including a grant to
its chief executive officer (ceo) steve jobs. the company also announced that
a special committee of outside directors (special committee) had been formed
and had hired independent counsel to conduct a full investigation of the
companys past stock option granting practices.
as a result of the internal review and the independent
investigation, management has concluded, and the audit and finance committee of
the board of directors agrees, that incorrect measurement dates were used for
financial accounting purposes for certain stock option grants made in prior
periods. therefore, the company has recorded additional non-cash stock-based
compensation expense and related tax effects with regard to past stock option
grants, and the company is restating previously filed financial statements in
this form10-k. these adjustments, after tax, amounted to $4
million, $7 million, and $10 million in fiscal years 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. the adjustment to 2006 was recorded in the fourth quarter of
fiscal year 2006 due to its insignificance.
the independent counsel and its forensic accountants (investigative
team) reviewed the facts and circumstances surrounding stock option grants
made on 259 dates. based on a review of the totality of evidence and the
applicable law, the special committee found no misconduct by current
management. the special committees investigation identified a number of grants
for which grant dates were intentionally selected in order to obtain favorable
exercise prices. the terms of these and certain other grants, as discussed
below, were finalized after the originally assigned grant dates. the special
committee concluded that the procedures for granting, accounting for, and
reporting stock option grants did not include sufficient safeguards to prevent
manipulation. although the investigation found that ceo steve jobs was aware or
recommended the selection of some favorable grant dates, he did not receive or financially
benefit from these grants or appreciate the accounting implications. the
special committee also found that the investigation had raised serious concerns
regarding the actions of two former officers in connection with the accounting,
recording and reporting of stock option grants.
based on the evidence and findings from the companys
internal review and the special committees independent investigation, an
analysis was performed of the measurement dates for the 42,077 stock option
grants made on 259 dates between october1996 and january2003 (the relevant
period). the company believes that the analysis was properly limited to the
relevant period. in addition to analyzing all grants made during the relevant
period, the company sampled certain grants between 1994 and 1997 and found none
that required accounting adjustments. the first grants for which stock-based
compensation expense is required are dated december29, 1997. the company
also examined grants made after the relevant period and found none that
required accounting adjustments. moreover, in the years after 2002, apple made
significant changes in its stock option granting practices in response to
evolving legal, regulatory and accounting requirements.
consistent with the accounting literature and recent
guidance from the securities and exchange commission (sec), the grants during
the relevant period were organized into categories based on grant
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2restatement
of consolidated financial statements (continued)
type and process by which the grant was finalized. the
company analyzed the evidence related to each category of grants including, but
not limited to, electronic and physical documents, document metadata, and
witness interviews. based on the relevant facts and circumstances, the company
applied the controlling accounting standards to determine, for every grant
within each category, the proper measurement date. if the measurement date is
not the originally assigned grant date, accounting adjustments were made as
required, resulting in stock-based compensation expense and related tax
effects.
the 42,077 grants were classified as follows: (1)17
grants to persons elected or appointed to the board of directors (director
grants); (2)3,892 grants to employees under the monday/tuesday plan
described below (monday/tuesday grants); (3)27,096 grants made in
broad-based awards to large numbers of employees, usually on an annual basis (focal
grants); (4)9,988 other grants ratified at meetings of the board or
compensation committee (meeting grants); (5)1,082 other grants ratified
by unanimous written consent (uwc) of the board or compensation committee (other
uwc grants); and (6)two grants to the ceo (ceo grants). all references
to the number of option shares, option exercise prices, and share prices in
this note 2 have not been adjusted for any subsequent stock splits.
with the exception of director grants, all stock
option grants were subject to ratification by the board or compensation
committee at a meeting or by uwc. following approval of the grants at a meeting
or by uwc, the companys legal staff would prepare a secretarys certificate
certifying the ratification of the grants. based on the facts and circumstances
described below, the company has concluded that the recipients and terms of
certain grants were fixed for accounting purposes before ratification pursuant
to parameters previously approved by the board or compensation committee
through the monday/tuesday plan and the focal process. as further discussed
below, within these parameters, management had the authority to determine the
recipients and terms for each grant. thus, the company has concluded that the
measurement dates for these grants occurred when managements process for
allocating these grants was completed and the grants were ready for
ratification, which was considered perfunctory. with regard to all other
grants, the company has concluded that the grants were finalized and the
measurement dates occurred when the grants were ratified. for many grants,
however, the dates of ratification cannot be established because the dates the uwcs
were executed by the board or compensation committee members or received by the
company are not available. for such grants, the company has concluded that the
date of the preparation of the secretarys certificate is the best alternative
for determining the actual date of ratification.
as discussed below, the companys analysis determined
that the originally assigned grant dates for 6,428 grants on 42 dates are not
the proper measurement dates. accordingly, after accounting for forfeitures,
the company has recognized stock-based compensation expense of $105 million on
a pre-tax basis over the respective awards vesting terms. no adjustments were
required for the remaining 35,649 grants. the adjustments were determined by
category as follows:
director grantsseventeen director grants were made
during the relevant period. two director grants were made pursuant to a 1997
plan that dated the grants on the enactment of the plan. the remaining fifteen
grants were automatically made under the director stock option plan for
non-employee directors, which was approved by shareholders in 1998, on the date
of a directors election or appointment to the board and on subsequent
anniversaries, beginning on the fourth anniversary. accordingly, the analysis
determined that the originally assigned grant date for each director grant is
the measurement date, and no accounting adjustments are required.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2restatement
of consolidated financial statements (continued)
monday/tuesday grantsbeginning in december1998,
3,892 new hire grants and grants for promotion and retention purposes (promotion/retention
grants) were made during the relevant period under the monday/tuesday plan. under
the monday/tuesday plan, new hire grants made within pre-established guidelines
approved by the board or compensation committee were dated on the monday that
the recipient started work (or the following monday, if the recipient started
on another day). the companys analysis showed this process to be reliable with
very low error rates. promotion/retention grants, also based on pre-established
guidelines, were made generally on the first tuesday of each month. the company
has concluded that the new hire and promotion/retention grants made pursuant to
the monday/tuesday plan within pre-established guidelines do not require
adjustment, with the exception of six grants that were erroneously dated before
the employees start dates. for 120 new hire and promotion/retention grants
made outside the guidelines, however, the company has concluded that the
measurement dates are the dates of ratification by the board or compensation
committee rather than the dates used for grants within guidelines. accordingly,
based on the methodology described above, the company has recognized
stock-based compensation expense of $6 million from 126 grants.
focal grantsduring the relevant period, 27,096 focal
grants were made to employees typically on an annual basis as part of an
extensive process that required several months to complete. pursuant to limits,
guidelines and practices previously approved by the board or compensation committee,
managers throughout the company would make recommendations for grants to
employees in their areas of responsibility. after senior management had
determined that the grants were made in accordance with these established
limits, guidelines and practices, management treated the grants as final when
they were submitted to the board or compensation committee for ratification. the
company has concluded that for 5,595 grants on five dates, the originally
assigned grant dates are not the proper measurement dates. for these grants,
managements process for finalizing the grants was completed after the originally
assigned grant dates. as a result, the company has recognized $29 million of
stock-based compensation expense. for two of the five grant dates comprising
3,744 grants, the evidence shows that the grants were finalized and the
measurement date occurred one day after the originally assigned grant dates. the
grants on these two dates represent more than $16 million of the total $29
million of stock-based compensation expense resulting from focal grants.
other meeting grantsduring the relevant period,
meetings of the board or compensation committee were held to ratify 9,988
grants that are not monday/tuesday, focal or ceo grants. the grant dates and
measurement dates for these grants are the meeting dates when the grants were
ratified, with the exception of 46 grants. forty-two of these 46 grants are
dated concurrent with a meeting that considered and approved certain grants,
but the evidence indicates that all of the grants may not have been finalized
until a later date. one of the 46 grants was approved and dated at another
meeting, but the recipient, who was becoming employed by the company as part of
a corporate acquisition, did not start until a later date. two other grants
were approved before the employees start dates. another grant was mistakenly
cancelled and subsequently reinstated, requiring an accounting adjustment.
thus, for these 46 grants the company has concluded that the originally assigned
grant dates are not the proper measurement dates. as a result, the company has
recognized $2 million of stock-based compensation expense.
other uwc grantsduring the relevant period, 1,082
grants were approved by uwcs for a variety of purposes, including executive
recruitment, retention, promotion and new hires outside the monday/tuesday
process. these grants were not made pursuant to pre-established guidelines
adopted by the board or compensation committee. therefore, the company has
concluded that these grants were
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2restatement
of consolidated financial statements (continued)
not finalized for accounting purposes until
ratification by the board or compensation committee. accordingly, for 660
grants, the company has concluded that the originally assigned grant dates are
not the proper measurement dates. as a result, the company has recognized $48
million of stock-based compensation expense.
ceo grantsduring the relevant period, the company
made two grants to ceo steve jobs. the first grant, dated january12,
2000, was for 10 million option shares. the second grant, dated october19,
2001, was for 7.5 million option shares. both grants were cancelled in march2003
prior to being exercised, when mr.jobs received 5 million shares of
restricted stock.
with respect to the grant dated january12, 2000,
the board on december2, 1999, authorized a special ceo compensation
committee to grant mr.jobs up to 15 million shares. the evidence
indicates that the ceo compensation committee finalized the terms of the grant
on january12, 2000, although the committees action was memorialized in a
uwc transmitted on january 18, 2000. because the measurement date is the originally
assigned grant date, the company has not recognized any stock-based
compensation expense from this grant. if the company had determined that the
measurement date was the date when the uwc was executed or received, then
additional stock-based compensation would have been recognized.
the grant dated october19, 2001 was originally
approved at a board meeting on august29, 2001, with an exercise price of
$17.83. the terms of the grant, however, were not finalized until december18,
2001. the grant was dated october19, 2001, with an exercise price of
$18.30. the approval for the grant was improperly recorded as occurring at a
special board meeting on october19, 2001. such a special board meeting
did not occur. there was no evidence, however, that any current member of
management was aware of this irregularity. the company has recognized $20
million in stock-based compensation expense for this grant, reflecting the
difference between the exercise price of $18.30 and the share price on december18,
2001 of $21.01.
the incremental impact
from recognizing stock-based compensation expense resulting from the
investigation of past stock option grants is as follows (dollars in millions):
fiscalyear
pre-tax
expense
(income)
aftertax
expense
$
(1
)
$
total 1998  2003
impact
total
$
$
additionally, the company has restated the pro forma
expense under statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no.123
in note 1 to reflect the impact of these adjustments.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2restatement
of consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table
presents the effects of the stock-based compensation and related tax adjustments
made to the companys previously reported consolidated balance sheet as of september24,
2005 (in millions, except share amounts):
september24,2005
asreported
adjustments
asrestated
assets:
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
3,491
$
$
3,491
short-term investments
4,770
4,770
accounts receivable, less allowance of $46
inventories
deferred tax assets
other current assets
total current assets
10,300
10,300
property, plant, and equipment, net
goodwill
acquired intangible assets, net
other assets
(35
)
total assets
$
11,551
(35
)
$
11,516
liabilities and shareholders
equity:
current
liabilities:
accounts payable
$
1,779
$
$
1,779
accrued expenses
1,705
1,708
total current liabilities
3,484
3,487
non-current
liabilities
total liabilities
4,085
4,088
commitments and
contingencies
shareholders
equity:
common stock, no par value; 1,800,000,000 shares
authorized; 835,019,364 shares issued and outstanding
3,521
3,564
deferred stock compensation
(60
)
(1
)
(61
)
retained earnings
4,005
(80
)
3,925
accumulated other comprehensive income
total shareholders equity
7,466
(38
)
7,428
total liabilities
and shareholders equity
$
11,551
(35
)
$
11,516
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2restatement of
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the
following table presents the effects of the stock-based compensation and
related tax adjustments made to the companys previously reported consolidated statements
of operations (in millions, except share and per share amounts):
fiscal year ended september24, 2005
fiscal year ended september25, 2004
as
reported
adjustments
as
restated
as
reported
adjustments
as
restated
net sales
$
13,931
$
$
13,931
$
8,279
$
$
8,279
cost of sales (1)
9,888
9,889
6,020
6,022
gross margin
4,043
(1
)
4,042
2,259
(2
)
2,257
operating expenses:
research and development (1)
selling, general, and administrative (1)
1,859
1,864
1,421
1,430
restructuring costs
total operating expenses
2,393
2,399
1,933
1,944
operating income
1,650
(7
)
1,643
(13
)
other income and expense
income before
provision for incometaxes
1,815
(7
)
1,808
(13
)
provision for
income taxes
(3
)
net income
$
1,335
$
(7
)
$
1,328
$
$
(10
)
$
earnings per
common share:
basic
$
1.65
$
(0.01
)
$
1.64
$
0.37
$
(0.01
)
$
0.36
diluted
$
1.56
$
(0.01
)
$
1.55
$
0.36
$
(0.02
)
$
0.34
shares used in computing
earnings per share (in thousands):
basic
808,439
808,439
743,180
743,180
diluted
856,780
856,878
774,622
774,776
(1) includes
stock-based compensation expense, which wasallocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
$
$
$
research and development
$
$
$
$
$
$
selling, general,
and administrative
$
$
$
$
$
$
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 2restatement of
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table presents
the cumulative adjustments of each component of shareholders equity at the end
of each fiscal year (in millions):
fiscalyear
commonstock
deferredstock
compensation
retainedearnings
netimpactto
shareholdersequity
$
$
(27
)
$
$
(1
)
(32
)
(6
)
(2
)
(43
)
(15
)
(2
)
(49
)
(28
)
(49
)
(51
)
(22
)
(63
)
(8
)
(73
)
(13
)
(1
)
(80
)
(38
)
note 3financial
instruments
the carrying amounts of
cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued
expenses approximate their fair value due to the short maturities of those
instruments.
cash, cash
equivalents and short-term investments
the
following table summarizes the fair value of the companys cash and available-for-sale
securities held in its short-term investment portfolio, recorded as cash and
cash equivalents or short-term investments (in millions):
september30,
september24,
cash
$
$
u.s. treasury and
agency securities
u.s. corporate
securities
4,309
2,030
foreign
securities
1,831
1,245
total cash equivalents
6,192
3,364
u.s. treasury and agency securities
u.s. corporate
securities
2,701
3,662
foreign
securities
total short-term investments
3,718
4,770
total cash, cash
equivalents, and short-term investments
$
10,110
$
8,261
the companys u.s. corporate securities consist
primarily of commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits, and
corporate debt securities. foreign securities consist primarily of foreign
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, and time deposits with foreign
institutions, most of which are denominated in u.s. dollars. the company had
net unrealized losses totaling $687,000 on its investment portfolio, primarily
related to investments with stated maturities less than 1 year, as of september30,
2006, and net unrealized losses of $5.9 million on its investment portfolio,
approximately half of which related to investments with stated maturities less
than 1 year, as of september24, 2005. the company may sell its
investments prior to their stated maturities for strategic purposes, in
anticipation of credit deterioration, or
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 3financial
instruments (continued)
for duration management.
the company recognized net losses before taxes of $434,000 and $137,000 in 2006
and 2005, respectively, and a net gain before taxes of $1 million in 2004 as a
result of such sales. these net gains were included in interest and other
income, net.
as of september30,
2006 and september24, 2005, approximately $921 million and $287 million,
respectively, of the companys short-term investments had underlying maturities
ranging from 1 to 5 years. the remaining short-term investments as of september30,
2006 and september24, 2005 had maturities less than 12 months.
in accordance with fasb
staff position (fsp) fas 115-1 and fas 124-1, the meaning of other-than-temporary impairment and its application to
certain investments, the following table shows the gross unrealized
losses and fair value for those investments that were in an unrealized loss
position as of september30, 2006 and september24, 2005, aggregated
by investment category and the length of time that individual securities have
been in a continuous loss position (in millions):
lessthan12months
12monthsorgreater
total
securitydescription
fair
value
unrealized
loss
fair
value
unrealized
loss
fair
value
unrealized
loss
u.s. treasury and agency
securities
$
$
$
$
$
$
u.s. corporate
securities
(1
)
1,045
(1
)
foreign securities
total
$
1,341
$
$
$
(1
)
$
1,503
$
(1
)
lessthan12months
12monthsorgreater
total
securitydescription
fair
value
unrealized
loss
fair
value
unrealized
loss
fair
value
unrealized
loss
u.s. treasury and agency
securities
$
$
(1
)
$
$
$
$
(1
)
u.s. corporate
securities
3,960
(4
)
3,985
(4
)
foreign securities
1,382
(1
)
1,383
(1
)
total
$
5,502
$
(6
)
$
$
$
5,530
$
(6
)
the unrealized losses on
the companys investments during 2006 in u.s. government securities and during
2005 in u.s. government securities, u.s. corporate securities, and foreign
securities were caused primarily by changes in interest rates. the company
typically invests in highly-rated securities with low probabilities of default.
the companys investment policy requires investments to be rated single-a or
better. therefore, the company considers the declines to be temporary in nature.
as of september30, 2006, the company does not consider the investments to
be other-than-temporarily impaired.
market values were
determined for each individual security in the investment portfolio. when
evaluating the investments for other-than-temporary impairment, the company
reviews factors such as the length of time and extent to which fair value has
been below cost basis, the financial condition of the issuer, and the companys
ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time, which may be
sufficient for anticipated recovery in market value.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 3financial
instruments (continued)
accounts receivable
trade receivables
the company distributes its products through
third-party distributors and resellers and directly to certain education,
consumer, and commercial customers. the company generally does not require
collateral from its customers; however, the company will require collateral in
certain instances to limit credit risk. in addition, when possible, the company
does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance
for certain customers in latin america, europe, asia, and australia and by
arranging with third-party financing companies to provide flooring arrangements
and other loan and lease programs to the companys direct customers. these
credit-financing arrangements are directly between the third-party financing
company and the end customer. as such, the company generally does not assume
any recourse or credit risk sharing related to any of these arrangements.
however, considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral,
third-party flooring arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the
companys distribution and retail channel partners. no customer accounted for
more than 10% of trade receivables as of september30, 2006 or september24,
2005.
the
following table summarizes the activity in the allowance for doubtful accounts
(in millions):
september30,
september24,
september25,
beginning
allowance balance
$
$
$
charged to costs
and expenses
deductions(a)
(11
)
(9
)
(5
)
ending allowance balance
$
$
$
(a) represents
amounts written off against the allowance, net of recoveries.
vendor non-trade
receivables
the company has non-trade
receivables from certain of its manufacturing vendors resulting from the sale
of raw material components to these manufacturing vendors who manufacture
sub-assemblies or assemble final products for the company. the company
purchases these raw material components directly from suppliers. these
non-trade receivables, which are included in the consolidated balance sheets in
other current assets, totaled $1.6 billion and $417 million as of september30,
2006 and september24, 2005, respectively. the company does not reflect
the sale of these components in net sales and does not recognize any profits on
these sales until the products are sold through to the end customer at which
time the profit is recognized as a reduction of cost of sales.
derivative
financial instruments
the company uses derivatives to partially offset its
business exposure to foreign exchange risk. foreign currency forward and option
contracts are used to offset the foreign exchange risk on certain existing
assets and liabilities and to hedge the foreign exchange risk on expected
future cash flows on certain forecasted revenue and cost of sales. from time to
time, the company enters into interest rate derivative agreements to modify the
interest rate profile of certain investments and debt. the companys accounting
policies for these instruments are based on whether the instruments are
designated as hedge or non-hedge instruments. the company records all
derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 3financial
instruments (continued)
the following table shows
the notional principal, net fair value, and credit risk amounts of the companys
foreign currency instruments as of september30, 2006 and september24,
2005 (in millions):
september30,2006
september24,2005
notional
principal
fair
value
creditrisk
amounts
notional
principal
fair
value
creitrisk
amounts
foreign exchange
instruments qualifying as accounting hedges:
spot/forward contracts
$
$
$
$
$
$
purchased options
$
1,256
$
$
$
1,668
$
$
sold options
$
$
(1
)
$
$
1,087
$
(5
)
$
foreign exchange instruments other than accounting
hedges:
spot/forward contracts
$
1,103
$
$
$
$
(3
)
$
purchased options
$
$
$
$
$
$
sold options
$
$
$
$
$
$
the notional principal amounts for derivative
instruments provide one measure of the transaction volume outstanding as of
year-end, and do not represent the amount of the companys exposure to credit
or market loss. the credit risk amounts shown in the table above represents the
companys gross exposure to potential accounting loss on these transactions if
all counterparties failed to perform according to the terms of the contract,
based on then-current currency exchange rates at each respective date.
the companys exposure to credit loss and market risk will vary over time as a
function of currency exchange rates.
the estimates of fair
value are based on applicable and commonly used pricing models and prevailing
financial market information as of september30, 2006 and september24,
2005. although the table above reflects the notional principal, fair value, and
credit risk amounts of the companys foreign exchange instruments, it does not
reflect the gains or losses associated with the exposures and transactions that
the foreign exchange instruments are intended to hedge. the amounts ultimately
realized upon settlement of these financial instruments, together with the
gains and losses on the underlying exposures, will depend on actual market
conditions during the remaining life of the instruments.
foreign exchange
risk management
the company may enter into foreign currency forward
and option contracts with financial institutions to protect against foreign
exchange risk associated with existing assets and liabilities, certain firmly
committed transactions, forecasted future cash flows, and net investments in
foreign subsidiaries. generally, the companys practice is to hedge a majority
of its existing material foreign exchange transaction exposures. however, the
company may not hedge certain foreign exchange transaction exposures due to
immateriality, prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular exposures, or
limited availability of appropriate hedging instruments.
to help protect gross margins from fluctuations in
foreign currency exchange rates, the companys u.s. dollar functional
subsidiaries hedge a portion of forecasted foreign currency revenue, and the
companys non-u.s. dollar functional subsidiaries selling in local currencies
hedge a portion of forecasted inventory purchases not denominated in the
subsidiaries functional currency. other comprehensive income
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 3financial
instruments (continued)
associated with hedges of foreign currency revenue is
recognized as a component of net sales in the same period as the related sales
are recognized, and other comprehensive income related to inventory purchases
is recognized as a component of cost of sales in the same period as the related
costs are recognized. typically, the company hedges portions of its forecasted
foreign currency exposure associated with revenue and inventory purchases over
a time horizon of up to 6 months.
derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges
must be de-designated as hedges when it is probable that the forecasted hedged
transaction will not occur in the initially identified time period or within a
subsequent 2 month time period. deferred gains and losses in other
comprehensive income associated with such derivative instruments are
immediately reclassified into earnings in other income and expense. any
subsequent changes in fair value of such derivative instruments are also
reflected in current earnings unless they are re-designated as hedges of other
transactions. the company recognized a net gain of approximately $421,000 in
2006 and net losses of $1.6 million and $2.8 million in 2005 and 2004,
respectively, in other income and expense related to the loss of hedge
designation on discontinued cash flow hedges due to changes in the companys
forecast of future net sales and cost of sales and due to prevailing market
conditions. as of september30, 2006, the company had a net deferred gain
associated with cash flow hedges of approximately $2.8 million, net of taxes,
substantially all of which is expected to be reclassified to earnings by the
end of the second quarter of fiscal 2007.
the net gain or loss on the effective portion of a
derivative instrument designated as a net investment hedge is included in the
cumulative translation adjustment account of accumulated other comprehensive
income within shareholders equity. for the years ended september30, 2006
and september24, 2005, the company had net gains of $7.4 million and
$673,000, respectively, included in the cumulative translation adjustment.
the company may also enter
into foreign currency forward and option contracts to offset the foreign
exchange gains and losses generated by the re-measurement of certain assets and
liabilities recorded in non-functional currencies. changes in the fair value of
these derivatives are recognized in current earnings in other income and
expense as offsets to the changes in the fair value of the related assets or
liabilities. due to currency market movements, changes in option time value can
lead to increased volatility in other income and expense.
note 4consolidated
financial statement details (in millions)
other current
assets
vendor non-trade
receivables
$
1,593
$
nand flash memory
prepayments
other current
assets
total other
current assets
$
2,270
$
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 4consolidated
financial statement details (in millions) (continued)
property, plant,
and equipment
land and
buildings
$
$
machinery,
equipment, and internal-use software
office furniture
and equipment
leasehold
improvements
2,075
1,481
accumulated depreciation and amortization
(794
)
(664
)
net property,
plant, and equipment
$
1,281
$
other assets
asrestated(1)
long-term nand
flash memory prepayments
$
1,042
$
non-current
deferred tax assets
capitalized
software development costs, net
other assets
total other
assets
$
1,238
$
accrued expenses
asrestated(1)
deferred revenuecurrent
$
$
accrued warranty
and related costs
accrued marketing
and distribution
accrued
compensation and employee benefits
other accrued tax
liability
deferred margin
on component sales
other current
liabilities
total accrued
expenses
$
3,081
$
1,708
non-current
liabilities
deferred tax
liabilities
$
$
deferred revenuenon-current
other non-current
liabilities
total non-current
liabilities
$
$
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 4consolidated
financial statement details (in millions) (continued)
other income and
expense
gains on
non-current investments, net
$
$
$
interest income
$
$
$
interest expense
(3
)
other income
(expense), net
(29
)
(18
)
(8
)
total interest
and other income, net
total other
income and expense
$
$
$
(1) see
note 2, restatement of consolidated financial statements.
note 5goodwill and other
intangible assets
the company is currently amortizing its acquired
intangible assets with definite lives over periods ranging from 3 to 10 years.
the
following table summarizes the components of gross and net intangible asset
balances (in millions):
september30,2006
september24,2005
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
carrying
amount
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
net
carrying
amount
goodwill
$
$
$
$
$
$
acquired
technology
(42
)
(34
)
total acquired
intangible assets
$
$
(42
)
$
$
$
(34
)
$
as of september30, 2006, and september24,
2005, the weighted-average amortization period for acquired technology was 8.5
years and 5.5 years, respectively.
during 2006, the company sold certain assets related
to its powerschool web-based student information system operations. in
connection with this sale, the company reduced goodwill by $31 million for the
outstanding balance from the acquisition of powerschool,inc. in 2001 and
recognized a $4 million pre-tax gain, which is reflected in other income and
expense in the consolidated statement of operations.
during 2005, the company recorded an adjustment of
approximately $11 million to goodwill relating to a reduction of valuation
allowances that were recorded at the time certain net operating loss
carryforwards (nols) were acquired in previous business combinations. during
2005, these nols were deemed to be more likely than not to be realized and
accordingly the valuation allowances were reversed against the related goodwill
that was recognized at the time of the acquisitions.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 5goodwill and other
intangible assets
(continued)
expected
annual amortization expense related to acquired technology is as follows (in
millions):
fiscalyears:
$
thereafter
total
$
amortization expense
related to acquired intangible assets was $12 million, $9 million, and $7
million in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively.
note 6restructuring
charges
during 2004, the company
recorded total restructuring charges of approximately $23.0 million, including
approximately $14.0 million in severance costs, $5.5 million in asset
impairments, and $3.5 million for lease cancellations. the lease cancellations
relate to vacating a leased sales facility from a european workforce reduction
during 2004. of the $23.0 million charges, $21.3 million had been utilized by
the end of 2006, with the remainder consisting of $1.7 million for lease
cancellations. these actions have resulted in the termination of 452 positions.
note 7income taxes
the
provision for income taxes consisted of the following (in millions):
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
federal:
current
$
$
$
deferred
state:
current
deferred
(91
)
(18
)
(25
)
(13
)
foreign:
current
deferred
(17
)
(3
)
(16
)
provision for income
taxes
$
$
$
(1) see
note 2, restatement of consolidated financial statements.
the foreign provision for income taxes is based on
foreign pretax earnings of approximately $1.5 billion, $922 million, and $384
million in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. as of september30, 2006,
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 7income
taxes (continued)
approximately $4.1 billion of the companys cash, cash
equivalents, and short-term investments were held by foreign subsidiaries
and are generally based in u.s. dollar-denominated holdings. amounts held
by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to u.s. income taxation on
repatriation to the u.s. the companys consolidated financial statements
provide for any related tax liability on amounts that may be repatriated, aside
from undistributed earnings of certain of the companys foreign subsidiaries
that are intended to be indefinitely reinvested in operations outside the u.s.
u.s. income taxes have not been provided on a cumulative total of $823 million
of such earnings. it is not practicable to determine the income tax liability
that might be incurred if these earnings were to be distributed.
on october22, 2004, the american jobs creation
act of 2004 (ajca) was signed into law. the ajca included a provision for the
deduction of 85% of certain foreign earnings that were repatriated, as defined
in the ajca, within a specified time frame. among other requirements, dividends
qualifying for the 85% deduction must be reinvested in the united states in
certain qualified investments pursuant to a domestic reinvestment plan approved
by the chief executive officer (ceo) and board of directors. during 2006, the
company repatriated approximately $1.6 billion of foreign earnings. of the
earnings repatriated, $755million is eligible for the reduced tax rate
provided by the ajca. accordingly, the company recorded a tax charge of $51
million related to the repatriation of foreign earnings under the provisions of
the ajca. in addition, the company recorded a tax benefit of $71 million
resulting from the implementation of tax planning strategies to recognize
deferred tax assets that were previously not recognizable within certain
foreign subsidiaries.
deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect the
effects of tax losses, credits, and the future income tax effects of temporary
differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of
existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and are measured
using enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in the years in which
those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
as of september30,
2006 and september24, 2005, the significant components of the companys
deferred tax assets and liabilities were (in millions):
asrestated(1)
deferredtaxassets:
accrued liabilities and other reserves
$
$
tax losses and credits
basis of capital assets and investments
accounts receivable and inventory reserves
other
total deferred tax assets
less valuation
allowance
net deferred tax
assets
deferred tax
liabilities:
unremitted earnings of subsidiaries
total deferred tax liabilities
net deferred tax asset
$
$
(1) see note 2, restatement
of consolidated financial statements.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 7income
taxes (continued)
as of september30, 2006, the company has state
and foreign tax loss and state credit carryforwards, the tax effect of which is
$55 million. certain of those carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $12
million, expire between 2016 and 2019. a
portion of these carryforwards was acquired from the companys previous
acquisitions, the utilization of which is subject to certain limitations
imposed by the internal revenue code. the remaining benefits from tax losses
and credits do not expire. as of september30, 2006 and september24,
2005, a valuation allowance of $5 million was recorded against the deferred tax
asset for the benefits of state operating losses that may not be realized. management
believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income
that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together
with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to
fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets.
a
reconciliation of the provision for income taxes, with the amount computed by
applying the statutory federal income tax rate (35% in 2006, 2005, and 2004) to
income before provision for income taxes, is as follows (in millions):
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
computed expected
tax
$
$
$
state taxes, net
of federal effect
(19
)
(5
)
indefinitely
invested earnings of foreign subsidiaries
(224
)
(98
)
(31
)
nondeductible
executive compensation
research and
development credit, net
(12
)
(26
)
(5
)
other items
(19
)
(24
)
provision for
income taxes
$
$
$
effective tax rate
%
%
%
(1) see
note 2, restatement of consolidated financial statements.
the companys income taxes
payable has been reduced by the tax benefits from employee stock options. the
company receives an income tax benefit calculated as the difference between the
fair market value of the stock issued at the time of the exercise and the
option price, tax effected. the net tax benefits from employee stock option
transactions were $419 million, $428 million (as restated(1)), and $83 million
(as restated(1)) in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively, and were reflected as
an increase to common stock in the consolidated statements of shareholders
equity.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 7income
taxes (continued)
the internal revenue
service (irs) has substantially completed its field audit of the companys
federal income tax returns for the years 2002 through 2003 and proposed certain
adjustments. the company intends to contest certain of these adjustments
through the irs appeals office. substantially all irs audit issues for years
prior to 2002 have been resolved. in addition, the company is also subject to
audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. management believes that
adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax
examinations. however, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with
certainty. should any issues addressed in the companys tax audits be resolved
in a manner not consistent with managements expectations, the company could be
required to adjust its provision for income tax in the period such resolution
occurs. in 2006, the company recorded a tax benefit of $20million due to
the settlement of prior year tax audits in the u.s.
note 8shareholders
equity
preferred stock
the company has five
million shares of authorized preferred stock, none of which is outstanding.
under the terms of the companys restated articles of incorporation, the board
of directors is authorized to determine or alter the rights, preferences,
privileges, and restrictions of the companys authorized but unissued shares of
preferred stock.
restricted stock units
the companys board of directors has granted
restricted stock units to members of the companys senior management team,
excluding its ceo. these restricted stock units generally vest over four years
either at the end of the four-year service period, in two equal installments on
the second and fourth anniversaries of the date of grant, or in equal
installments on each of the first through fourth anniversaries of the grant
date. upon vesting, the restricted stock units will convert into an equivalent
number of shares of common stock. the amounts of the restricted stock units
expensed by the company are based on the closing market price of the companys
common stock on the date of grant and are amortized on a straight-line basis
over the four-year requisite service period. the restricted stock units have
been reflected in the calculation of diluted earnings per share utilizing the
treasury stock method.
2.47 million previously
granted restricted stock units vested during 2006. a majority of these vested
restricted stock units were net-share settled such that the company withheld
shares with value equivalent to the employees minimum statutory obligation for
the applicable income and other employment taxes, and remitted the cash to the
appropriate taxing authorities. the total shares withheld of 985,833 for 2006
was based on the value of the restricted stock units on their vesting date as
determined by the companys closing stock price. total payments for the
employees tax obligations to the taxing authorities were approximately $59 million.
these net-share settlements had the effect of share repurchases by the company
as they reduced and retired the number of shares that would have otherwise been
issued as a result of the vesting and did not represent an expense to the
company.
ceo restricted stock award
on march19, 2003,
the companys board of directors granted 10 million shares of restricted stock
to the companys ceo that vested on march19, 2006. the amount of the
restricted stock award expensed by the company was based on the closing market
price of the companys common stock on the date of grant and was amortized on a
straight-line basis over the three-year requisite service period.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 8shareholders
equity (continued)
upon vesting during 2006,
the restricted stock award was net-share settled such that the company withheld
shares with value equivalent to the ceos minimum statutory obligation for the
applicable income and other employment taxes, and remitted the cash to the
appropriate taxing authorities. the total shares withheld of 4.6 million was
based on the value of the restricted stock award on the vesting date as
determined by the companys closing stock price of $64.66. the remaining shares
net of those withheld were delivered to the companys ceo. total payments for
the ceos tax obligations to the taxing authorities were approximately $296
million. the net-share settlement had the effect of share repurchases by the
company as it reduced and retired the number of shares outstanding and did not
represent an expense to the company.
stock repurchase plan
in july1999, the
companys board of directors authorized a plan for the company to repurchase up
to $500 million of its common stock. this repurchase plan does not obligate the
company to acquire any specific number of shares or acquire shares over any
specified period of time. the company has repurchased a total of 13.1 million
shares at a cost of $217 million under this plan and was authorized to
repurchase up to an additional $283 million of its common stock as of september30,
2006.
comprehensive income
comprehensive income consists of two components: net
income and other comprehensive income. other comprehensive income refers to
revenue, expenses, gains, and losses that under u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles are recorded as an element of shareholders equity but
are excluded from net income. the companys other comprehensive income consists
of foreign currency translation adjustments from those subsidiaries not using
the u.s. dollar as their functional currency, unrealized gains and losses on
marketable securities categorized as available-for-sale, and net deferred gains
and losses on certain derivative instruments accounted for as cash flow hedges.
the
following table summarizes the components of accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss), net of taxes (in millions):
unrealized losses
on available-for-sale securities
$
$
(4
)
$
(4
)
unrealized
gains/(losses) on derivative investments
(4
)
cumulative
foreign currency translation
(7
)
accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss)
$
$
$
(15
)
the following table
summarizes activity in other comprehensive income related to available-for-sale
securities, net of taxes (in millions):
change in fair
value of available-for-sale securities
$
$
$
(1
)
adjustment for
net gains/losses realized and included in net income
(4
)
change in unrealized
gain/loss on available-for-sale securities
$
$
$
(5
)
the tax effect related to
the change in unrealized gain/loss on available-for-sale securities was $(2)million,
zero, and $4 million for 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. the tax effect on
the reclassification adjustment for net gains/losses realized and included in
net income was $1 million for 2004.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 8shareholders
equity (continued)
the following table
summarizes activity in other comprehensive income related to derivatives, net
of taxes, held by the company (in millions):
changes in fair
value of derivatives
$
$
$
(21
)
adjustment for
net losses realized and included in net income
(12
)
change in unrealized
gain/loss on derivative instruments
$
(1
)
$
$
the tax effect related to
the changes in fair value of derivatives was $(8)million, $(3)million,
and $10million for 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. the tax effect
related to derivative gains/losses reclassified from other comprehensive income
to net income was $8 million, $(2)million, and $(13) million for 2006,
2005, and 2004, respectively.
employee benefit plans
2003 employee stock plan
the 2003 employee stock
plan (the 2003 plan) is a shareholder approved plan that provides for
broad-based grants to employees, including executive officers. based on the
terms of individual option grants, options granted under the 2003 plan
generally expire 7 to 10 years after the grant date and generally become
exercisable over a period of 4 years, based on continued employment, with
either annual or quarterly vesting. the 2003 plan permits the granting of
incentive stock options, nonstatutory stock options, restricted stock units,
stock appreciation rights, and stock purchase rights.
1997 employee stock option plan
in august1997, the
companys board of directors approved the 1997 employee stock option plan (the 1997
plan), a non-shareholder approved plan for grants of stock options to employees
who are not officers of the company. based on the terms of individual option
grants, options granted under the 1997 plan generally expire 7 to 10 years
after the grant date and generally become exercisable over a period of 4years,
based on continued employment, with either annual or quarterly vesting. in october2003,
the company terminated the 1997 employee stock option plan and cancelled all
remaining unissued shares totaling 28,590,702. no new options can be granted
from the 1997 plan.
employee stock option exchange program
on march20, 2003,
the company announced a voluntary employee stock option exchange program (the exchange
program) whereby eligible employees, other than executive officers and members
of the board of directors, had an opportunity to exchange outstanding options
with exercise prices at or above $12.50 per share for a predetermined smaller
number of new stock options issued with exercise prices equal to the fair
market value of one share of the companys common stock on the day the new
awards were issued, which was to be at least six months plus one day after the
exchange options were cancelled. on april17, 2003, in accordance with the
exchange program, the company cancelled options to purchase 33,138,386 shares
of its common stock. on october22, 2003, new stock options totaling
13,394,736 shares were issued to employees at an exercise price of $11.38 per
share, which is equivalent to the closing price of the companys stock on that
date. no financial or accounting impact to the companys financial position,
results of operations or cash flows was associated with this transaction.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 8shareholders equity (continued)
1997 director stock option plan
in august1997, the
companys board of directors adopted a director stock option plan (director
plan) for non-employee directors of the company, which was approved by
shareholders in 1998. pursuant to the
director plan, the companys non-employee directors are granted an option to
acquire 30,000 shares of common stock upon their initial election to the board
(initial options). the initial options vest and
become exercisable in three equal annual installments on each of the first
through third anniversaries of the grant date. on the fourth anniversary of a
non-employee directors initial election to the board and on each subsequent
anniversary thereafter, the director will be entitled to receive an option to
acquire 10,000 shares of common stock (annual options). annual options are
fully vested and immediately exercisable on their date of grant.
rule10b5-1 trading plans
certain of the companys
executive officers, including mr.timothy d. cook, mr.peter
oppenheimer, mr.philip w. schiller, and dr.bertrand serlet, have
entered into trading plans pursuant to rule10b5-1(c)(1)of the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended. a trading plan is a written
document that pre-establishes the amounts, prices and dates (or formula for
determining the amounts, prices and dates) of future purchases or sales of the
companys stock including the exercise and sale of employee stock options and
shares acquired pursuant to the companys employee stock purchase plan and upon
vesting of restricted stock units.
employee stock purchase plan
the company has a
shareholder approved employee stock purchase plan (the purchase plan), under
which substantially all employees may purchase common stock through payroll
deductions at a price equal to 85% of the lower of the fair market values as of
the beginning and end of six month offering periods. stock purchases under the
purchase plan are limited to 10% of an employees compensation, up to a maximum
of $25,000 in any calendar year. the number of shares authorized for issuance
is limited to a total of 1 million shares per offering period. during 2006,
2005, and 2004, adjusted for the february2005 stock split, 1.5 million,
2.3 million, and 3.9 million shares, respectively, were issued under the
purchase plan. as of september30, 2006, approximately 2.3 million shares
were reserved for future issuance under the purchase plan.
employee savings plan
the company has an employee savings plan (the savings
plan) qualifying as a deferred salary arrangement under
section401(k)of the internal revenue code. under the savings plan,
participating u.s. employees may defer a portion of their pre-tax earnings, up
to the internal revenue service annual contribution limit ($15,000 for calendar
year 2006). the company matches 50% to 100% of each employees contributions,
depending on length of service, up to a maximum 6% of the employees earnings.
the companys matching contributions to the savings plan were approximately $33
million, $28million, and $24 million in 2006, 2005, and 2004,
respectively.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 8shareholders'
equity (continued)
stock option activity
a
summary of the companys stock option activity and related information for the
last three fiscal years follows (stock award amounts and aggregate intrinsic
value are presented in thousands):
outstandingoptions
shares
available
numberof
weighted-average
weighted-average
remaining
aggregate
forgrant
shares
exerciseprice
contractualterm
intrinsicvalue
balance at
september27, 2003
91,660
126,024
$
9.54
restricted stock granted
(5,030
)
options granted
(36,394
)
36,394
$
11.48
options cancelled
6,010
(6,010
)
$
10.35
options exercised
(45,686
)
$
8.60
plan shares expired
(32,196
)
balance at
september25, 2004
24,050
110,722
$
10.52
additional options
authorized
49,000
restricted stock units
granted
(460
)
options granted
(16,214
)
16,214
$
42.52
options cancelled
3,844
(3,844
)
$
13.28
restricted stock units
cancelled
options exercised
(49,871
)
$
10.05
plan shares expired
(1,493
)
balance at
september24, 2005
58,957
73,221
$
17.79
restricted stock units
granted
(2,950
)
options granted
(3,881
)
3,881
$
65.28
options cancelled
2,325
(2,325
)
$
29.32
restricted stock units
cancelled
options exercised
(21,795
)
$
11.78
plan shares expired
(82
)
balance at
september30, 2006
54,994
52,982
$
23.23
4.78
$
2,848,896
exercisable at
september30, 2006
31,184
$
14.69
4.35
$
1,942,486
expected to vest
after september30, 2006
21,798
$
35.40
5.40
$
906,410
in conjunction with the amendments to the 2003 plan
that were approved at the annual meeting of shareholders held on april21,
2005, the number of shares available for grant under the 2003 plan will be
reduced by two times the number of restricted shares and restricted stock units
granted. this amendment is effective for all grants made after april21,
2005.
aggregate intrinsic value represents the value of the
companys closing stock price on the last trading day of the fiscal period in
excess of the exercise price multiplied by the number of options outstanding or
exercisable. total intrinsic value of options at time of exercise was $1.2
billion, $1.1 billion, and $266.9 million for 2006, 2005, and 2004,
respectively.
as of september30, 2006, the company had 3.41
million restricted stock units outstanding with a total grant-date fair value
of $135.1 million that were excluded from the options outstanding balances in
the preceding table. the weighted-average grant date fair value of restricted
stock units granted during 2006, 2005, and 2004 was $70.92, $45.04, and $12.81,
respectively. aggregate intrinsic value of unvested restricted stock units at september30,
2006 was $262.5 million. restricted stock units that vested during 2006 totaled
2.47 million and had a fair value of $148.5 million as of the vesting date. granted
restricted stock units have been deducted from the shares available for grant
under the companys stock option plans.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 8shareholders'
equity (continued)
the number of shares of restricted
stock that vested during 2006 was 10 million, which had a fair value of $646.6
million. the grant-date fair value of restricted stock that fully vested during
2006 was $7.48 per share. for the years ended september30, 2006, september24,
2005, and september25, 2004, compensation expense related to restricted
stock was $4.6 million, $24.9 million, and $24.9 million, respectively.
note 9stock-based
compensation
the company has provided pro forma disclosures in note
1 of these notes to consolidated financial statements of the effect on net
income and earnings per share for the years ended september24, 2005 and september25,
2004 as if the fair value method of accounting for stock compensation had been
used for its employee stock option grants and employee stock purchase plan
purchases. these pro forma effects have been estimated at the date of grant and
beginning of the period, respectively, using the bsm option pricing model.
the
weighted average assumptions used for 2006, 2005, and 2004 and the resulting estimates
of weighted-average fair value per share of options granted and for stock
purchases during those periods are as follows:
expected life of
stock options
3.56 years
3.57 years
3.50 years
expected life of
stock purchases
6 months
6 months
6 months
interest
ratestock options
4.60
%
3.73
%
2.40
%
interest
ratestock purchases
4.29
%
2.54
%
1.18
%
volatilitystock
options
40.34
%
39.52
%
40.00
%
volatilitystock
purchases
39.56
%
40.88
%
35.82
%
dividend yields
weighted-average
fair value of options granted during the year
$
23.16
$
14.41
$
3.69
weighted-average fair
value of stock purchases during the year
$
14.06
$
7.55
$
2.78
pursuant to sfas no.123r,
the expected volatility assumptions used by the company are based on the
historical volatility of the companys common stock over the most recent period
commensurate with the estimated expected life of the companys stock options
and other relevant factors including implied volatility in market traded
options on the companys common stock. the company bases its expected life
assumption on its historical experience and on the terms and conditions of the
stock options it grants to employees.
note 10commitments and
contingencies
lease commitments
the company leases various equipment and facilities,
including retail space, under noncancelable operating lease arrangements. the
company does not currently utilize any other off-balance-sheet financing
arrangements. the major facility leases are for terms of 5 to 15 years and
generally provide
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 10commitments
and contingencies (continued)
renewal options for
terms of 3 to 5 additional years. leases for retail space are for terms of 5 to
20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi-year
renewal options. as of september30, 2006, the companys total future
minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were approximately
$1.2 billion, of which $887 million related to leases for retail space.
rent
expense under all operating leases, including both cancelable and noncancelable
leases, was $138 million, $140 million, and $103 million in 2006, 2005, and
2004, respectively. future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating
leases having remaining terms in excess of one year as of september30,
2006, are as follows (in millions):
fiscalyears
$
thereafter
total minimum lease
payments
$
1,154
accrued warranty
and indemnifications
the company offers a basic limited parts and labor
warranty on its hardware products. the basic warranty period for hardware
products is typically one year from the date of purchase by the end-user. the
company also offers a 90-day basic warranty for its service parts used to
repair the companys hardware products. the company provides currently for the
estimated cost that may be incurred under its basic limited product warranties
at the time related revenue is recognized. factors considered in determining
appropriate accruals for product warranty obligations include the size of the
installed base of products subject to warranty protection, historical and
projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and
knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the companys
typical experience. the company assesses the adequacy of its preexisting
warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary based on actual
experience and changes in future estimates.
the company periodically provides updates to its
applications and system software to maintain the softwares compliance with
specifications. the estimated cost to develop such updates is accounted for as
warranty costs that are recognized at the time related software revenue is
recognized. factors considered in determining appropriate accruals related to
such updates include the number of units delivered, the number of updates
expected to occur, and the historical cost and estimated future cost of the
resources necessary to develop these updates.
the
following table reconciles changes in the companys accrued warranties and
related costs (in millions):
beginning accrued
warranty and related costs
$
$
$
cost of warranty
claims
(267
)
(188
)
(105
)
accruals for
product warranties
ending accrued warranty
and related costs
$
$
$
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 10commitments
and contingencies (continued)
the
company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and
application software against legal claims that the software infringes
third-party intellectual property rights. other agreements entered into by the
company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the company
could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim
against the company or an indemnified third-party. however, the company has not
been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an
infringement claim asserted against itself or an indemnified third-party and,
in the opinion of management, does not have a potential liability related to
unresolved infringement claims subject to indemnification that would have a
material adverse effect on its financial condition, liquidity or results of
operations. therefore, the company did not record a liability for infringement
costs as of either september30, 2006 or september24, 2005.
concentrations in
the available sources of supply of materials and product
although most components
essential to the companys business are generally available from multiple
sources, other key components (including microprocessors and application-specific
integrated circuits (asics)) are currently obtained by the company from
single or limited sources. some other key components, while currently available
to the company from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry-wide
availability and pricing pressures. in addition, the company uses some
components that are not common to the rest of the personal computer industry,
and new products introduced by the company often initially utilize custom
components obtained from only one source until the company has evaluated
whether there is a need for and subsequently qualifies additional suppliers. if
the supply of a key single-sourced component to the company were to be
delayed or curtailed, or in the event a key manufacturing vendor delays
shipments of completed products to the company, the companys ability to ship
related products in desired quantities and in a timely manner could be adversely
affected. the companys business and financial performance could also be
adversely affected depending on the time required to obtain sufficient
quantities from the original source, or to identify and obtain sufficient
quantities from an alternative source. continued availability of these
components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the
production of common components instead of components customized to meet the
companys requirements. finally, significant portions of the companys cpus,
logic boards, and assembled products are now manufactured by outsourcing
partners, primarily in various parts of asia. although the company works
closely with its outsourcing partners on manufacturing schedules, the companys
operating results could be adversely affected if its outsourcing partners were
unable to meet their production obligations.
long-term supply
agreements
during 2006, the company
entered into long-term supply agreements with hynix semiconductor,inc.,
intel corporation, micron technology,inc., samsung electronics co., ltd.,
and toshiba corporation to secure supply of nand flash memory through calendar
year 2010. as part of these agreements, the company prepaid $1.25 billion for
flash memory components during 2006. these prepayments will be applied to
inventory purchases made over the life of each respective agreement.
contingencies
the company is subject to certain other legal
proceedings and claims that have arisen in the ordinary course of business and
have not been fully adjudicated. in the opinion of management, the company does
not have a potential liability related to any current legal proceedings and
claims that would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse
effect on its financial condition, liquidity, or results of operations.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 10commitments
and contingencies (continued)
however, the results of legal proceedings cannot be
predicted with certainty. should the company fail to prevail in any of these
legal matters or should several of these legal matters be resolved against the
company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular
reporting period could be materially adversely affected.
production and marketing
of products in certain states and countries may subject the company to
environmental and other regulations including, in some instances, the
requirement to provide customers the ability to return product at the end of
its useful life, and place responsibility for environmentally safe disposal or
recycling with the company. such laws and regulations have recently been passed
in several jurisdictions in which the company operates including various
european union member countries, japan and certain states within the u.s. although
the company does not anticipate any material adverse effects in the future
based on the nature of its operations and the thrust of such laws, there is no
assurance that such existing laws or future laws will not have a material
adverse effect on the companys financial condition, liquidity, or results of
operations.
note 11segment
information and geographic data
in accordance with sfas no.131, disclosures about segments of an enterprise and related information,
the company reports segment information based on the management approach. the
management approach designates the internal reporting used by management for
making decisions and assessing performance as the source of the companys
reportable segments.
the company manages its business primarily on a geographic
basis. the companys reportable operating segments are comprised of the
americas, europe, japan, and retail. the americas, europe, and japan reportable
segments do not include activities related to the retail segment. the americas
segment includes both north and south america. the europe segment includes
european countries as well as the middle east and africa. the retail segment
operates apple-owned retail stores in the u.s., canada, japan, and the u.k. other
operating segments include asia-pacific, which includes australia and asia
except for japan, and the companys subsidiary, filemaker,inc. each
reportable geographic operating segment provides similar hardware and software
products and similar services, and the accounting policies of the various
segments are the same as those described in note 1, summary of significant
accounting policies, except as described below for the retail segment.
the company evaluates the performance of its operating
segments based on net sales. the retail segments performance is also evaluated
based on operating income. net sales for geographic segments are generally
based on the location of the customers. operating income for each segment
includes net sales to third parties, related cost of sales, and operating expenses
directly attributable to the segment. operating income for each segment
excludes other income and expense and certain expenses that are managed outside
the operating segments. costs excluded from segment operating income include
various corporate expenses such as manufacturing costs and variances not
included in standard costs, research and development, corporate marketing
expenses, stock-based compensation expense, income taxes, various nonrecurring
charges, and other separately managed general and administrative expenses
including certain corporate expenses associated with support of the retail
segment. the company does not include intercompany transfers between segments
for management reporting purposes. segment assets exclude corporate assets.
corporate assets include cash, short-term and long-term investments,
manufacturing facilities, miscellaneous corporate infrastructure, goodwill and
other acquired intangible assets, and retail store construction-in-progress
that is not subject to depreciation. except for the retail segment, capital
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 11segment
information and geographic data (continued)
expenditures for long-lived assets are not reported to
management by segment. capital expenditures by the retail segment were $200
million, $132 million, and $104 million for 2006, 2005, and 2004,
respectively.operating income for all segments, except retail, includes cost of
sales at manufacturing standard cost, other cost of sales, related sales and
marketing costs, and certain general and administrative costs. this measure of
operating income, which includes manufacturing profit, provides a comparable
basis for comparison between the companys various geographic segments. certain
manufacturing expenses and related adjustments not included in segment cost of
sales, including variances between standard and actual manufacturing costs and
the mark-up above standard cost for product supplied to the retail segment, are
included in corporate expenses.
management assesses the operating performance of the
retail segment differently than it assesses the operating performance of the
companys geographic segments. the retail segment revenue and operating income
is intended to depict a measure comparable to that of the companys major
channel partners in the u.s. operating retail stores so the company can
evaluate the retail segment performance as if it were a channel partner.
therefore, the company makes three significant adjustments to the retail
segment for management reporting purposes that are not included in the results
of the companys other segments.
first, the retail segments operating income includes
cost of sales for apple products at an amount normally charged to major channel
partners in the u.s. operating retail stores, less the cost of sales programs
and incentives provided to those channel partners and the companys cost to
support those partners. for the years ended september30, 2006, september24,
2005, and september25, 2004, this resulted in the recognition of
additional cost of sales above standard cost by the retail segment and an
offsetting benefit to corporate expenses of approximately $663 million, $435
million, and $213 million, respectively.
second, the companys service and support contracts
are transferred to the retail segment at the same cost as that charged to the
companys major retail channel partners in the u.s., resulting in a measure of
revenue and gross margin for those items that is comparable between the companys
retail stores and those retail channel partners. the retail segment recognizes
the full amount of revenue and cost of sales of the companys service and
support contracts at the time of sale. because the company has not yet earned
the revenue or incurred the costs associated with the sale of these contracts,
an offset to these amounts is recognized in other operating segments net sales
and cost of sales. for the year ended september30, 2006, this resulted in
the recognition of net sales and cost of sales by the retail segment, with
corresponding offsets in other operating segments, of $159 million and $109
million, respectively. for the year ended september24, 2005, this
resulted in the recognition of net sales and cost of sales by the retail
segment of $92 million and $64 million, respectively. for the year ended september25,
2004, this resulted in the recognition of net sales and cost of sales by the
retail segment of $54 million and $37 million, respectively.
third, the company had opened a total of eight
high-profile stores as of september30, 2006. these high-profile stores
are larger than the companys typical retail stores and were designed to
further promote brand awareness and provide a venue for certain corporate sales
and marketing activities, including corporate briefings. as such, the company
allocates certain operating expenses associated with these stores to corporate
marketing expense to reflect the estimated benefit realized company-wide. the
allocation of these operating costs is based on the amount incurred for a high-profile
store in excess of that incurred by a more typical company retail location.
expenses allocated to corporate marketing resulting
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 11segment
information and geographic data (continued)
from the operations
of these stores were $33 million, $31 million, and $16 million for the years
ended september30, 2006, september24, 2005, and september25,
2004, respectively.summary information by operating segment follows (in
millions):
americas:
net sales
$
9,307
$
6,590
$
4,019
operating income
$
1,665
$
$
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets (a)
$
$
$
europe:
net sales
$
4,094
$
3,073
$
1,799
operating income
$
$
$
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets
$
$
$
japan:
net sales
$
1,208
$
$
operating income
$
$
$
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets
$
$
$
retail:
net sales
$
3,359
$
2,350
$
1,185
operating income
$
$
$
depreciation, amortization, and accretion (b)
$
$
$
segment assets (b)
$
$
$
other segments (c):
net sales
$
1,347
$
$
operating income
$
$
$
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets
$
$
$
(a) the americas asset
figures do not include fixed assets held in the u.s. such fixed assets are not
allocated specifically to the americas segment and are included in the
corporate assets figures below.
(b) retail segment
depreciation and asset figures reflect the cost and related depreciation of its
retail stores and related infrastructure. retail store
construction-in-progress, which is not subject to depreciation, is reflected in
corporate assets.
(c) other segments include
asia-pacific and filemaker.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 11segment
information and geographic data (continued)
a
reconciliation of the companys segment operating income and assets to the
consolidated financial statements follows (in millions):
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
segment operating
income
$
2,906
$
1,661
$
retail
manufacturing margin (a)
other corporate
expenses, net (b)
(953
)
(404
)
(820
)
stock-based
compensation expense
(163
)
(49
)
(46
)
restructuring
costs
(23
)
consolidated operating income
$
2,453
$
1,643
$
segment assets
$
2,379
$
1,881
$
1,411
corporate assets
14,826
9,635
6,628
consolidated assets
$
17,205
$
11,516
$
8,039
segment depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
corporate
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
consolidated
depreciation, amortization, and accretion
$
$
$
(1) see note 2, restatement
of consolidated financial statements.
(a) represents the excess of
the retail segments cost of sales over the companys standard cost of sales
for products sold through the retail segment.
(b) corporate expenses
include research and development, corporate marketing expenses, manufacturing
costs and variances not included in standard costs, and other separately
managed general and administrative expenses including certain corporate
expenses associated with support of the retail segment.
no
single customer accounted for more than 10% of net sales in 2006, 2005, or 2004.
net sales and long-lived assets related to operations in the u.s., japan, and
other foreign countries are as follows (in millions):
net sales:
u.s.
$
11,486
$
8,194
$
4,893
japan
1,327
1,021
other countries
6,502
4,716
2,648
total net sales
$
19,315
$
13,931
$
8,279
long-lived
assets:
u.s.
$
1,150
$
$
japan
other countries
total long-lived
assets
$
1,368
$
$
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 11segment
information and geographic data (continued)
information regarding net
sales by product is as follows (in millions):
net sales:
desktops (a)
$
3,319
$
3,436
$
2,373
portables (b)
4,056
2,839
2,550
total macintosh net sales
7,375
6,275
4,923
ipod
7,676
4,540
1,306
other music
related products and services (c)
1,885
peripherals and
other hardware (d)
1,100
1,126
software,
service, and other net sales (e)
1,279
1,091
total net sales
$
19,315
$
13,931
$
8,279
(a) includes imac, emac, mac
mini, power mac, mac pro, and xserve product lines.
(b) includes macbook, ibook,
macbook pro, and powerbook product lines.
(c) consists of itunes store
sales and ipod services, and apple-branded and third-party ipod accessories.
(d) includes sales of
apple-branded and third-party displays, wireless connectivity and networking
solutions, and other hardware accessories.
(e) includes
sales of apple-branded operating system and application software, third-party
software, applecare, and internet services.
note 12related party
transactions and certain other transactions
in march2002, the company entered into a
reimbursement agreement with its ceo, steve jobs, for the reimbursement of
expenses incurred by mr.jobs in the operation of his private plane when
used for company business. the reimbursement agreement became effective for
expenses incurred by mr.jobs for company business purposes since he took
delivery of the plane in may2001. the company recognized a total of
$202,000, $1,100,000, and $483,000 in expenses pursuant to the reimbursement
agreement during 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. all expenses recognized
pursuant to the reimbursement agreement have been included in selling, general,
and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
in 2006, the company
entered into an agreement with pixar to sell certain of pixars short films on
the itunes store. mr.jobs was the ceo, chairman, and a large shareholder
of pixar. on may5, 2006, the walt disney company (disney) acquired
pixar, which resulted in pixar becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of disney.
upon disneys acquisition of pixar, mr.jobs shares of pixar common stock
were exchanged for disneys common stock and he was elected to the disney board
of directors. royalty expense recognized by the company under the arrangement
with pixar from september25, 2005 through may5, 2006 was less than
$1 million.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note
13selected quarterly financial information (unaudited)
the
following tables set forth a summary of the companys quarterly financial
information for each of the four quarters ended september30, 2006 and september24,
2005 (in millions, except share and per share amounts):
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
net sales
$
4,837
$
4,370
$
4,359
$
5,749
cost of sales (1)
3,425
3,045
3,062
4,185
gross margin
1,412
1,325
1,297
1,564
operating
expenses:
research and development (1)
selling, general, and administrative(1)
total operating expenses
operating income
other income and
expense
income before
provision for incometaxes
provision for
income taxes
net income
$
$
$
$
earnings per common share:
basic
$
0.63
$
0.55
$
0.49
$
0.68
diluted
$
0.62
$
0.54
$
0.47
$
0.65
shares used in
computing earnings per share(in thousands):
basic
854,187
851,375
840,910
830,781
diluted
878,757
876,368
878,537
874,207
(1) includes stock-based
compensation expense, which was allocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
$
research and
development
$
$
$
$
selling, general, and
administrative
$
$
$
$
the net of tax impact of the stock-based compensation
adjustments in 2006, which amounted to $4 million, was recorded by the company
in its fourth quarter of 2006 and is described in note 2, restatement of
consolidated financial statements.
basic and diluted earnings per share are computed
independently for each of the quarters presented. therefore, the sum of
quarterly basic and diluted per share information may not equal annual basic
and diluted earnings per share.
net income during the third quarter of 2006 benefited
by $20 million resulting from the dividend repatriation under the ajca and
international tax planning strategies associated with the repatriation. net
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 13selected
quarterly financial information (unaudited) (continued)
income during the fourth
quarter of 2006 benefited by $20 million due to the settlement of prior year
tax audits in the u.s.
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
asrestated(1)
net sales
$
3,678
$
3,520
$
3,243
$
3,490
cost of sales (2)
2,643
2,476
2,275
2,495
gross margin
1,035
1,044
operating
expenses:
research and development (2)
selling, general, and administrative (2)
total operating expenses
operating income
other income and
expense
income before
provision for income taxes
provision for
income taxes
net income
$
$
$
$
earnings per common share:
basic
$
0.52
$
0.39
$
0.36
$
0.37
diluted
$
0.49
$
0.37
$
0.34
$
0.35
shares used in
computing earnings per share(in thousands):
basic
821,420
815,092
808,172
789,032
diluted
866,483
860,803
857,568
838,805
(1) see
note 2, restatement of consolidated financial statements.
(2) includes
stock-based compensation expense, which was allocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
$
research and
development
$
$
$
$
selling, general, and
administrative
$
$
$
$
the impact of the stock-based compensation adjustments
was not significant to any of the interim balance sheets for fiscal year 2005.
basic and diluted earnings per share are computed
independently for each of the quarters presented. therefore, the sum of
quarterly basic and diluted per share information may not equal annual basic
and diluted earnings per share.
net income during the fourth quarter of 2005 benefited
by $81 million from the reversal of certain tax contingency reserves and
adjustments to net deferred tax assets, including reductions to valuation
allowances.
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 13selected
quarterly financial information (unaudited) (continued)
the following tables
present the effects of adjustments made to the companys previously reported
quarterly financial information as of september24, 2005 (in millions,
expect per share amounts):
threemonthsendedseptember24,2005
threemonthsendedjune25,2005
as
reported
adjustments(1)
as
restated
as
reported
adjustments(1)
as
restated
net sales
$
3,678
$
$
3,678
$
3,520
$
$
3,520
cost of sales (2)
2,643
2,643
2,476
2,476
gross margin
1,035
1,035
1,044
1,044
operating
expenses:
research and development(2)
selling, general, and administrative(2)
total operating
expenses
operating income
(1
)
(1
)
other income and
expense
income before
provision forincometaxes
(1
)
(1
)
provision for
income
taxes
net income
$
$
(2
)
$
$
$
(1
)
$
earnings per common share:
basic
$
0.52
$
$
0.52
$
0.39
$
$
0.39
diluted
$
0.50
$
(0.01
)
$
0.49
$
0.37
$
$
0.37
shares used in
computing earnings per share (inthousands):
basic
821,420
821,420
815,092
815,092
diluted
866,404
866,483
860,688
860,803
(1) see note 2, restatement of consolidated
financial statements.
(2) includes stock-based compensation expense,
which was allocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
$
$
$
research and
development
$
$
$
$
$
$
selling, general, and administrative
$
$
$
$
$
$
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note 13selected
quarterly financial information (unaudited) (continued)
threemonthsendedmarch26,2005
threemonthsendeddecember25,2004
as
reported
adjustments(1)
as
restated
as
reported
adjustments(1)
as
restated
net sales
$
3,243
$
$
3,243
$
3,490
$
$
3,490
cost of sales (2)
2,275
2,275
2,494
2,495
gross margin
(1
)
operating
expenses:
research and development (2)
selling, general, and administrative(2)
total operating expenses
operating income
(2
)
(3
)
other income and expense
income before provision for income taxes
(2
)
(3
)
provision for income taxes
(1
)
net income
$
$
(2
)
$
$
$
(2
)
$
earnings per common share:
basic
$
0.36
$
$
0.36
$
0.37
$
$
0.37
diluted
$
0.34
$
$
0.34
$
0.35
$
$
0.35
shares used in
computing earnings pershare (inthousands):
basic
808,172
808,172
789,032
789,032
diluted
857,011
857,568
838,174
838,805
(1) see note 2, restatement of consolidated
financial statements.
(2) includes stock-based compensation expense,
which was allocated as follows:
cost of sales
$
$
$
$
$
$
research and development
$
$
$
$
$
$
selling, general, and administrative
$
$
$
$
$
$
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and shareholders
apple computer,inc.:
we have audited the accompanying consolidated balance
sheets of apple computer,inc. and subsidiaries (the company) as of september30,
2006 and september24, 2005, and the related consolidated statements of
operations, shareholders equity and cash flows for each of the years in the
three-year period ended september30, 2006. these consolidated financial
statements are the responsibility of the companys management. our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial
statements based on our audits.
we conducted our audits in accordance with the
standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of
material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial
statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements
referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of the company as of september30, 2006 and september24,
2005, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the
years in the three-year period ended september30, 2006, in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america.
as discussed in note 2 to the consolidated financial
statements, the consolidated financial statements as of september24, 2005
and for each of the years in the two-year period ended september24, 2005
have been restated.
as discussed in note 1 to the consolidated financial
statements, effective september25, 2005, the company adopted the
provision of statement of financial accounting standards no.123 (revised
2004), share-based payment.
we
also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states), the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting as of september30, 2006, based
on criteria established in internal
control-integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso), and our report dated december29,
2006 expressed an unqualified opinion on managements assessment of, and the
effective operation of internal control over financial reporting.
/s/ kpmg llp
mountain view,
california
december29,
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and shareholders
apple computer,inc.:
we have audited managements assessment, included in
the accompanying managements annual report on internal control over financial
reporting, that apple computer,inc. and subsidiaries maintained effective
internal control over financial reporting as of september30, 2006, based
on criteria established in internal control-integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the
treadway commission (coso). apple computer,inc.s management is
responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting
and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on managements
assessment and an opinion on the effectiveness of the apple computer,inc.s
internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
we conducted our audit in accordance with the
standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).
those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting, evaluating
managements assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other procedures as we
considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
a companys internal control over financial reporting
is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that (1)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because of inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk
that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
in our opinion, managements assessment that apple
computer,inc. maintained effective internal control over financial
reporting as of september30, 2006, is fairly stated, in all material
respects, based on criteria established in internal
control-integrated framework issued by coso. also, in our opinion,
apple computer,inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of september30, 2006, based
on criteria established in internal
control-integrated framework issued by coso.
we also have audited, in
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board
(united states), the consolidated balance sheets of apple computer,inc.
as of september30, 2006 and september24, 2005, and the related
consolidated statements of operations, shareholders equity, and cash flows for
each of the years in the three-year period ended september30, 2006, and
our report dated december29, 2006 expressed an unqualified opinion on
those consolidated financial statements.
/s/ kpmg llp
mountain view,
california
december29,
item 9. changes in
and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item 9a. controls
and procedures
special committee
review into stock option grant practices and restatement
as discussed in the explanatory note preceding parti
and in note 2 in notes to consolidated financial statements of this form10-k,
the company on june29,
2006, announced that an internal review had discovered irregularities related
to the issuance of certain past stock option grants, including a grant to its
ceo steve jobs. the company also announced that a special committee of outside
directors (special committee) had been formed and had hired independent
counsel to conduct a full investigation of the companys past stock option
granting practices. as a result of the internal review and the independent
investigation, management has concluded, and the audit and finance committee of
the board of directors agrees, that incorrect measurement dates were used for
financial accounting purposes for certain stock option grants made in prior
periods. therefore, the company has recorded additional non-cash stock-based
compensation expense and related tax effects with regard to past stock option
grants, and the company is restating previously filed financial statements in
this form10-k.
the internal review
and the special committees independent investigation identified a number of
occasions between october1996 and january2003 (the relevant period)
when the company used incorrect measurement dates for stock option grants. the
independent investigation also found that during the relevant period:
procedures
for granting, accounting, and reporting of stock option grants did not include
sufficient safeguards to prevent manipulation
the
grant dates for a number of grants were intentionally selected in order to
obtain favorable exercise prices
two
former officers of the corporation engaged in conduct that raises serious
concerns in connection with the granting, accounting, recording, and reporting
of stock options
ceo
steve jobs was aware or recommended the selection of some favorable grant
dates, but he did not receive or financially benefit from these grants or
appreciate the accounting implications
from 2003 through
2005, the company implemented improvements to procedures, processes, and
systems to provide additional safeguards and greater internal control over the
stock option granting and administration function in compliance with the
sarbanes-oxley act (sox) and evolving accounting guidance. these improvements
included:
documenting
and assessing the design and operation of internal controls
segregating
responsibilities, adding reviews and reconciliations, and redefining roles and
responsibilities
upgrading
systems and system controls that support the processes
obtaining
training in the stock administration function
implementing
before the adoption of sfas no.123r the practice of using the receipt of
the final board or compensation committee approval as the grant and measurement
date for stock option grants
identifying
key controls, developing test plans, and testing controls in the stock granting
and administration function
certifying
stock administration and other controls for sox section404 compliance in
fiscal year 2005
the internal review and the independent investigation
discovered no stock option grant after january2003 that required
accounting adjustments.
in coming to the conclusion that the companys
disclosure controls and procedures and the companys internal control over
financial reporting were effective as of september30, 2006, management
considered, among other things, the impact of the restatement to the financial
statements and the effectiveness of the internal controls in this area as of
the fiscal years ended 2006 and 2005. management has concluded, therefore, that
control deficiencies resulting in the restatement of previously issued
financial statements did not constitute a material weakness in disclosure
controls and procedures, or internal controls and procedures over financial
reporting, as of september30, 2006.
in addition to the
significant improvements implemented between 2003 and 2005 discussed above, the
company will adopt other measures identified by the special committee and
management to enhance the oversight of the stock option granting and
administration function and the review and preparation of financial statements,
including:
the
company will engage experienced general counsel, increase the resources of the
corporate legal department, and review the adequacy of its procedures and
practices
the
cfo will arrange for senior management to undertake professional training to
enhance awareness and understanding of standards and principles for accounting
and financial reporting, particularly those relevant to stock options
the
company will review all current policies, practices, and controls related to
the granting of stock options and provide education and training to those who
implement those policies and processes, as needed
the
company will establish improved procedures for regular communication among the
general counsel, the cfo, and stock administrators to improve monitoring of all
company practices with regard to stock option grants, including formal written
confirmation that all grant dates correspond precisely with the dates
authorized
the company will also
establish improved procedures for the review of the preparation and
presentation of financial statements by senior management
evaluation of
disclosure controls and procedures
based on an evaluation
under the supervision and with the participation of the companys management,
the companys principal executive officer and principal financial officer have
concluded that the companys disclosure controls and procedures as defined in rules13a-15(e)and
15d-15(e)under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended
(exchange act) were effective as of september30, 2006 to ensure that
information required to be disclosed by the company in reports that it files or
submits under the exchange act is (i)recorded, processed, summarized and
reported within the time periods specified in the securities and exchange
commission rulesand forms and (ii)accumulated and communicated to
the companys management, including its principal executive officer and
principal financial officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding
required disclosure.
inherent
limitations over internal controls
the companys
internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation
of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. the companys internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that:
(i) pertain to the
maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the companys assets;
(ii) provide reasonable
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, and that the companys receipts and expenditures are being made
only in accordance with authorizations of the companys management and directors;
and
(iii) provide reasonable assurance
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
management, including the
companys ceo and cfo, does not expect that the companys internal controls
will prevent or detect all errors and all fraud. a control system, no matter
how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute,
assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. further, the
design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource
constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their
costs. because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no
evaluation of internal controls can provide absolute assurance that all control
issues and instances of fraud, if any, have been detected. also, any evaluation
of the effectiveness of controls in future periods are subject to the risk that
those internal controls may become inadequate because of changes in business
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures
may deteriorate.
managements annual
report on internal control over financial reporting
the companys management
is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting (as defined in rule13a-15(f)under the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended). management conducted an
evaluation of the effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting based on the criteria set forth in internal controlintegrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission (coso). based on this evaluation, management has concluded that the
companys internal control over financial reporting was effective as of september30,
2006. the companys independent registered public accounting firm, kpmg llp,
has issued an attestation report on the companys assessment of its internal
control over financial reporting. the report on the audit of internal control
over financial reporting appears on page119 of this form10-k.
changes in internal
control over financial reporting
there were no significant
changes in the companys internal control over financial reporting identified
in managements evaluation during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006 that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys
internal control over financial reporting.
item 9b. other information
none.
part iii
item 10. directors
and executive officers of the registrant
directors
listed below are the
companys seven directors whose terms expire at the next annual meeting of
shareholders.
name
positionwiththecompany
age
directorsince
william v.
campbell
co-lead
director
millard s.
drexler
director
albert a.
gore,jr.
director
steven p. jobs
director
and chief executive officer
arthur d.
levinson
co-lead
director
eric e. schmidt
director
jerome b. york
director
william
v. campbell has been chairman of the board of
directors of intuit,inc. (intuit) since
august1998. from september1999 to january2000, mr.campbell
acted as chief executive officer of intuit. from april1994 to august1998,
mr.campbell was president and chief executive officer and a director of
intuit. from january1991 to december1993, mr.campbell was
president and chief executive officer of go corporation. mr.campbell also
serves on the board of directors of opsware,inc.
millard
s. drexler has been chairman and chief executive
officer of j. crew group,inc. since january2003. previously, mr.drexler
was chief executive officer of gapinc. from 1995 and president from 1987
until september2002. mr.drexler was also a member of the board of
directors of gapinc. from november1983 until october2002.
albert
a. gore,jr. has served as a senior advisor to
google,inc. since 2001. he has also served as executive chairman of
current tv since 2002 and as chairman of generation investment management since
2004. he is a visiting professor at middle tennessee state university. mr.gore
was inaugurated as the 45th vice president of the united states in 1993. he was
re-elected in 1996 and served for a total of eight years as president of the
senate, a member of the cabinet and the national security council. prior to
1993, he served eight years in the u.s. senate and eight years in the u.s.
house of representatives.
steven
p. jobs is one of the companys co-founders and
currently serves as its chief executive officer. mr.jobs is also a
director of the walt disney company.
arthur
d. levinson, ph.d. has been chief executive officer
and a director of genentechinc. (genentech)
since july1995. dr.levinson has been chairman of the board of
directors of genentech since september1999. he joined genentech in 1980
and served in a number of executive positions, including senior vice president
of r&d from 1993 to 1995. dr.levinson also serves on the board of
directors of google,inc.
eric
e. schmidt, ph.d. has served as the chief executive
officer of google,inc. (google) since july2001
and as a member of googles board of directors since march2001, where he
served as chairman of the board from march2001 to april2004. in april2004,
dr.schmidt was named chairman of the executive committee of googles
board of directors. from april1997 to november2001, dr.schmidt
served as chairman of the board of directors of novell,inc., a computer
networking company, and, from april1997 to july2001, as the chief
executive officer of novell. dr.schmidt was a director of siebel systems
until january2006.
jerome b. york has
been chief executive officer of harwinton capital corporation, a private
investment company that he controls, since september2003. from january2000
until september2003, mr.york was
chairman and chief
executive officer of microwarehouse,inc., a reseller of computer
hardware, software and peripheral products. from september1995 to october1999,
he was vice chairman of tracinda corporation. from may1993 to september1995
he was senior vice president and chief financial officer of ibm corporation,
and served as a member of ibms board of directors from january1995 to august1995.
mr.york is also a director of tyco internationalltd.
role of the board;
corporate governance matters
it is the paramount duty of the board of directors to
oversee the chief executive officer and other senior management in the
competent and ethical operation of the company on a day-to-day basis and to
assure that the long-term interests of the shareholders are being served. to
satisfy this duty, the directors take a proactive, focused approach to their
position, and set standards to ensure that the company is committed to business
success through maintenance of the highest standards of responsibility and
ethics.
members of the board bring
to the company a wide range of experience, knowledge and judgment. these varied
skills mean that governance is far more than a check the box approach to
standards or procedures. the governance structure in the company is designed to
be a working structure for principled actions, effective decision-making
and appropriate monitoring of both compliance and performance. the key
practices and procedures of the board are outlined in the corporate governance
guidelines available on the companys website at www.apple.com/investor.
board committees
the board has a standing compensation committee, a
nominating and corporate governance committee (nominating committee) and an audit and finance committee (audit committee).
all committee members are independent under the listing standards of the nasdaq
global select market.
the audit committee is primarily responsible for
overseeing the services performed by the companys independent auditors and
internal audit department, evaluating the companys accounting policies and its
system of internal controls and reviewing significant financial transactions.
members of the audit committee are messrs.campbell and york and dr.levinson.
the compensation committee is primarily responsible
for reviewing the compensation arrangements for the companys executive
officers, including the chief executive officer, and for administering the
companys equity compensation plans. members of the compensation committee are messrs.campbell,
drexler, and gore.
the nominating committee assists the board in
identifying qualified individuals to become directors, determines the composition
of the board and its committees, monitors the process to assess board
effectiveness and helps develop and implement the companys corporate
governance guidelines. the nominating committee also considers nominees
proposed by shareholders. members of the nominating committee are messrs.drexler
and gore and dr.levinson.
the audit, compensation
and nominating committees operate under written charters adopted by the board.
these charters are available on apples website at www.apple.com/investor.
audit committee
financial expert
all members of the companys
audit committee, messrs.campbell and york and dr.levinson, qualify
as audit committee financial experts under item 401(h)of regulation s-k
and are considered independent as the term is used in item 7(d)(3)(iv)of
schedule 14a under the exchange act.
code of ethics
the company has a code of
ethics that applies to all of the companys employees, including its principal
executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer and
its board. a copy of this code,
ethics: the way we do
business worldwide, is available on the companys website at
www.apple.com/investor. the company intends to disclose any changes in or
waivers from its code of ethics by posting such information on its website or
by filing a form8-k.
executive officers
the following sets forth certain information regarding
executive officers of the company. information pertaining to mr.jobs, who
is both a director and an executive officer of the company, may be found in the
section entitled directors.
timothy
d. cook, chief operating officer (age 46), joined the
company in march1998. mr.cook also served with the company as
executive vice president, worldwide sales and operations from 2002 to 2005. in
2004, his responsibilities were expanded to include the companys macintosh
hardware engineering. from 2000 to 2002, mr.cook served in the role of
senior vice president, worldwide operations, sales, service and support. from
1998 to 2000, mr.cook served in the position of senior vice president,
worldwide operations. prior to joining the company, mr.cook held the
position of vice president, corporate materials for compaq computer corporation
(compaq). previous to his work at
compaq, mr.cook was the chief operating officer of the reseller division
at intelligent electronics. mr.cook also spent 12years with ibm,
most recently as director of north american fulfillment. mr.cook also
serves as a member of the board of directors of nike,inc.
anthony
fadell, senior vice president, ipod division (age 37),
joined the company in 2001. from 2004 to april2006, mr.fadell was
vice president of ipod engineering. from 2001 to 2004, mr.fadell was the
senior director of the companys ipod engineering team. prior to joining apple,
mr.fadell was a co-founder, cto, and director of engineering of the
mobile computing group at philips electronics where he was responsible for all
aspects of business and product development for a variety of products. mr.fadell
later became vp of business development for philips u.s. strategy&
ventures, focusing on building the companys digital media strategy and
investment portfolio. prior to joining philips, mr.fadell was a hardware
and software architect at general magic.
ronald
b. johnson, senior vice president, retail (age 48),
joined the company in january2000. prior to joining the company, mr.johnson
spent 16years with target stores, most recently as senior merchandising
executive.
peter
oppenheimer, senior vice president and chief financial
officer (age 44), joined the company in july1996. mr.oppenheimer
also served with the company in the position of vice president and corporate
controller, and as senior director of finance for the americas. prior to
joining the company, mr.oppenheimer was cfo of one of the four business
units for automatic data processing,inc. (adp).
prior to joining adp, mr.oppenheimer spent six years in the information
technology consulting practice with coopers and lybrand.
donald
j. rosenberg, senior vice president, general counsel
and secretary (age 55), joined the company in december2006. prior to
joining the company mr.rosenberg spent 31 years with ibm, most recently
as senior vice president and general counsel. prior to that he held a number of
senior positions at ibm, including over ten years as vice president and
assistant general counsel for litigation.
philip
w. schiller, senior vice president, worldwide product
marketing (age 46), rejoined the company in 1997. prior to rejoining the
company, mr.schiller was vice president of product marketing at
macromedia,inc. from december1995 to march1997, and was
director of product marketing at firepower systems,inc. from 1993 to december1995.
prior to that, mr.schiller spent six years at the company in various
marketing positions.
bertrand
serlet, ph.d., senior vice president, software
engineering (age 46), joined the company in february1997 upon the companys
acquisition of next. at next, dr.serlet held several engineering
and managerial positions, including director of web
engineering. prior to next, from 1985 to 1989, dr.serlet worked as a
research engineer at xerox parc.
sina tamaddon, senior
vice president, applications (age 49), joined the company in september1997.
mr.tamaddon has also served with the company in the position of senior
vice president, worldwide service and support, and vice president and general
manager, newton group. before joining the company, mr.tamaddon held the
position of vice president, europe with next from september1996 through march1997.
from august1994 to august1996, mr.tamaddon held the position
of vice president, professional services with next.
section16(a)beneficial
ownership reporting compliance
section16(a)of the securities exchange act
of 1934, as amended, requires the companys officers and directors, and persons
who own more than ten percent of a registered class of the companys equity
securities, to file reports of securities ownership and changes in such
ownership with the securities and exchange commission (sec).
officers, directors and greater than ten percent shareholders also are required
by rulespromulgated by the sec to furnish the company with copies of all section16(a)forms
they file.
based solely upon a review of the copies of such forms
furnished to the company or written representations that no forms 5 were
required, the company believes that all section16(a)filing
requirements were met during fiscal year 2006, except for the following: (i)one
form4 was filed for arthur d. levinson on august17, 2006 to report
an automatic stock option grant under the companys 1997 director stock option
plan made on august14, 2006; and (ii)one form4 was filed for
anthony fadell on september1, 2006 with respect to the purchase and sale
by mr.fadells trust of 300 and 25 shares, respectively, of the companys
common stock in june2006 and august2006.
item 11. executive
compensation
information
regarding executive compensation
the following table
summarizes compensation information for the last three fiscal years for (i)mr.jobs,
chief executive officer, and (ii)the four most highly compensated executive
officers other than the chief executive officer who were serving as executive
officers of the company at the end of the fiscal year (collectively, the named executive officers).
summary
compensation table
annualcompensation
long-term
compensation
nameandprincipalposition
fiscal
year
salary
($)
bonus
($)
restricted
stockaward
($)(1)
securities
underlying
options*
(#)
allother
compensation
($)
steven p. jobs
(2)
chief executive officer
timothy d. cook
696,880
525,000
21,603,000
(3)
13,200
(5)
chief operating
officer
602,434
600,239
12,600
(5)
602,632
7,650,000
(4)
12,588
(5)
peter oppenheimer
615,006
450,000
14,402,000
(3)
13,200
(5)
senior vice president and
552,189
550,202
21,092
(5)
chief financial officer
450,739
6,375,000
(4)
3,808
(5)
ronald b. johnson
592,476
450,000
14,402,000
(3)
senior vice
president, retail
552,795
550,202
484,836
1,500,000
6,375,000
(4)
philip w. schiller
494,942
375,000
10,801,500
(3)
5,769
(5)
senior vice president,
402,244
400,239
5,539
(5)
worldwide product marketing
402,277
6,375,000
(4)
5,308
(5)
(1) the
following table reflects the aggregated restricted stock holdings for each of
the companys named executive officers as of the end of the 2006 fiscal year
and the value of such restricted stock based on $76.98 per share, the closing
price of the companys common stock on the nasdaq global select market on september29,
2006 (the last day of trading for the 2006 fiscal year). the table has been
adjusted to reflect the companys two-for-one stock split in february2005.
namedexecutiveofficer
numberofunvested
restrictedsharesat
september30,2006
(#)
valueofunvested
restrictedsharesat
september30,2006
($)
steven p. jobs
timothy d. cook (a)
600,000
46,188,000
peter oppenheimer
(b)
450,000
34,641,000
ronald b. johnson
(b)
450,000
34,641,000
philip w. schiller (c)
400,000
30,792,000
(a) includes 300,000
unvested restricted stock units that are part of a grant of 600,000 restricted
stock units (split-adjusted) made on march24, 2004. fifty percent (50%)
of such units vested in march2006, and the remainder is scheduled to vest
in march2008. also includes 300,000 unvested restricted stock units that
were granted on december14, 2005, and are scheduled to
vest in their entirety in march2010.
the restricted stock units do not include the right to receive dividends prior to
vesting.
(b) includes 250,000 unvested
restricted stock units that are part of a grant of 500,000 restricted stock
units (split-adjusted) made on march24, 2004. fifty percent (50%) of such
units vested in march2006, and the remainder is scheduled to vest in march2008.
also includes 200,000 unvested restricted stock units that were granted on december14,
2005, and are scheduled to vest in their entirety in march2010. the
restricted stock units do not include the right to receive dividends prior to
vesting.
(c) includes 250,000
unvested restricted stock units that are part of a grant of 500,000 restricted
stock units (split-adjusted) made on march24, 2004. fifty percent (50%)
of such units vested in march2006, and the remainder is scheduled to vest
in march2008. also includes 150,000 unvested restricted stock units that
were granted on december14, 2005, and are scheduled to vest in their
entirety in march2010. the restricted stock units do not include the
right to receive dividends prior to vesting.
(2) in march2003, mr.jobs
voluntarily cancelled all of his outstanding options, excluding those granted
to him in his capacity as a director. in march2003, the board awarded mr.jobs
10million (split-adjusted) restricted shares of the companys common
stock, which vested in full in march2006.
(3) market value of
restricted stock units granted on december14, 2005 (based on $72.01 per
share, the closing price of the companys common stock on the nasdaq global
select market on the day of grant). the restricted stock units vest in march2010.
(4) market value of
restricted stock units granted on march24, 2004 (based on $12.75 per
share, the split-adjusted closing price of the companys common stock on the
nasdaq global select market on the day of grant). the restricted stock units
granted on this date generally vest over four years with 50% of the total
number of shares vesting on each of the second and fourth anniversaries of the
grant date.
(5) consists
of matching contributions made by the company in accordance with the terms of
the 401(k)plan.
option grants in
last fiscal year
there were no options
granted to the named executive officers during fiscal year 2006. grants of
restricted stock units to the named executive officers are disclosed above in the
summary compensation table.
options exercised
and year-end option holdings
the following table
provides information about stock option exercises by the named executive
officers during fiscal year 2006 and stock options held by each of them at
fiscal year-end. the table has been adjusted to reflect the companys
two-for-one stock split in february2005.
aggregated
option exercises in the last fiscal year
and fiscal year-end option values
shares
acquiredon
exercise
value
realized
numberofsecurities
underlying
unexercised
optionsatfiscal
year-end(#)
valueofunexercised
in-the-moneyoptions
atfiscal
year-end($)(1)
name
(#)
($)
exercisable
unexercisable
exercisable
unexercisable
steven p. jobs
120,000
(2)
$
8,547,600
(2)
timothy d. cook
(3)
peter oppenheimer
1,145,000
$
55,851,613
(3)
ronald b. johnson
350,000
$
15,653,210
1,900,000
(3)
$
102,994,688
philip w. schiller
162,500
$
9,454,728
(3)
(1) market value of
securities underlying in-the-money options at the end of fiscal year 2006
(based on $76.98 per share, the closing price of common stock on the nasdaq
global select market on september29, 2006), minus the exercise price.
(2) consists
of 120,000 options granted to mr.jobs in his capacity as a director
pursuant to the 1997 director stock option plan. since accepting the position
of ceo, mr.jobs is no longer eligible to receive option grants under the
director plan. in march2003, mr.jobs voluntarily cancelled all of
his outstanding options, excluding those granted to him in his capacity as a
director.
(3) excludes
600,000 restricted stock units granted to mr.cook that are currently
unvested, 450,000 restricted stock units granted to each of messrs.oppenheimer
and johnson that are currently unvested, and 400,000 restricted stock units
granted to mr.schiller that are currently unvested.
director
compensation
the form and amount of
director compensation are determined by the board after a review of
recommendations made by the nominating committee. the current practice of the
board is to base a substantial portion of a directors annual retainer on
equity. in 1998, shareholders approved the 1997 director stock option plan (the
director plan) and 1,600,000 shares
were reserved for issuance thereunder. pursuant to the director plan, the
companys non-employee directors are granted an option to acquire 30,000 shares
of common stock upon their initial election to the board (initial
options). the initial options vest and become exercisable in three
equal annual installments on each of the first through third anniversaries of
the grant date. on the fourth anniversary of a non-employee directors initial
election to the board and on each subsequent anniversary thereafter, the
director will be entitled to receive an option to acquire 10,000 shares of
common stock (annual options). annual options
are fully vested and immediately exercisable on their date of grant. as of the
end of the fiscal year, there were options for 760,000 shares outstanding under
the director plan. since accepting the position of ceo, mr.jobs is no
longer eligible for grants under the director plan. non-employee directors also
receive a $50,000 annual retainer paid in quarterly increments. in addition,
directors receive up to two free computer systems per year and are eligible to
purchase additional equipment at a discount. directors do not receive any
additional consideration for serving on committees or as committee chairperson.
compensation
committee interlocks and insider participation
the current members of the
compensation committee are messrs.campbell, drexler and gore, none of
whom are employees of the company and all of whom are considered independent
directors under the applicable nasdaq rules. there were no interlocks or
insider participation between any member of the board or compensation committee
and any member of the board of directors or compensation committee of another
company.
arrangements with named executive officers
change in control
arrangementsstock options and restricted stock units
in the event of a change in control of the company,
all outstanding options under the companys stock option plans, except the
director plan, and all restricted stock units granted on or after
january1, 2005, will, unless otherwise determined by the plan
administrator, become fully exercisable, and will be cashed out at an amount
equal to the difference between the applicable change in control price and
the exercise price. the director plan provides that upon a change in control
of the company, all outstanding options held by non-employee directors will
automatically become fully exercisable and will be cashed out at an amount
equal to the difference between the applicable change in control price and
the exercise price of the options. a change in control under these plans is
generally defined as (i)the acquisition by any person of 50% or more of
the combined voting power of the companys outstanding securities, or (ii)the
occurrence of a transaction requiring shareholder approval and involving the
sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the company or the merger of
the company with or into another corporation.
agreements governing
certain restricted stock units granted to the named executive officers and
other officers prior to january1, 2005 generally provide that in the
event there is a change in control, as defined in the companys stock option
plans, and if in connection with or following such change in control, their
employment is terminated without cause or if they should resign for good
reason, those options, restricted stock, and restricted stock units
outstanding that are not yet vested as of the date of such change in control
shall become fully vested. further, these restricted stock unit agreements also
provide that, in the event the company terminates the officer without cause at
any time, the restricted stock and restricted stock units will vest in full.
generally, cause is defined to include a felony conviction, willful
disclosure of confidential information, or willful and continued failure to
perform his or her employment duties. good reason includes resignation of
employment as a result of a substantial diminution in position or duties, or an
adverse change in title or reduction in annual base salary.
item 12. security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
the following table sets
forth certain information as of november30, 2006 (the table date) with respect to the beneficial ownership of the
companys common stock by (i)each person the company believes
beneficially holds more than 5% of the outstanding shares of common stock; (ii)each
director; (iii)each named executive officer listed in the summary
compensation table under the heading executive compensation;
and (iv)all directors and executive officers as a group. on the table
date, 859,202,448 shares of common stock were issued and outstanding. unless
otherwise indicated, all persons named as beneficial
owners of common stock have sole voting power and sole investment power with
respect to the shares indicated as beneficially owned. in addition, unless
otherwise indicated, all persons named below can be reached at apple computer,inc.,
1 infinite loop, cupertino, ca 95014.
security
ownership of 5% holders, directors, nominees and executive officers
nameofbeneficialowner
sharesofcommonstock
beneficiallyowned(1)
percentofcommonstock
outstanding
fidelity
investments
57,162,311
(2)
6.65
%
alliancebernstein
lp
48,637,731
(3)
5.66
%
steven p. jobs
5,546,451
(4)
*
william v.
campbell
221,004
(5)
*
timothy d. cook
12,597
(6)
*
millard s.
drexler
220,000
(7)
*
albert a.
gore,jr.
60,000
(8)
*
ronald b. johnson
2,049,890
(9)
*
arthur d.
levinson
362,400
(10)
*
peter oppenheimer
149,768
(11)
*
philip w.
schiller
(12)
*
eric e. schmidt
12,284
(13)
*
jerome b. york
80,000
(14)
*
all current executive
officers and directors as a group (15persons)
9,378,423
(15)
1.09
%
(1) represents shares of
common stock held and/or options held by such individuals that were exercisable
at the table date or within 60days thereafter. this does not include
options or restricted stock units that vest after 60 days. the share numbers
have been adjusted to reflect the companys two-for-one stock split in february2005.
(2) based on a form13g/a
filed february14, 2005 by fmr corp. fmr corp. lists its address as 82devonshire
street, boston, ma 02109, in such filing.
(3) based on a form13f
filed january25, 2006, by barclays global investors. barclays global
investors lists its address as 45 fremont street, san francisco, ca 94105.
(4) includes 120,000 shares
of common stock that mr.jobs has the right to acquire by exercise of
stock options.
(5) includes 220,000 shares
of common stock that mr.campbell has the right to acquire by exercise of
stock options.
(6) excludes 600,000
unvested restricted stock units.
(7) includes 40,000 shares
of common stock that mr.drexler holds indirectly and 180,000 shares of
common stock that mr.drexler has the right to acquire by exercise of
stock options.
(8) consists of 60,000
shares of common stock that mr.gore has the right to acquire by exercise
of stock options.
(9) includes 1,900,000
shares of common stock that mr.johnson has the right to acquire by
exercise of stock options and excludes 450,000 unvested restricted stock units.
(10) includes 2,000 shares of common
stock that dr.levinson holds indirectly and 100,000 shares of common
stock that dr.levinson has the right to acquire by exercise of stock
options.
(11) excludes 450,000 unvested
restricted stock units.
(12) excludes 400,000 unvested
restricted stock units.
(13) consists of 12,284 shares of
common stock that dr.schmidt holds indirectly. dr.schmidt has
declined to participate in the 1997 director stock option plan.
(14) includes 40,000 shares of
common stock that mr.york has the right to acquire by exercise of stock
options.
(15) includes
3,063,371 shares of common stock that executive officers or directors have the
right to acquire by exercise of stock options. does not include 2.7 million
unvested restricted stock units.
* represents
less than 1% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock on the table
date.
equity compensation
plan information
the
following table sets forth certain information, as of september30, 2006,
concerning shares of common stock authorized for issuance under all of the
companys equity compensation plans. the table has been adjusted to reflect the
companys two-for-one stock split in february2005.
numberofsecurities
tobeissuedupon
exerciseof
outstandingoptions,
warrantsandrights
(a)
weightedaverage
exercisepriceof
outstandingoptions,
warrantsandrights
(b)
numberofsecurities
remainingavailablefor
futureissuanceunder
equitycompensationplans
(excludingsecurities
reflectedincolumn(a))
(c)
equity
compensation plans approved by shareholders
34,827,183
$
30.03
57,290,691
(1)
equity
compensation plans not approved by shareholders
18,137,049
$
10.19
total equity
compensation plans (2)
52,964,232
$
23.24
57,290,691
(1) this number includes
2,297,225 shares of common stock reserved for issuance under the employee stock
purchase plan, 400,000 shares available for issuance under the 1997 director
stock option plan, and 54,593,466 shares available for issuance under the 2003
employee stock plan. the grant of 3,410,000 restricted stock units has been
deducted from the number of shares available for future issuance. shares of
restricted stock and restricted stock units granted after april2005 count
against the shares available for grant as two shares for every share granted. this
amount does not include shares under the 1990 stock option plan that was
terminated in 1997. no new options can be granted under the 1990 stock option
plan.
(2) this
table does not include 17,266 shares of common stock underlying options assumed
in connection with a prior acquisition of a company that originally granted
those options. these assumed options have a weighted average exercise price of
$4.30 per share. no additional options may be granted under the assumed plan.
item 13. certain
relationships and related transactions
in march2002, the company entered into a
reimbursement agreement with its ceo, steve jobs, for the reimbursement of
expenses incurred by mr.jobs in the operation of his private plane when
used for company business. the reimbursement agreement became effective for
expenses incurred by mr.jobs for company business purposes since he took
delivery of the plane in may2001. the company recognized a total of
$202,000 in expenses pursuant to the reimbursement agreement during 2006.
in 2006, the company
entered into an agreement with pixar to sell certain of pixars short films on
the itunes store. mr.jobs was the ceo, chairman, and a large shareholder
of pixar. on may5, 2006, the walt disney company (disney) acquired
pixar, which resulted in pixar becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of disney.
upon disneys acquisition of pixar, mr.jobs shares of pixar common stock
were
exchanged for disneys
common stock and he was elected to the disney board of directors. royalty
expense recognized by the company under the arrangement with pixar from september25,
2005 through may5, 2006 was less than $1 million.
item 14. principal
accountant fees and services
the following table sets
forth the fees accrued or paid to the companys independent registered public
accounting firm, kpmg llp, during fiscal years 2006 and 2005.
audit
and non-audit fees
audit fees
$
7,912,700
(1)
$
6,948,800
audit-related
fees
28,000
(2)
46,700
tax fees
820,500
(3)
923,000
all other fees
total
$
8,761,200
$
7,918,500
(1) audit fees relate to
professional services rendered in connection with the audit of the companys
annual financial statements and internal control over financial reporting,
quarterly review of financial statements included in the companys forms 10-q,
and audit services provided in connection with other statutory and regulatory
filings. fiscal year 2006 also includes fees incurred in connection with the
special committee of the companys board of directors investigation into stock
option practices, no such fees were incurred during 2005.
(2) audit-related fees
primarily relate to professional services for the audits of employee benefit
plans.
(3) 2006
tax fees include $728,600 for professional services rendered in connection with
tax compliance and preparation relating to the companys expatriate program,
tax audits and international tax compliance; and $91,900 for international tax
consulting and planning services. the company does not engage kpmg to perform
personal tax services for its executive officers.
policy on audit
committee pre-approval of audit and non-audit services performed by the
independent auditors
prior to the enactment of the sarbanes-oxley act
of 2002 (the act), the company adopted an
auditor independence policy that banned its auditors from performing
non-financial consulting services, such as information technology consulting
and internal audit services. this auditor independence policy also mandates
that the audit and non-audit services and related budget be approved by the
audit committee in advance, and that the audit committee be provided with
quarterly reporting on actual spending. in accordance with this policy, all
services to be performed by kpmg were pre-approved by the audit committee.
subsequent to the enactment of the act, the audit
committee met with kpmg to further understand the provisions of that act as it
relates to auditor independence. kpmg previously rotated the lead audit partner
in fiscal year 2005, rotated other partners in 2006, and will rotate additional
partners as appropriate in compliance with the act. the audit committee will
continue to monitor the activities undertaken by kpmg to comply with the act.
partiv
item 15. exhibits
and financial statement schedules.
(a) documents
filed as part of this report
(1) all
financial statements
indextoconsolidatedfinancialstatements
page
consolidated
balance sheets as of september30, 2006 and september24, 2005
consolidated
statements of operations for the three fiscal years ended september30,
consolidated
statements of shareholders equity for the three fiscal years ended
september30,2006
consolidated
statements of cash flows for the three fiscal years ended september30,
notes
to consolidated financial statements
selected
quarterly financial information (unaudited)
reports of independent
registered public accounting firm, kpmg llp
all financial statement
schedules have been omitted, since the required information is not applicable
or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule,
or because the information required is included in the consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto.
(2) index
to exhibits
incorporatedby
reference
exhibit
number
exhibitdescription
form
filingdate/
periodenddate
filed/
furnished
herewith
3.1
restated articles
of incorporation, filed with the secretary of state of the state of
california on january27, 1988.
s-3
7/27/88
3.2
amendment to
restated articles of incorporation, filed with the secretary of state of the
state of california on may4, 2000.
10-q
5/11/00
3.3
by-laws of the
company, as amended through june7, 2004.
10-q
6/26/04
3.4
certificate of
amendment to restated articles of incorporation, as amended, filed with the
secretary of state of the state of california on february25, 2005.
10-q
3/26/05
4.8
registration
rights agreement, dated june7, 1996 among the company and goldman,
sachs& co. and morgan stanley& co. incorporated.
s-3
8/28/96
4.9
certificate of
determination of preferences of seriesa non-voting convertible
preferred stock of apple computer,inc.
10-k
9/26/97
10.a.3**
apple
computer,inc. savings and investment plan, as amended and restated
effective as of october1, 1990.
10-k
9/27/91
10.a.3-1**
amendment of
apple computer,inc. savings and investment plan dated march1,
1992.
10-k
9/25/92
10.a.3-2**
amendment
no.2 to the apple computer, inc. savings and investment plan.
10-q
3/28/97
10.a.5**
1990 stock option
plan, as amended through november5, 1997.
10-q
12/26/97
10.a.6**
apple
computer,inc. employee stock purchase plan, as amended through
april21, 2005.
10-q
3/26/05
10.a.8**
formof
indemnification agreement between the registrant and each officer of the
registrant.
10-k
9/26/97
10.a.43**
next computer,inc.
1990 stock option plan, as amended.
s-8
3/21/97
10.a.49**
1997 employee
stock option plan, as amended through october19, 2001.
10-k
9/28/02
10.a.50**
1997 director
stock option plan.
10-q
3/27/98
10.a.51**
2003 employee
stock plan, as amended through november9, 2005.
10-k
9/24/05
10.a.52**
reimbursement
agreement dated as of may25, 2001 by and between the registrant and
steven p. jobs.
10-q
6/29/02
10.a.53**
option
cancellation and restricted stock award agreement dated as of march19,
2003 by and between the registrant and steven p. jobs.
10-q
6/28/03
10.a.54**
formof
restricted stock unit award agreement.
10-q
3/27/04
10.a.54-1**
alternative
formof restricted stock unit award agreement.
10-k
9/24/05
10.a.55**
apple
computer,inc. performance bonus plan dated april21, 2005.
10-q
3/26/05
10.a.56**
formof
election to satisfy tax withholding with stock.
8-k
8/15/05
10.a.57**
formof
option agreements.
10-k
9/24/05
10.b.18*
custom sales
agreement effective october21, 2002 between the registrant and
international business machines corporation.
10-k
9/27/03
10.b.19*
purchase
agreement effective august10, 2005 between the registrant and freescale
semiconductor,inc.
10-k
9/24/05
10.b.20
consulting
agreement dated as of april17, 2006 by and between the registrant and
j.r. ruby consulting corp.
10-q
7/1/06
14.1
code of ethics of
the company.
10-k
9/27/03
21***
subsidiaries of
apple computer,inc.
23.1***
consent of
independent registered public accounting firm.
24.1***
power of attorney
(included on page137 of this annual report on form10-k).
31.1***
rule13a-14(a)/
15d-14(a) certification of chief executive officer.
31.2***
rule13a-14(a)/
15d-14(a) certification of chief financial officer.
32.1****
section1350
certifications of chief executive officer and chief financial officer.
* confidential
treatment requested as to certain portions of this exhibit.
** indicates
management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
*** filed herewith.
**** furnished herewith.
signatures
pursuant
to the requirements of section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange
act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, this 29thday of december 2006.
apple computer, inc.
by:
/s/ peter oppenheimer
peter oppenheimer
senior vice president and
chief financial officer
power of attorney
know all persons by these presents, that each person
whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints steven p. jobs and peter
oppenheimer, jointly and severally, his attorneys-in-fact, each
with the power of substitution, for him in any and all capacities, to sign any
amendments to this annual report on form10-k, and to file the same,
with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the
securities and exchange commission, hereby ratifying and confirming all that
each of said attorneys-in-fact, or his substitute or substitutes,
may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has
been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated:
name
title
date
/s/ steven p.
jobs
chief executive
officer and director
december29, 2006
steven
p. jobs
(principal
executive officer)
/s/ peter
oppenheimer
senior vice president and chief financial officer
(principal financial and
december29, 2006
peter
oppenheimer
principal accounting officer)
/s/ william v.
campbell
director
december29, 2006
william
v. campbell
/s/ millard s.
drexler
director
december29, 2006
millard
s. drexler
/s/ albert
gore,jr.
director
december29, 2006
albert
gore, jr.
/s/ arthur d.
levinson
director
december29, 2006
arthur
d. levinson
/s/ eric e.
schmidt
director
december29, 2006
eric
e. schmidt
/s/ jerome b.
york
director
december29,
jerome b. york
