10-k
d220209d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
united states
securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended september24, 2011
or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period
fromto
commission file
number: 000-10030
apple inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
california
94-2404110
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
1 infinite loop cupertino, california
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (408)996-1010
securities registered pursuant to section12(b)of the act:
common stock, no par value
the nasdaq global select market
(title of class)
(name of exchange on which registered)
securities registered pursuant to section12(g)of the act: none
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act.
yesxno
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports
pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the act.
yesno
x  indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90 days.
yesxno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically
and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every interactive data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t (232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to submit and post such files).
yesxno
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
item405 of regulation s-k (section 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of the registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii
of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.  indicate by
check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and
smaller reporting company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.
largeacceleratedfilerx
acceleratedfiler
non-accelerated filer
(do not check if smaller reporting company)
smallerreportingcompany
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the act).
yesnox  the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting stock held by
non-affiliates of the registrant, as of march25, 2011, the last business day of the companys most recently completed second fiscal quarter, was approximately $322,921,000,000 based upon the closing price reported for such date on the
nasdaq global select market. for purposes of this disclosure, shares of common stock held by persons who hold more than 5% of the outstanding shares of common stock and shares held by executive officers and directors of the registrant have been
excluded because such persons may be deemed to be affiliates. this determination of executive officer or affiliate status is not necessarily a conclusive determination for other purposes.
929,409,000 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of october14, 2011
documents incorporated by reference  (1) portions of the registrants definitive proxy statement relating to its 2012 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference into part iii of this annual report on form 10-k where
indicated. such proxy statement will be filed with the u.s. securities and exchange commission within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year to which this report relates.
the business section and other parts of this annual report on form 10-k (form
10-k) contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. many of the forward-looking statements are located in managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.
forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. forward-looking statements can also be identified by
words such as anticipates, believes, estimates, expects, intends, plans, predicts, and similar terms. forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future
performance and the companys actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection
entitled risk factors under part i, item1a of this form 10-k, which are incorporated herein by reference. the company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by
law.  part i
item1.
business  company background
apple inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries (collectively apple or the
company) designs, manufactures and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers, and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, networking solutions, and
third-party digital content and applications. the companys products and services include iphone, ipad, mac, ipod, apple tv, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the ios and mac os x operating systems, icloud, and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. the company also sells and delivers digital content and applications through the itunes store, app storesm, ibookstoresm, and mac app store. the company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores, and direct
sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. in addition, the company sells a variety of third-party iphone, ipad, mac and ipod compatible products, including application
software, printers, storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and peripherals, through its online and retail stores. the company sells to consumers, small and mid-sized businesses (smb), and education,
enterprise and government customers. the companys fiscal year is the 52 or 53-week period that ends on the last saturday of september. unless otherwise stated, all information presented in this form 10-k is based on the companys fiscal
calendar. the company is a california corporation established in 1977.  business strategy
the company is committed to bringing the best user experience to its customers through its innovative hardware,
software, peripherals, and services. the companys business strategy leverages its unique ability to design and develop its own operating systems, hardware, application software, and services to provide its customers new products and solutions
with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative design. the company believes continual investment in research and development and marketing and advertising is critical to the development and sale of innovative products and
technologies. as part of its strategy, the company continues to expand its platform for the discovery and delivery of third-party digital content and applications through the itunes store. as part of the itunes store, the companys app store
and ibookstore allow customers to discover and download applications and books through either a mac or windows-based computer or through ios devices, namely iphone, ipad and ipod touch. in january 2011, the company opened the mac app store to allow customers to easily discover, download and install applications for their macs. the company also
supports a community for the development of third-party software and hardware products and digital content that complement the companys offerings. the companys strategy also includes expanding its distribution network to effectively
reach more customers and provide them with a high-quality sales and post-sales support experience.
consumer and small and mid-sized business
the company believes a high-quality buying experience with knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the companys
products and services greatly enhances its ability to attract and retain customers. the company sells many of its products and resells third-party products in most of its major markets directly to consumers and businesses through its retail and
online stores. the company has also invested in programs to enhance reseller sales by placing high quality apple fixtures, merchandising materials and other resources within selected third-party reseller locations. through the apple premium reseller
program, certain third-party resellers focus on the apple platform by providing a high level of product expertise, integration and support services.  the companys retail stores are typically located at high-traffic locations in quality shopping malls and urban shopping districts. by operating its own stores and locating them in desirable
high-traffic locations, the company is better positioned to ensure a high quality customer buying experience and attract new customers. the stores are designed to simplify and enhance the presentation and marketing of the companys products and
related solutions. to that end, retail store configurations have evolved into various sizes to accommodate market-specific demands. the company believes providing direct contact with its customers is an effective way to demonstrate the advantages of
its products over those of its competitors. the stores employ experienced and knowledgeable personnel who provide product advice, service and training. the stores offer a wide selection of third-party hardware, software, and other accessories and
peripherals that complement the companys products.  education
throughout its history, the company has been committed to delivering solutions to help educators teach and students learn. the company
believes effective integration of technology into classroom instruction can result in higher levels of student achievement and has designed a range of products, services and programs to address the needs of education customers. the company also
supports mobile learning and real-time distribution and accessibility of education related materials through itunes u, a platform that allows students and teachers to share and distribute educational media online. the company sells its
products to the education market through its direct sales force, select third-party resellers and its online and retail stores.  enterprise
and government  the company also sells its hardware and software products to enterprise and government customers in each of
its geographic segments. the companys products are deployed in these markets because of their power, productivity, ease of use and the simplicity of seamless integration into information technology environments. the companys products are
compatible with thousands of third-party business applications and services, and its tools enable the development and secure deployment of custom applications as well as remote device administration.
business organization
the company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. accordingly, the company has determined that its reportable operating
segments, which are generally based on the nature and location of its customers, consist of the americas, europe, japan, asia-pacific and retail. the results of the americas, europe, japan and asia-pacific reportable segments do not include the
results of the retail segment. the americas segment includes both north and south america. the europe segment includes european countries, as well as the middle east and africa. the asia-pacific segment includes australia and asian countries, other
than japan. the retail segment operates apple retail stores worldwide. each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. further information regarding the companys operating segments may be
found in part ii, item7 of this form 10-k under the subheading segment operating performance, and in part ii, item8 of this form 10-k in notes to consolidated financial statements in note 8, segment information and
geographic data.
products  the company offers a range of mobile communication and media devices, personal computing products, and portable digital music players, as well as a variety of related software, services, peripherals,
networking solutions and third-party hardware and software products. in addition, the company offers its own software products, including ios, the companys proprietary mobile operating system; mac os x, the companys proprietary operating
system software for the mac; server software and application software for consumer, smb, and education, enterprise and government customers. the companys primary products are discussed below.
iphone  iphone combines
a mobile phone, an ipod, and an internet communications device in a single handheld product. based on the companys multi-touch user interface, iphone featuresdesktop-class email, web browsing, searching, and maps and is compatible
with both macs and windows-based computers. iphone automatically syncs content from users itunes libraries, as well as contacts, bookmarks, and email accounts.iphone allows customers to access the itunes store to download audio and video
files, as well as a variety of other digital content and applications. in october 2011, the company launched iphone 4s, its latest version of iphone, which includes siri, a voice activated intelligent assistant. in addition to the
companys own iphone accessories, third-party iphone compatible accessories are available through the companys online and retail stores and from third parties.  ipad  ipad is a multi-purpose mobile device for browsing the web, reading
and sending email, viewing photos, watching videos, listening to music, playing games, reading e-books and more. ipad is based on the companys multi-touch technology and allows customers to connect with their applications and content in a more
interactive way. ipad allows customers to access the itunes store to download audio and video files, as well as a variety of other digital content and applications. in march 2011, the company introduced ipad 2, its second-generation ipad. in
addition to the companys own ipad accessories, third-party ipad compatible accessories are available through the companys online and retail stores and from third parties.  mac hardware products  the company offers a range of
personal computing products including desktop and portable computers, related devices and peripherals, and third-party hardware products. the companys mac desktop and portable systems feature intel microprocessors, the mac os x lion operating
system and the ilife suite of software for creation and management of digital photography, music, movies, dvds
and websites.  the companys desktop computers include imac, mac pro and mac mini. the imac desktop computer has an all-in-one design that incorporates a display, processor,
graphics card, storage, memory and other components inside a single enclosure. the mac pro desktop computer is targeted at business and professional customers and is designed to meet the performance, expansion, and networking needs of the most
demanding mac user. the mac mini is a desktop computer in a compact enclosure.  the companys
portable computers include macbook pro and macbook air. macbook pro is a portable computer designed for professionals and consumers. macbook air is an ultra-slim portable computer designed for professionals and consumers.
ipod  the companys ipod line of portable digital music and media players includes ipod touch, ipod nano, ipod shuffle and ipod
classic. all ipods work with itunes. in addition to the companys own ipod accessories, third-party ipod
compatible accessories are available, through the companys online and retail stores or from third parties.
the ipod touch, based on ios, is a flash-memory-based ipod with a widescreen display and a
multi-touch user interface. ipod touch allows customers to access the itunes store to download audio and video content, as well as a variety of digital applications. the ipod nano is a flash-memory-based ipod that features the companys
multi-touch interface allowing customers to navigate their music collection by tapping or swiping the display. the ipod nano features a polished aluminum and glass enclosure with a built-in clip. the ipod shuffle is a flash-memory-based ipod that
features a clickable control pad to control music playback and voiceover technology enabling customers to hear song titles, artists and playlist names. the ipod classic is a hard-drive based portable digital music and video player.
itunes
itunes is an application that supports the purchase, download, organization and playback
of digital audio and video files and is available for both mac and windows-based computers. itunes 10 is the latest version of itunes and features airplay wireless music playback, genius mixes, home sharing, and improved syncing functionality with ios devices.
itunes is integrated with the itunes store, a service that allows customers to discover, purchase, rent, and download digital content and applications. the itunes store includes the app store and
ibookstore. the app store allows customers to discover and download applications, and the ibookstore features electronic books from major and independent publishers and allows customers to preview and buy books for their ios devices. customers can
access the app store through either a mac or windows-based computer or through an ios device. the ibookstore is accessed through the ibooks application on an ios device.  mac app store
in january 2011, the company opened the mac app store allowing customers to discover, download and
install applications for their macs. the mac app store offers applications in education, games, graphics and design, lifestyle, productivity, utilities and other categories. the companys mac os x operating system software and ilife and iwork application software are also available on the mac app store.
icloud  in october 2011,
the company launched icloud, its new cloud service, which stores music, photos, applications, contacts, calendars, and documents and wirelessly pushes them to multiple ios devices, macs and windows-based computers. iclouds features include
itunes in the cloud, photo stream, documents in the cloud, contacts, calendar, mail,automatic downloads and purchase history for applications and ibooks, and icloud backup.users can sign up for free access to icloud using a device
running ios 5 or a mac running mac os x lion.  software products and computer technologies
the company offers a range of software products for consumer, smb, education, enterprise and government customers, including the
companys proprietary ios and mac os x operating system software; server software; professional application software; and consumer, education, and business oriented application software.  operating system software  ios
ios is the companys mobile operating system that serves as the foundation for ios devices. in october 2011, the company released ios
5, which supports icloud and includes new features such as notification center, a way to view and manage notifications in one place; imessage, a messaging service that allows users to send text messages, photos and videos between ios devices;
and newsstand, a way to purchase and organize newspaper and magazine subscriptions.
mac os x  mac os x, the operating system for macs, is built on an open-source unix-based foundation. mac os x lion is the eighth major release of mac os x and became available in july 2011. mac os x lion includes
support for new multi-touch gestures; icloud integration; system-wide support for full screen applications; mission control, a way to view everything running on a users mac; the mac app store; launchpad, a new home for a
users applications; and a redesigned mail application.  application software  ilife  ilife 11 is the latest version of the
companys consumer-oriented digital lifestyle application suite included with all mac computers. ilife features
iphoto, imovie, idvd, garageband, and iweb. iphoto is the companys consumer-oriented digital photo application and imovie is the
companys consumer-oriented digital video editing software application. idvd is the companys consumer-oriented software application that enables customers to turn imovie files, quicktime files, and digital pictures into interactive dvds.
garageband is the companys consumer-oriented music creation application that allows customers to play, record and create music. iweb allows customers to create online photo albums, blogs and podcasts, and to customize websites using editing
tools.  iwork  iwork 09 is the latest version of the companys integrated productivity suite designed to help users create, present, and publish documents, presentations, and spreadsheets. iwork 09
includes pages 09 for word processing and page layout, keynote 09 for presentations, and numbers 09 for spreadsheets. the company also has a multi-touch version of each iwork application designed specifically for use on ios devices.
other application software  the company also sells various other application software, including final cut
pro, logic studio, logic express 9, logic
studio pro, and its filemaker pro database software.  displays& peripheral
products  the company manufactures the apple led cinema display and thunderbolt display. the company also sells a
variety of apple-branded and third-party mac-compatible and ios-compatible peripheral products, including printers, storage devices, computer memory, digital video and still cameras, and various other computing products and supplies.
apple tv  apple tv allows
customers to watch movies and television shows on their high definition television. content from itunes, netflix, youtube, and flickr as well as music, photos, videos, and podcasts from a mac or windows-based computer can also be wirelessly streamed
to a television through apple tv. with the release of icloud in october 2011, content purchased on apple tv can be re-downloaded on ios devices.  product support and services  applecare offers a range of support options for the companys customers. these options include assistance that is
built into software products, printed and electronic product manuals, online support including comprehensive product information as well as technical assistance, and the applecare protection plan (app). app is a fee-based service that
typically includes two to three years of phone support and hardware repairs and dedicated web-based support resources.
markets and distribution  the companys customers are primarily in the consumer, smb, and education, enterprise and government markets. the company uses a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels, such as its
retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, and third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. the company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by
knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware and software integration, and demonstrate the unique solutions that are available on its products. the company further believes providing direct contact with its targeted customers
is an effective way to demonstrate the advantages of its products over those of its competitors and providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting new and retaining existing customers. to ensure a
high-quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the company continues to expand and improve its distribution capabilities by expanding the number of its own retail stores worldwide. additionally, the
company has invested in programs to enhance reseller sales by placing high quality apple fixtures, merchandising materials and other resources within selected third-party reseller locations. through the apple premium reseller program, certain
third-party resellers focus on the apple platform by providing a high level of integration and support services, and product expertise.  no single customer accounted for more than 10% of net sales in 2011 or 2010. one of the companys customers accounted for 11% of net sales in 2009.
competition  the markets
for the companys products and services are highly competitive and the company is confronted by aggressive competition in all areas of its business. these markets are characterized by frequent product introductions and rapid technological
advances that have substantially increased the capabilities and use of mobile communication and media devices, personal computers, and other digital electronic devices. the companys competitors who sell mobile devices and personal computers
based on other operating systems have aggressively cut prices and lowered their product margins to gain or maintain market share. the companys financial condition and operating results can be adversely affected by these and other industry-wide
downward pressures on gross margins. principal competitive factors important to the company include price, product features, relative price/performance, product quality and reliability, design innovation, a strong third-party software and
peripherals ecosystem, marketing and distribution capability, service and support, and corporate reputation.  the company is
focused on expanding its market opportunities related to mobile communication and media devices. these industries are highly competitive and include several large, well-funded and experienced participants. the company expects competition in these
industries to intensify significantly as competitors attempt to imitate some of the features of the companys products and applications within their own products or, alternatively, collaborate with each other to offer solutions that are more
competitive than those they currently offer. these industries are characterized by aggressive pricing practices, frequent product introductions, evolving design approaches and technologies, rapid adoption of technological and product advancements by
competitors, and price sensitivity on the part of consumers and businesses.  the companys digital content services have
faced significant competition from other companies promoting their own digital music and content products and services, including those offering free peer-to-peer music and video services. the company believes it offers superior innovation and
integration of the entire solution including the hardware (iphone, ipad, mac, and ipod), software (itunes), and distribution of digital content and applications (itunes store, app store, ibookstore and mac app store). some of the companys
current and potential competitors have substantial resources and may be able to provide such products and services at little or no profit or even at a loss to compete with the companys offerings.
the companys future financial condition and operating results depend on the companys ability to continue to develop and offer
new innovative products and services in each of the markets it competes in.
supply of components  although most components essential to the companys business are generally available from multiple sources, a number of components are currently obtained from single or limited sources, which
subjects the company to significant supply and pricing risks. many components are at times subject to industry-wide shortages and significant commodity pricing fluctuations. in addition, the company has entered into various agreements for the supply
of components; however there can be no guarantee that the company will be able to extend or renew these agreements on similar terms, or at all. therefore, the company remains subject to significant risks of supply shortages and price increases that
can materially adversely affect its financial condition and operating results.  the company and other participants in the
mobile communication and media device, and personal computer industries compete for various components with other industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. the company also uses some custom components that are not common
to the rest of these industries, and new products introduced by the company often utilize custom components available from only one source. when a component or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until the
suppliers yields have matured or manufacturing capacity has increased. if the companys supply of components for a new or existing product were delayed or constrained, or if a key manufacturing vendor delayed shipments of completed
products to the company, the companys financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected. the companys business and financial performance could also be materially adversely affected depending on the time
required to obtain sufficient quantities from the original source, or to identify and obtain sufficient quantities from an alternative source. continued availability of these components at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected if those
suppliers concentrated on the production of common components instead of components customized to meet the companys requirements.  substantially all of the companys hardware products are manufactured by outsourcing partners primarily located in asia. a significant concentration of this manufacturing is currently performed by a
small number of outsourcing partners, often in single locations. certain of these outsourcing partners are the sole-sourced suppliers of components and manufacturer for many of the companys products. although the company works closely with its
outsourcing partners on manufacturing schedules, the companys operating results could be adversely affected if its outsourcing partners were unable to meet their production commitments. the companys purchase commitments typically cover
the companys requirements for periods up to 150 days. research and development
because the industries in which the company competes are characterized by rapid technological advances, the companys ability to
compete successfully depends heavily upon its ability to ensure a continual and timely flow of competitive products, services and technologies to the marketplace. the company continues to develop new technologies to enhance existing products and to
expand the range of its product offerings through research and development, licensing of intellectual property and acquisition of third-party businesses and technology. total research and development expense was $2.4 billion, $1.8 billion and $1.3
billion in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.  patents, trademarks, copyrights and licenses
the company currently holds rights to patents and copyrights relating to certain aspects of its iphone, ipad, mac and ipod devices,
peripherals, software and services. the company has registered or has applied for trademarks and service marks in the u.s. and a number of foreign countries. although the company believes the ownership of such patents, copyrights, trademarks and
service marks is an important factor in its business and that its success does depend in part on the ownership thereof, the company relies primarily on the innovative skills, technical competence and marketing abilities of its personnel.
the company regularly files patent applications to protect inventions arising from its
research and development, and is currently pursuing thousands of patent applications around the world.over time, the company has accumulated a large portfolio of issued patents in the u.s. and worldwide.the company holds copyrights
relating to certain aspects of its products and services. no single patent or copyright is solely responsible for protecting the companys products. the company believes the duration of its patents is adequate relative to the expected lives of
its products. due to the fast pace of innovation and product development, the companys products are often obsolete before the patents related to them expire, and sometimes are obsolete before the patents related to them are even granted.
many of the companys products are designed to include intellectual property obtained from third parties. while it may
be necessary in the future to seek or renew licenses relating to various aspects of its products and business methods, based upon past experience and industry practice, the company believes such licenses generally could be obtained on commercially
reasonable terms; however, there is no guarantee that such licenses could be obtained at all. because of technological changes in the industries in which the company competes, current extensive patent coverage, and the rapid rate of issuance of new
patents, it is possible that certain components of the companys products and business methods may unknowingly infringe existing patents or intellectual property rights of others. from time to time, the company has been notified that it may be
infringing certain patents or other intellectual property rights of third parties.  foreign and domestic operations and geographic data
the u.s. represents the companys largest geographic market. approximately 39% of the companys net sales in
2011 came from sales to customers inside the u.s. final assembly of the companys products is currently performed in the companys manufacturing facility in ireland, and by outsourcing partners, primarily located in asia. the supply and
manufacture of a number of components is performed by sole-sourced outsourcing partners in the u.s., asia and europe. single-sourced outsourcing partners in asia perform final assembly of substantially all of the companys hardware products.
margins on sales of the companys products in foreign countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained from foreign suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and by international
trade regulations, including tariffs and antidumping penalties. information regarding financial data by geographic segment is set forth in part ii, item7 and item8 of this form 10-k and in notes to consolidated financial statements in
note 8, segment information and geographic data.  seasonal business
the company has historically experienced increased net sales in its first fiscal quarter compared to other quarters in its fiscal year due
to increased holiday seasonal demand. this historical pattern should not be considered a reliable indicator of the companys future net sales or financial performance.  warranty  the company offers a limited parts and labor warranty on most of
its hardware products. the basic warranty period is typically one year from the date of purchase by the original end-user. the company also offers a 90-day basic warranty for its service parts used to repair the companys hardware products. in
addition, consumers may purchase the app, which extends service coverage on many of the companys hardware products in most of its major markets.  backlog  in the companys experience, the actual amount of product
backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. in particular, backlog often increases in anticipation of or immediately following new product introductions as customers anticipate shortages. backlog
is often reduced once customers
believe they can obtain sufficient supply. because of the foregoing, backlog should not be considered a reliable indicator of the companys ability to achieve any particular level of revenue
or financial performance.  employees  as of september24, 2011, the company had approximately 60,400 full-time equivalent employees and an additional 2,900 full-time equivalent temporary employees and contractors.
available information
the companys annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k, and amendments to reports
filed pursuant to sections 13(a) and 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (exchange act), are filed with the u.s. securities and exchange commission (the sec). such reports and other information filed by
the company with the sec are available free of charge on the companys website at www.apple.com/investor when such reports are available on the sec website. the public may read and copy any materials filed by the company with the sec at
the secs public reference room at 100 f street, ne, room 1580, washington, dc 20549. the public may obtain information on the operation of the public reference room by calling the sec at 1-800-sec-0330. the sec maintains an internet site that
contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the sec at www.sec.gov. the contents of these websites are not incorporated into this filing. further, the companys
references to the urls for these websites are intended to be inactive textual references only.
item1a.
risk factors  because of
the following factors, as well as other factors affecting the companys financial condition and operating results, past financial performance should not be considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not
use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods.  global economic conditions could materially
adversely affect the company.  the companys operations and performance depend significantly on worldwide economic
conditions. uncertainty about global economic conditions poses a risk as consumers and businesses postpone spending inresponse to tighter credit, unemployment, negative financial news and/or declines in income or asset values, which could have
a material negative effect on demand for the companys products and services. demand also could differ materially from the companys expectations because the company generally raises prices on goods and services sold outside the u.s. to
offset the effect of a strengthening of the u.s. dollar. other factors that could influence demand include increases in fuel and other energy costs, conditions in the real estate and mortgage markets, unemployment, labor and healthcare costs, access
to credit, consumer confidence, and other macroeconomic factors affecting consumer spending behavior. these and other economic factors could materially adversely affect demand for the companys products and services and the companys
financial condition and operating results.  in the event of financial turmoil affecting the banking system and
financialmarkets, additional consolidation of the financial services industry, or significant financial service institution failures, there could be a new or incremental tightening in the creditmarkets, low liquidity, andextreme
volatility in fixed income, credit, currency, and equity markets. thiscould have a number of effects onthe companys business, including the insolvency or financial instability of outsourcing partners or suppliers or their inability
to obtain credit to finance development and/or manufacture products resulting inproduct delays; inability of customers, including channel partners, to obtain credit to financepurchases of the companys products; and failure of
derivative counterparties and other financial institutions. other income andexpense also could vary materially from expectations depending on gains or lossesrealized on the sale or exchange of financial instruments; impairment charges
resulting from revaluations of debt and equitysecurities and other investments; interest rates;cash balances; and
changes in fair value of derivative instruments.increased volatility in the financial markets and overall economicuncertainty would increase the risk of the actual amounts realized in
thefuture on the companys financial instruments differing significantlyfrom the fair values currently assigned to them.  global markets for the companys products and services are highly competitive and subject to rapid technological change. if the company is unable to compete effectively in these markets, its
financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected.  the companys products and services
compete in highly competitive global markets characterized by aggressive price cutting, with resulting downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life cycles, evolving industry standards, continual
improvement in product price/performance characteristics, rapid adoption of technological and product advancements by competitors, and price sensitivity on the part of consumers.
the companys ability to compete successfully depends heavily on its ability to ensure a continuing and timely introduction of
innovative new products and technologies to the marketplace. the company believes it is unique in that it designs and develops nearly the entire solution for its products, including the hardware, operating system, numerous software applications, and
related services. as a result, the company must make significant investments in research and development and as such, the company currently holds a significant number of patents and copyrights and has registered and/or has applied to register
numerous patents, trademarks and service marks. by contrast, many of the companys competitors seek to compete primarily through aggressive pricing and very low cost structures. if the company is unable to continue to develop and sell
innovative new products with attractive margins or if other companies infringe on the companys intellectual property, the companys ability to maintain a competitive advantage could be negatively affected and its financial condition and
operating results could be materially adversely affected.  the company markets certain mobile communication and media devices
based on the ios mobile operating system and also markets related third-party digital content and applications. the company faces substantial competition in these markets from companies that have significant technical, marketing, distribution and
other resources, as well as established hardware, software and digital content supplier relationships. additionally, the company faces significant price competition as competitors reduce their selling prices and attempt to imitate the companys
product features and applications within their own products or, alternatively, collaborate with each other to offer solutions that are more competitive than those they currently offer. the company also competes with illegitimate ways to obtain
third-party digital content and applications. the company has entered the mobile communications and media device markets, and some of its competitors in these markets have greater experience, product breadth and distribution channels than the
company. because some current and potential competitors have substantial resources and/or experience and a lower cost structure, they may be able to provide such products and services at little or no profit or even at a loss. the company also
expects competition to intensify as competitors attempt to imitate the companys approach to providing these components seamlessly within their individual offerings or work collaboratively to offer integrated solutions. the companys
financial condition and operating results depend substantially on the companys ability to continually improve ios and ios devices in order to maintain their functional and design advantages.
the company is the only authorized maker of hardware using mac os x, which has a minority market share in the personal computer market.
this market is dominated by computer makers using competing operating systems, most notably windows. in the market for personal computers and peripherals, the company faces a significant number of competitors, many of which have broader product
lines, lower priced products, and a larger installed customer base. consolidation in this market has resulted in larger and potentially stronger competitors. price competition has been particularly intense as competitors selling windows-based
personal computers have aggressively cut prices and lowered product margins. an increasing number of internet devices that include software applications and are smaller and simpler than traditional personal computers compete for market share with
the companys existing products. the companys financial condition and operating results depend substantially on its ability to continually improve the mac platform to maintain its functional and design advantages.
there can be no assurance the company will be able to continue to provide products and
services that compete effectively.  to remain competitive and stimulate customer demand, the company must successfully
manage frequent product introductions and transitions.  due to the highly volatile and competitive nature of the industries
in which the company competes, the company must continually introduce new products, services and technologies, enhance existing products and services, and effectively stimulate customer demand for new and upgraded products. the success of new
product introductions depends on a number of factors including but not limited to timely and successful product development, market acceptance, the companys ability to manage the risks associated with new products and production ramp issues,
the availability of application software for new products, the effective management of purchase commitments and inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, the availability of products in appropriate quantities and costs to meet
anticipated demand, and the risk that new products may have quality or other defects in the early stages of introduction. accordingly, the company cannot determine in advance the ultimate effect of new product introductions and transitions on its
financial condition and operating results.  the company faces substantial inventory and other asset risk in addition to
purchase commitment cancellation risk.  the company records a write-down for product and component inventories that have
become obsolete or exceed anticipated demand or net realizable value and accrues necessary cancellation fee reserves for orders of excess products and components. the company also reviews its long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or
changed circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. if the company determines that impairment has occurred, it records a write-down equal to the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds its fair
market value. although the company believes its provisions related to inventory, other assets and purchase commitments are currently adequate, no assurance can be given that the company will not incur additional related charges given the rapid and
unpredictable pace of product obsolescence in the industries in which the company competes. such charges could materially adversely affect the companys financial condition and operating results.
the company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product announcements and shipments. consistent with
industry practice, components are normally acquired through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, open orders and, where appropriate, inventory component prepayments, in each case based on projected demand. such purchase commitments
typically cover forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods up to 150 days. because the companys markets are volatile, competitive and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the company will forecast
incorrectly and order or produce excess or insufficient amounts of components or products, or not fully utilize firm purchase commitments. the companys financial condition and operating results have been in the past and could be in the future
materially adversely affected by the companys ability to manage its inventory levels and respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns.  future operating results depend upon the companys ability to obtain components in sufficient quantities.  because the company currently obtains components from single or limited sources, the company is subject to significant supply and pricing risks. many components that are available from multiple sources
are at times subject to industry-wide shortages and significant commodity pricing fluctuations. the company has entered into various agreements for the supply of components; there can be no guarantee that the company will be able to extend or renew
these agreements on similar terms, or at all. the follow-on effects from the credit crisis onthe companys suppliers, referred to in economic conditions could materially adversely affect the company above, also could
affect the companys ability to obtain components. therefore, the company remains subject to significant risks of supply shortages and price increases that could materially adversely affect the companys
financial condition and operating results. the company expects to experience decreases in its gross margin percentage in future periods, as compared to levels achieved during 2011, largely due to
a higher mix of new and innovative products with flat or reduced pricing that have higher cost structures and deliver greater value to customers, and potential future component cost and other cost increases.
the company and other participants in the mobile communication and media device, and personal computer industries compete for various
components with other industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. the company uses some custom components that are not common to the rest of these industries. the companys new products often utilize custom components
available from only one source. when a component or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until the suppliers yields have matured or manufacturing capacity has increased. continued availability of these
components at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected if those suppliers decided to concentrate on the production of common components instead of components customized to meet the companys requirements. if the supply of components for a
new or existing product were delayed or constrained, or if a key manufacturing vendor delayed shipments of completed products to the company, the companys financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected.
the company depends on component and product manufacturing and logistical services provided by outsourcing partners, many
of whom are located outside of the u.s.  substantially all of the companys manufacturing is performed in whole or in
part by a few outsourcing partners primarily located in asia. the company has also outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. while these arrangements may lower operating costs, they also reduce the companys direct control
over production and distribution. it is uncertain what effect such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of products or services, or the companys flexibility to respond to changing conditions. although arrangements with these
partners may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement, the company may remain responsible to the consumer for warranty service in the event of product defects. the company also relies on its partners to adhere to the companys
supplier code of conduct. any unanticipated product defect or warranty liability, whether pursuant to arrangements with outsourcing partners or otherwise, or material violations of the supplier code of conduct, could materially adversely affect the
companys reputation, financial condition and operating results.  the supply and manufacture of many critical components
is performed by sole-sourced outsourcing partners in the u.s., asia and europe. single-sourced outsourcing partners in asia perform final assembly of substantially all of the companys hardware products. if manufacturing or logistics in these
locations is disrupted for any reason including, but not limited to, natural and man-made disasters, information technology system failures, military actions or economic, business, labor, environmental, public health, or political issues, the
companys financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected.  the company relies on
third-party intellectual property and digital content, which may not be available to the company on commercially reasonable terms or at all.  many of the companys products include third-party intellectual property, which requires licenses from those third parties. based on past experience and industry practice, the company believes such
licenses generally could be obtained on reasonable terms. there is however no assurance that the necessary licenses could be obtained on acceptable terms or at all. if the company is unable to obtain or renew critical licenses on reasonable terms,
its financial condition and operating results may be materially adversely affected.  the company also contracts with third
parties to offer their digital content through the itunes store. the licensing arrangements with these third parties are short-term and do not guarantee the continuation or renewal of these arrangements on reasonable terms, if at all. some
third-party content providers currently or in the future may offer competing products and services, and could take action to make it more difficult or impossible for the
company to license their content in the future. other content owners, providers or distributors may seek to limit the companys access to, or increase the cost of, such content. if the
company is unable to continue to offer a wide variety of content at reasonable prices with acceptable usage rules, or continue to expand its geographic reach, the companys financial condition and operating results may be materially adversely
affected.  many third-party content providers require the company to provide digital rights management (drm) and
other security solutions. if these requirements change, the company may have to develop or license new technology to provide these solutions. there is no assurance the company will be able to develop or license such solutions at a reasonable cost
and in a timely manner. in addition, certain countries have passed or may propose legislation that would force the company to license its drm, which could lessen the protection of content and subject it to piracy and also could affect arrangements
with the companys content providers.  the companys future results could be materially adversely affected if it
is found to have infringed on intellectual property rights.  technology companies, including many of the companys
competitors, frequently enter into litigation based on allegations of patent infringement or other violations of intellectual property rights. in addition, patent holding companies seek to monetize patents they have purchased or otherwise obtained.
as the company has grown, the intellectual property rights claims against it have increased and may continue to increase. in particular, the companys cellular enabled products compete with mobile communication and media device companies that
hold significant patent portfolios, and the number of patent claims against the company has significantly increased.the company is vigorously defending infringement actions in courts in a number of u.s. jurisdictions and before the u.s.
international trade commission, as well as internationally in europe and asia. the plaintiffs in these actions frequently seek injunctions and substantial damages.  regardless of the scope or validity of such patents orthe merits of any patent claims by potential or actual litigants, the company may have to engage in protracted litigation. if the company is
found to infringe one or more patents, it may be required to pay substantial damages. if there is a temporary or permanent injunction prohibiting the company from marketing or selling certain products or a successful claim of infringement against
the company requiring it to pay royalties to a third-party, its financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected, regardless of whether it can develop non-infringing technology.
in certain cases, the company may consider the desirability of entering into licensing agreements, although no assurance can be given
that such licenses can be obtained on acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur. these licenses may also significantly increase the companys operating expenses.  in managements opinion there is not at least a reasonable possibility the company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss
contingencies, including matters related to infringement of intellectual property rights. however, the outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain. therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or
more of these legal matters were resolved against the company in the same reporting period for amounts in excess of managements expectations, the companys consolidated financial statements of a particular reporting period could be
materially adversely affected.  the companys future performance depends in part on support from third-party software
developers.  the company believes decisions by customers to purchase its hardware products depend in part on the
availability of third-party software applications and services. there is no assurance that third-party developers will continue to develop and maintain software applications and services for the companys products. if third-party software
applications and services cease to be developed and maintained for the companys products, customers may choose not to buy the companys products, which could materially adversely affect the companys financial condition and operating
results.
with respect to its mac products, the company believes the availability of third-party
software applications and services depends in part on the developers perception and analysis of the relative benefits of developing, maintaining, and upgrading such software for the companys products compared to windows-based products.
this analysis may be based on factors such as the perceived strength of the company and its products, the anticipated revenue that may be generated, continued acceptance by customers of mac os x, and the costs of developing such applications and
services. if the companys minority share of the global personal computer market causes developers to question the companys prospects, developers could be less inclined to develop or upgrade software for the companys products and
more inclined to devote their resources to developing and upgrading software for the larger windows market.  with respect to
ios devices, the company relies on the continued availability and development of compelling and innovative software applications, which are distributed through a single distribution channel, the app store. the absence of multiple distribution
channels, which are available for competing platforms, may limit the availability and acceptance of third-party applications by the companys customers, thereby causing developers to reduce or curtail development for the ios platform. in
addition, ios devices are subject to rapid technological change, and, if third-party developers are unable to or choose not to keep up with this pace of change, third-party applications might not successfully operate and may result in dissatisfied
customers. as with applications for the companys mac products, the availability and development of these applications also depend on developers perceptions and analysis of the relative benefits of developing software for the
companys products rather than its competitors products, including devices that use competing platforms. if developers focus their efforts on these competing platforms, the availability and quality of applications for the companys
devices may suffer.  the companys future operating performance depends on the performance of distributors, carriers
and other resellers.  the company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers,
and value-added resellers, many of whom distribute products from competing manufacturers. the company also sells many of its products and third-party products in most of its major markets directly to education customers, cellular network
carriers distribution channels, resellers and consumers through its online and retail stores.  carriers providing
cellular network service for iphone typically subsidize users purchase of the device. there is no assurance that such subsidies will be continued at all or in the same amounts upon renewal of the companys agreements with these carriers
or in agreements the company enters into with new carriers.  many resellers have narrow operating margins and have been
negatively affected in the past by weak economic conditions. some resellers have perceived the expansion of the companys direct sales as conflicting with their business interests as distributors and resellers of the companys products.
such a perception could discourage resellers from investing resources in the distribution and sale of the companys products or lead them to limit or cease distribution of those products. the company has invested and will continue to invest in
programs to enhance reseller sales, including staffing selected resellers stores with company employees and contractors and improving product placement displays. these programs could require a substantial investment while providing no
assurance of return or incremental revenue. the companys financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakens, if resellers stopped distributing the
companys products, or if uncertainty regarding demand for the companys products caused resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the companys products.
the companys retail business has required and will continue to require a
substantial investment and commitment of resources and is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties.  the companys
retail stores have required substantial fixed investment in equipment and leasehold improvements, information systems, inventory and personnel. the company also has entered into substantial operating lease commitments for retail space. certain
stores have been designed and built to serve as high-profile venues to promote brand awareness and serve as vehicles for corporate sales and marketing activities. because of their unique design elements, locations and size, these stores require
substantially more investment than the companys more typical retail stores. due to the high fixed cost structure associated with the retail segment, a decline in sales or the closure or poor performance of individual or multiple stores could
result in significant lease termination costs, write-offs of equipment and leasehold improvements, and severance costs that could materially adversely affect the companys financial condition and operating results.
many factors unique to retail operations, some of which are beyond the companys control, pose risks and uncertainties that could
materially adversely affect the companys financial condition and operating results. these risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, macro-economic factors that could have a negative effect on general retail activity, as well as
the companys inability to manage costs associated with store construction and operation, inability to sell third-party products at adequate margins, failure to manage relationships with its existing retail channel partners, more challenging
environment in managing retail operations outside the u.s., costs associated with unanticipated fluctuations in the value of retail inventory, and inability to obtain and renew leases in quality retail locations at a reasonable cost.
investment in new business strategies and initiatives could disrupt the companys ongoing business and present risks not
originally contemplated.  the company has invested, and in the future may invest, in new business strategies or
acquisitions. such endeavors may involve significant risks and uncertainties, including distraction of management from current operations, insufficient revenue to offset liabilities assumed and expenses associated with the strategy, inadequate
return of capital, and unidentified issues not discovered in the companys due diligence. these new ventures are inherently risky and may not be successful. they may materially adversely affect the companys financial condition and
operating results.  the companys products and services experience quality problems from time to time that can result
in decreased sales and operating margin.  the company sells complex hardware and software products and services that can
contain design and manufacturing defects. sophisticated operating system software and applications, such as those sold by the company, often contain bugs that can unexpectedly interfere with the softwares intended operation. the
companys online services may from time to time experience outages, service slowdowns, or errors. defects may also occur in components and products the company purchases from third parties. there can be no assurance the company will be able to
detect and fix all defects in the hardware, software and services it sells. failure to do so could result in lost revenue, harm to reputation, and significant warranty and other expenses, and could have a material adverse impact on the
companys financial condition and operating results.  the company is subject to laws and regulations worldwide,
changes to which could increase the companys costs and individually or in the aggregate materially adversely affect the companys financial condition or operating results.
the company is subject to laws and regulations affecting its domestic and international operations in a number of areas.these u.s.
and foreign laws and regulations affect the companys activities including, but not limited to, areas of labor, advertising, content, consumer protection, real estate, billing, e-commerce, promotions, quality of services, telecommunications,
mobile, television, intellectual property ownership and infringement, tax,
import and export requirements, anti-corruption, foreign exchange controls and cash repatriation restrictions, data privacy requirements, anti-competition, environmental, health, and safety.
by way of example, laws and regulations related to mobile communications and media devices in the many jurisdictions in which
the company operates are extensive and subject to change. such changes could include, among others, restrictions on the production, manufacture, distribution, and use of the device, locking the device to a carriers network, or mandating the
use of the device on more than one carriers network. these devices are also subject to certification and regulation by governmental and standardization bodies, as well as by cellular network carriers for use on their networks.these
certification processes are extensive and time consuming, and could result in additional testing requirements, product modifications, delays in product shipment dates, or preclude the company from selling certain products.
compliance with these laws, regulations and similar requirements may be onerous and expensive, and they may be inconsistent from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction, further increasing the cost of compliance.this increases the costs of doing business, and any such costs, which may rise in the future as a result of changes in these laws and regulations or in their
interpretation could individually or in the aggregate make the companys products and services less attractive to the companys customers, delay the introduction of new products in one or more regions, cause the company to change or limit
its business practices, or affect the companys financial condition and operating results. the company has implemented policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with these laws and regulations, but there can be no assurance that the
companys employees, contractors, or agents will not violate such laws and regulations or the companys policies. any such violations could individually or in the aggregate materially adversely affect the companys financial condition
or operating results. the companys success depends largely on the continued service and availability of key
personnel.  much of the companys future success depends on the continued availability and service of key personnel,
including its ceo, its executive team and highly skilled employees. experienced personnel in the technology industry are in high demand and competition for their talents is intense, especially in the silicon valley, where most of the companys
key personnel are located.  political events, war, terrorism, public health issues, natural disasters and other
circumstances could materially adversely affect the company.  war, terrorism, geopolitical uncertainties, public health
issues, and other business interruptions have caused and could cause damage or disruption to international commerce and the global economy, and thus could have a strong negative effect on the company, its suppliers, logistics providers,
manufacturing vendors and customers, including channel partners. the companys business operations are subject to interruption by natural disasters, fire, power shortages, nuclear power plant accidents, terrorist attacks, and other hostile
acts, labor disputes, public health issues, and other events beyond its control. such events could decrease demand for the companys products, make it difficult or impossible for the company to make and deliver products to its customers,
including channel partners, or to receive components from its suppliers, and create delays and inefficiencies in the companys supply chain. should major public health issues, including pandemics, arise, the company could be negatively affected
by more stringent employee travel restrictions, additional limitations in freight services, governmental actions limiting the movement of products between regions, delays in production ramps of new products, and disruptions in the operations of the
companys manufacturing vendors and component suppliers. the majority of the companys research and development activities, its corporate headquarters, information technology systems, and other critical business operations, including
certain component suppliers and manufacturing vendors, are in locations that could be affected by natural disasters. in the event of a natural disaster, losses, significant recovery time and substantial expenditures could be required to resume
operations and the companys financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected.
please also refer to the discussion of risks related to the march11, 2011, japan
earthquake and tsunami and the recent flooding in thailand in partii, item7, managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations, under the subheading japan earthquake and tsunami
and thailand flooding, which is incorporated herein by reference.  the company may be subject to information
technology system failures or network disruptions that could damage the companys reputation, business operations, and financial conditions.  the company may be subject to information technology system failures and network disruptions. these may be caused by natural disasters, accidents, power disruptions, telecommunications failures, acts of
terrorism or war, computer viruses, physical or electronic break-ins, or similar events or disruptions. system redundancy may be ineffective or inadequate, and the companys disaster recovery planning may not be sufficient for all
eventualities. such failures or disruptions could prevent access to the companys online stores and services, preclude retail store transactions, compromise company or customer data, and result in delayed or cancelled orders. system failures
and disruptions could also impede the manufacturing and shipping of products, delivery of online services, transactions processing and financial reporting.  the company may be subject to breaches of its information technology systems, which could damage the companys reputation, business partner and customer relationships, and access to online stores
and services. such breaches could subject the company to significant reputational, financial, legal, and operational consequences.  the companys business requires it to use and store customer, employee, and business partner personally identifiable information (pii). this may include names, addresses, phone numbers,
email addresses, contact preferences, tax identification numbers, and payment account information. although malicious attacks to gain access to pii affect many companies across various industries, the company may be at a relatively greater risk of
being targeted because of its high profile and the amount of pii managed.  the company requires user names and passwords in
order to access its information technology systems. the company also uses encryption and authentication technologies to secure the transmission and storage of data. these security measures may be compromised as a result of third-party security
breaches, employee error, malfeasance, faulty password management, or other irregularity, and result in persons obtaining unauthorized access to company data or accounts. third parties may attempt to fraudulently induce employees or customers into
disclosing user names, passwords or other sensitive information, which may in turn be used to access the companys information technology systems. to help protect customers and the company, the company monitors accounts and systems for unusual
activity and may freeze accounts under suspicious circumstances, which may result in the delay or loss of customer orders.
the company devotes significant resources to network security, data encryption, and other security measures to protect its systems and
data, but these security measures cannot provide absolute security. the company may experience a breach of its systems and may be unable to protect sensitive data. moreover, if a computer security breach affects the companys systems or results
in the unauthorized release of pii, the companys reputation and brand could be materially damaged and use of the companys products and services could decrease. the company would also be exposed to a risk of loss or litigation and
possible liability, which could result in a material adverse effect on the companys business, results of operations and financial condition.  the companys business is subject to a variety of u.s. and international laws, rules, policies and other obligations regarding data protection.
the company is subject to federal, state and international laws relating to the collection, use, retention, security and transfer of pii.
in many cases, these laws apply not only to third-party transactions, but also to transfers of information between the company and its subsidiaries, and among the company, its subsidiaries and other parties with which the company has commercial
relations. several jurisdictions have passed new laws in this
area, and other jurisdictions are considering imposing additional restrictions. these laws continue to develop and may be inconsistent from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. complying with emerging
and changing international requirements may cause the company to incur substantial costs or require the company to change its business practices. noncompliance could result in penalties or significant legal liability.
the companys privacy policies and practices concerning the use and disclosure of data are posted on its website. any failure by the
company, its suppliers or other parties with whom the company does business to comply with its posted privacy policies or with other federal, state or international privacy-related or data protection laws and regulations could result in proceedings
against the company by governmental entities or others, which could have a material adverse effect on the companys business, results of operations and financial condition.
the company is also subject to payment card association rules and obligations under its contracts with payment card processors. under
these rules and obligations, if information is compromised, the company could be liable to payment card issuers for the cost of associated expenses and penalties. in addition, if the company fails to follow payment card industry security standards,
even if no customer information is compromised, the company could incur significant fines or experience a significant increase in payment card transaction costs.  the company expects its quarterly revenue and operating results to fluctuate.  the companys profit margins vary among its products and its distribution channels. the companys software, accessories, and service and support contracts generally have higher gross margins
than certain of the companys other products. gross margins on the companys hardware products vary across product lines and can change over time as a result of product transitions, pricing and configuration changes, and component,
warranty, and other cost fluctuations. the companys direct sales generally have higher associated gross margins than its indirect sales through its channel partners. in addition, the companys gross margin and operating margin
percentages, as well as overall profitability, may be materially adversely impacted as a result of a shift in product, geographic or channel mix, new products, component cost increases, strengthening u.s. dollar, or price competition. the company
has typically experienced greater net sales in the first fiscal quarter compared to other fiscal quarters due to increased holiday seasonal demand. furthermore, the company sells more products from time-to-time during the third month of a quarter
than it does during either of the first two months. developments late in a quarter, such as lower-than-anticipated demand for the companys products, issues with new product introductions, an internal systems failure, or failure of one of the
companys logistics, components supply, or manufacturing partners, could have a material adverse impact on the companys financial condition and operating results.  the companys stock price is subject to volatility.  the
companys stock continues to experience substantial price volatility. additionally, the stock market as a whole has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have affected the stock price of many technology companies in ways that
may have been unrelated to these companies operating performance. the company believes its stock price reflects high future growth and profitability expectations. if the company fails to meet these expectations its stock price may
significantly decline, which could have a material adverse impact on investor confidence and employee retention.  the
companys business is subject to the risks of international operations.  the company derives a significant portion of
its revenue and earnings from its international operations. compliance with applicable u.s. and foreign laws and regulations, such as import and export requirements, anti-corruption laws, tax laws, foreign exchange controls and cash repatriation
restrictions, data privacy requirements, environmental laws, labor laws, and anti-competition regulations, increases the costs of doing business in foreign jurisdictions. although the company has implemented policies and procedures to comply with
these laws and
regulations, a violation by the companys employees, contractors, or agents could nevertheless occur. the consequences of such violations could individually or in the aggregate materially
adversely affect the companys financial condition or operating results.  the companys financial condition and
operating results also could be significantly affected by other risks associated with international activities including, but not limited to, economic and labor conditions, increased duties, taxes and other costs, political instability, and changes
in the value of the u.s. dollar versus local currencies. margins on sales of the companys products in foreign countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained from foreign suppliers, could be materially adversely affected
by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including duties, tariffs and antidumping penalties. the company is also exposed to credit and collectability risk on its trade receivables with customers in
certain international markets. there can be no assurance it can effectively limit its credit risk and avoid losses, which could materially adversely affect the companys financial condition and operating results.
the companys primary exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates relate to non-u.s. dollar denominated sales and
operating expenses worldwide. weakening of foreign currencies relative to the u.s. dollar will adversely affect the u.s. dollar value of the companys foreign currency-denominated sales and earnings, and generally will lead the company to raise
international pricing, potentially reducing demand for the companys products. in some circumstances, due to competition or other reasons, the company may decide not to raise local prices to the full extent of the dollars strengthening,
or at all, which would adversely affect the u.s. dollar value of the companys foreign currency denominated sales and earnings. conversely, a strengthening of foreign currencies, while generally beneficial to the companys foreign
currency-denominated sales and earnings, could cause the company to reduce international pricing and incur losses on its foreign currency derivative instruments, thereby limiting the benefit. additionally, strengthening of foreign currencies may
also increase the companys cost of product components denominated in those currencies, thus adversely affecting gross margins.  the company has used derivative instruments, such as foreign currency forward and option contracts, to hedge certain exposures to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. the use of such hedging
activities may not offset any or more than a portion of the adverse financial effects of unfavorable movements in foreign exchange rates over the limited time the hedges are in place.
the company is exposed to credit risk and fluctuations in the market values of its investment portfolio.
although the company has not recognized any significant losses to date on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, any
significant declines in their market values could materially adversely affect the companys financial condition and operating results. given the global nature of its business, the company has both domestic and international investments. credit
ratings and pricing of these investments can be negatively affected by liquidity, credit deterioration, financial results, economic risk, political risk, sovereign risk or other factors. as a result, the value and liquidity of the companys
cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities could decline and result in a significant impairment, which could materially adversely affect the companys financial condition and operating results.
the company is exposed to credit risk on its trade accounts receivable, vendor non-trade receivables and prepayments related to
long-term supply agreements. this risk is heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen.  the company
distributes its products through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value-added resellers. a substantial majority of the companys outstanding trade receivables are not covered by collateral or credit insurance.
the companys exposure to credit and collectability risk on its trade receivables is higher in certain international markets and its ability to mitigate such risks may be limited. cellular network carriers accounted for a significant portion of
the companys trade receivables as of september24, 2011. the
company also has unsecured vendor non-trade receivables resulting from purchases of components by outsourcing partners and other vendors that manufacture sub-assemblies or assemble final products
for the company. two vendors accounted for a significant portion of the companys non-trade receivables as of september24, 2011. in addition, the company has made prepayments associated with long-term supply agreements to secure supply of
inventory components. while the company has procedures to monitor and limit exposure to credit risk on its trade and vendor non-trade receivables as well as long-term prepayments, there can be no assurance such procedures will effectively limit its
credit risk and avoid losses, which could materially adversely affect the companys financial condition and operating results.  unfavorable results of legal proceedings could materially adversely affect the company.  the company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that have not yet been fully resolved and that have arisen in the ordinary conduct of business, and additional claims may arise in the
future. results of legal proceedings are subject to significant uncertainty and, regardless of the merit of the claims, litigation may be expensive, time-consuming, disruptive to the companys operations, and distracting to management. in
recognition of these considerations, the company may enter into arrangements to settle litigation.  although management
considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the company in the same reporting period for amounts in excess of managements expectations, the companys consolidated
financial statements of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. further, such an outcome could result in significant compensatory, punitive or trebled monetary damages, disgorgement of revenue or profits, remedial
corporate measures or injunctive relief against the company that could materially adversely affect its financial condition and operating results.  changes in the companys tax rates, the adoption of new u.s. or international tax legislation or exposure to additional tax liabilities could affect its future results.
the company is subject to taxes in the u.s. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. the companys future effective tax rates could be
affected by changes in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, or changes in tax laws or their interpretation. any of these changes could have a material
adverse effect on the companys profitability. the company is also subject to the continual examination of its income tax returns by the internal revenue service and other tax authorities. the company regularly assesses the likelihood of
adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of its provision for taxes. there can be no assurance that the outcomes from these examinations will not materially adversely affect the companys financial condition
and operating results.
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
none.
item2.
properties  the
companys headquarters are located in cupertino, california. as of september24, 2011, the company owned or leased approximately 13.2million square feet of building space, primarily in the u.s., and to a lesser extent, in europe,
japan, canada, and the asia-pacific regions. of that amount approximately 7.0million square feet was leased building space, which includes approximately 3.0million square feet related to retail store space. of the companys owned
building space, approximately 2.6million square feet that is located in cupertino, california will be demolished to build a second corporate campus. additionally, the company owns a total of 584 acres of land in various locations.
as of september24, 2011, the company owned a manufacturing facility in cork, ireland that also housed a customer support call
center and facilities in elk grove, california that included warehousing and distribution operations and a customer support call center. in addition, the company owned facilities for research and
development and corporate functions in cupertino, california, including land for the future development of the companys second corporate campus. the company also owned data centers in
newark, california and in north carolina. outside the u.s., the company owned additional facilities for various purposes.  the
company believes its existing facilities and equipment are in good operating condition and are suitable for the conduct of its business. the company has invested in internal capacity and strategic relationships with outside manufacturing vendors and
continues to make investments in capital equipment as needed to meet anticipated demand for its products.
item3.
legal proceedings  as of
september24, 2011, the end of the annual period covered by this report, the company was subject to the various legal proceedings and claims discussed below, as well as certain other legal proceedings and claims that have not been fully
resolved and that have arisen in the ordinary course of business. in the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with
respect to loss contingencies. however, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the company are subject to significant uncertainty. therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one
or more of these legal matters were resolved against the company in the same reporting period for amounts in excess of managements expectations, the companys consolidated financial statements of a particular reporting period could be
materially adversely affected. see the risk factors the companys future results could be materially adversely affected if it is found to have infringed on intellectual property rights. and unfavorable results of
legal proceedings could materially adversely affect the company. in part i, item1a of this annual report on form 10-k under the heading risk factors. the company settled certain matters during the fourth quarter of 2011
that did not individually or in the aggregate have a material impact on the companys financial condition and results of operations.  in re apple& attm antitrust litigation (brought on behalf of named plaintiffs kliegerman, holman, rivello, smith, lee, macasaddu, morikawa, scotti and sesso)
this is a purported class action filed against the company and at&t mobility in the united states district court for the northern
district of california.the consolidated complaint alleges that the company and at&t mobility violated the federal antitrust laws by monopolizing and/or attempting to monopolize the aftermarket for voice and data services for
the iphone and that the company monopolized and/or attempted to monopolize the aftermarket for software applications for iphones.plaintiffs are seeking unspecified compensatory and punitive damages for the class, treble damages,
injunctive relief and attorneys fees. onjuly 8, 2010the court granted in part plaintiffs motion for class certification.following a favorable supreme court ruling for at&t mobility in its case against conception,
defendants have filed motions to compel arbitration and to decertify the class. the apple ipod itunes antitrust litigation
(formerly charoensak v. apple computer, inc. and tucker v. apple computer, inc.); somers v. apple inc.  these related cases
have been filed on january3, 2005,july21, 2006 and december31, 2007 in the united states district court for the northern district of california on behalf of a purported class of direct and indirect purchasers of ipods and
itunes store content, alleging various claims including alleged unlawful tying of music and video purchased on the itunes store with the purchase of ipods and unlawful acquisition or maintenance of monopoly market powerand unlawful acquisition
or maintenance of monopoly market power under 1 and 2 of the sherman act, the cartwright act, california business& professions code 17200 (unfair competition), the california consumer legal remedies act and california
monopolization law. plaintiffs are seeking unspecified compensatory and punitive damages for the class, treble damages, injunctive relief, disgorgement of revenues and/or profits and attorneys fees. plaintiffs are also seeking drm free versions of
any songs downloaded from itunes or an order requiring the company to license its drm to all competing music players. the cases are currently pending.
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the companys common stock is traded on the over-the-counter market and is quoted on the nasdaq global select market under the symbol
aapl.  price range of common stock  the price range per share of common stock presented below represents the highest and lowest sales prices for the companys common stock on the nasdaq global select market during each quarter of the
two most recent years.
fourth quarter
third quarter
second quarter
first quarter
fiscal 2011 price range per common share
$
422.86-$327.25
$
355.13-$310.50
$
364.90-$321.31
$
325.72-$275.00
fiscal 2010 price range per common share
$
293.53 - $235.56
$
279.01 - $199.25
$
231.95 - $190.25
$
209.35 - $180.70
holders  as of october14, 2011, there were 28,543 shareholders of record.  dividends
the company did not declare or pay cash dividends in either 2011 or 2010. the company anticipates that for the foreseeable
future it will retain any earnings for use in the operation of its business.  purchases of equity securities by the issuer and affiliated
purchasers  none.
company stock performance  the following graph shows a five-year comparison of cumulative total shareholder return, calculated on a dividend reinvested basis, for the company, the s&p 500 composite index, the s&p computer
hardware index, and the dow jones u.s. technology index. the graph assumes $100 was invested in each of the companys common stock, the s&p 500 composite index, the s&p computer hardware index, and the dow jones u.s. technology index on
september30, 2006. data points on the graph are annual. note that historic stock price performance is not necessarily indicative of future stock price performance.
september30,2006
september30,2007
september30,2008
september30,2009
september30,2010
september30,2011
apple inc.
$
$
$
$
$
$
s&p 500
$
$
$
$
$
$
s&p computer hardware
$
$
$
$
$
$
dow jones us technology
$
$
$
$
$
$
item6.
selected financial data
the information set forth below for the five years ended september24, 2011, is not necessarily indicative of results of future
operations, and should be read in conjunction with item7, managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in
item8 of this form 10-k to fully understand factors that may affect the comparability of the information presented below (inmillions, except share amounts which are reflected in thousands and per share amounts).
net sales
$
108,249
$
65,225
$
42,905
$
37,491
$
24,578
net income
$
25,922
$
14,013
$
8,235
$
6,119
$
3,495
earnings per common share:
basic
$
28.05
$
15.41
$
9.22
$
6.94
$
4.04
diluted
$
27.68
$
15.15
$
9.08
$
6.78
$
3.93
cash dividends declared per common share
$
$
$
$
$
shares used in computing earnings per share:
basic
924,258
909,461
893,016
881,592
864,595
diluted
936,645
924,712
907,005
902,139
889,292
total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities
$
81,570
$
51,011
$
33,992
$
24,490
$
15,386
total assets
$
116,371
$
75,183
$
47,501
$
36,171
$
24,878
total long-term obligations (a)
$
10,100
$
5,531
$
3,502
$
1,745
$
total liabilities
$
39,756
$
27,392
$
15,861
$
13,874
$
10,347
total shareholders equity
$
76,615
$
47,791
$
31,640
$
22,297
$
14,531
(a)
the company did not have any long-term debt during the five years ended september24, 2011. long-term obligations exclude non-current deferred
revenue.
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
this section and other parts of this form 10-k contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. forward-looking
statements can also be identified by words such as anticipates, expects, believes, plans, predicts, and similar terms. forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance
and the companys actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled
risk factors above, which are incorporated herein by reference. the following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in item8 of this form 10-k. all
information presented herein is based on the companys fiscal calendar. unless otherwise stated, references in this report to particular years or quarters refer to the companys fiscal years ended in september and the associated quarters
of those fiscal years. the company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law.  executive overview  the company designs, manufactures, and markets mobile
communication and media devices, personal computers, and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, networking solutions, and third-party digital content and applications. the companys
products and services include iphone, ipad, mac, ipod, apple tv, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the ios and mac os x operating systems, icloud, and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. the company
also sells and delivers digital content and applications through the itunes store, app store, ibookstore, and mac app store. the company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, as well as
through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. in addition, the company sells a variety of third-party iphone, ipad, mac and ipod compatible products, including application software, printers,
storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and peripherals through its online and retail stores. the company sells to consumers, small and mid-sized businesses, and education, enterprise and government customers.
the company is committed to bringing the best user experience to its customers through its innovative hardware, software,
peripherals, and services. the companys business strategy leverages its unique ability to design and develop its own operating systems, hardware, application software, and services to provide its customers new products and solutions with
superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative design. as part of its strategy, the company continues to expand its platform for the discovery and delivery of third-party digital content and applications through the itunes store. as part
of the itunes store, the companys app store and ibookstore allow customers to discover and download applications and books through either a mac or windows-based computer or through ios devices, namely iphone, ipad and ipod touch.
in january 2011, the company opened the mac app store to allow customers to easily discover, download and install applications for their macs. the company also supports a community for the development of third-party software and hardware products
and digital content that complement the companys offerings. the companys strategy also includes expanding its distribution network to effectively reach more customers and provide them with a high-quality sales and post-sales support
experience.  the company participates in several highly competitive markets, including mobile communications and media devices
with its iphone, ipad and ipod product families; personal computers with its mac computers; and distribution of third-party digital content and applications through the itunes store, app store, ibookstore, and mac app store. while the company is
widely recognized as a leading innovator in the markets where it competes, these markets are highly competitive and subject to aggressive pricing. to remain competitive, the company believes that continual investment in research and development and
marketing and advertising is critical to the development and sale of innovative products and technologies. the companys research and development spending is focused on investing in new hardware and software products, and in further developing
its existing products, including iphone, ipad, mac, and ipod hardware; ios and mac os x operating systems; and a variety of application software and online services.
the company uses a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels, such as its retail
stores, online stores, and direct sales force, and third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. the company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable
salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware and software integration, and demonstrate the unique solutions that are available on its products. the company further believes providing direct contact with its targeted customers is an
effective way to demonstrate the advantages of its products over those of its competitors and providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting new and retaining existing customers. to ensure a high-quality
buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the company continues to expand and improve its distribution capabilities by expanding the number of its own retail stores worldwide. additionally, the company has
invested in programs to enhance reseller sales by placing high quality apple fixtures, merchandising materials and other resources within selected third-party reseller locations. through the apple premium reseller program, certain third-party
resellers focus on the apple platform by providing a high level of integration and support services, and product expertise.  japan
earthquake and tsunami and thailand flooding  on march11, 2011, the northeast coast of japan experienced a severe
earthquake followed by a tsunami, with continuing aftershocks. these geological events have caused significant damage in the region, including severe damage to nuclear power plants, and have impacted japans power and other infrastructure as
well as its economy. certain of the companys suppliers are located in japan, and certain of its other suppliers integrate components or use materials manufactured in japan in the production of its products. to the extent that component
production has been affected, the company has generally obtained alternative sources of supply or implemented other measures. the company does not currently believe these events will have a material impact on its operations in the first quarter of
2012 unless conditions worsen, including, but not limited to, power outages and expansion of evacuation zones around the nuclear power plants.  beyond the first quarter of 2012, uncertainty exists with respect to the availability of electrical power, the damage to nuclear power plants and the impact to other infrastructure. thus, there is a risk
that the company could in the future experience delays or other constraints in obtaining key components and products and/or price increases related to such components and products that could materially adversely affect the companys financial
condition and operating results.  in addition, in recent months several regions of thailand have experienced severe flooding,
causing damage to infrastructure, housing and factories. a number of the companys suppliers are located in thailand. as with japan, to the extent that component production has been affected, the company will work to obtain alternative sources
of supply or implement other measures. based on the companys current assessment of the situation, it does not believe this event will have a material impact on its operations in the first quarter of 2012; however, because the situation in
thailand is still evolving uncertainty remains regarding the ultimate impact of this event on the company.  critical accounting policies
and estimates  the preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles (gaap) and the companys discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the companys management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts
reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. note 1, summary of significant accounting policies of notes to consolidated financial statements in this form 10-k describes the significant accounting policies
and methods used in the preparation of the companys consolidated financial statements. management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results
of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material.
management believes the companys critical accounting policies and estimates are those
related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. management considers these policies critical
because they are both important to the portrayal of the companys financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. the companys senior management
has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the audit and finance committee of the companys board of directors.  revenue recognition  net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale
of hardware, software, digital content and applications, peripherals, and service and support contracts. the company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or
determinable, and collection is probable. product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. for most of the companys product sales, these criteria are met at the time the
product is shipped. for online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the u.s., and for certain other sales, the company defers recognition of revenue until the customer receives the product because the company retains a
portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. the company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware, and third-party digital content sold
on the itunes store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. the company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions:
(i)standalone sales of software products, (ii)sales of software upgrades and (iii)sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware.
for multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware products functionality,
undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware products essential software, and undelivered non-software services, the company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. in such circumstances, the
company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i)vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (vsoe), (ii)third-party evidence of selling price
(tpe) and (iii)best estimate of the selling price (esp). vsoe generally exists only when the company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the company for that deliverable. esps reflect
the companys best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis.  for sales of iphone, ipad, apple tv, for sales of ipod touch beginning in june 2010, and for sales of mac beginning in june 2011, the company has indicated it may from time-to-time provide future
unspecified software upgrades and features free of charge to customers. in june 2011, the company announced it would begin providing various non-software services to owners of qualifying versions of ios devices and mac. because the company has
neither vsoe nor tpe for these unspecified software upgrade rights or the non-software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the companys esps. amounts allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and
non-software services are deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated lives of each of these devices, which range from 24 to 48 months. the companys process for determining esps involves managements judgment. the
companys process considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. if the facts and circumstances underlying the factors considered change, including the estimated
or actual costs incurred to provide non-software services or the estimated lives of the related devices, or should future facts and circumstances lead the company to consider additional factors, the companys esp for software upgrades and
non-software services related to future sales of these devices could change. if the estimated life of one or more of the devices should change, the future rate of amortization of the revenue allocated to the software upgrade rights would also
change.
the company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price
protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. for transactions involving price protection, the company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to
be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. the companys policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not
recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. for customer incentive programs, the estimated cost of these programs is recognized at the later of the date at which the company has sold the product or the date at
which the program is offered. the company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the companys historical experience. future market conditions and product transitions may require the company to increase
customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional reductions to revenue at the time such programs are offered. additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to
estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. managements estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. if a greater than estimated proportion of
customers redeem such incentives, the company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have a negative impact on the companys results of operations.  valuation and impairment of marketable securities  the companys
investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the companys
consolidated balance sheets. changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact the companys net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. realized gains and losses on the
sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each securitys cost basis. the company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired, which would require the company
to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. in making this judgment, the company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost, the financial
condition of the issuer and any changes thereto, and the companys intent to sell, or whether it is more likely than not it will be required to sell, the security before recovery of the its amortized cost basis. the companys assessment on
whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired, could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security.  inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments  the company must
order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. the company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in
excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. the company performs a detailed review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current
sales levels, and component cost trends. the industries in which the company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. if future demand or market conditions for the
companys products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the company may be required to record additional write-downs, which would negatively affect its
results of operations in the period when the write-downs were recorded.  the company records accruals for estimated
cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. consistent with industry practice, the company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders
based on projected demand information. these commitments typically cover the companys requirements for periods up to 150 days. if there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the companys products or an
unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the companys products, the company may be required to
record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would negatively affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded.
warranty costs  the
company provides for the estimated cost of hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific
product failures that are outside of the companys typical experience. each quarter, the company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products
subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. if actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required and could materially affect the
companys results of operations.  income taxes  the company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which
deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards.
deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. the company records a valuation allowance
to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.  the company recognizes tax
benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. the tax benefits recognized in the financial
statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.  management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing
taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. in the event that the company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the company will make an adjustment to
the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. in addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of gaap
and complex tax laws. resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with managements expectations could have a material impact on the companys financial condition and operating results.
legal and other contingencies  as discussed in part i, item3 of this form 10-k under the heading legal proceedings and in note 7, commitments and contingencies in notes to consolidated financial
statements, the company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. the company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. there
is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. in the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the company may have incurred a material
loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies. however, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the company are subject to significant uncertainty. therefore, although management
considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the company in the same reporting period for amounts in excess of managements expectations, the companys consolidated
financial statements of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected.
net sales  fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009 each spanned 52 weeks. an additional week is included in the first fiscal quarter approximately every six years to realign fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. fiscal
year 2012 will end on september29, 2012 and will span 53 weeks, with a 14th week added to the first quarter of 2012.
the following table summarizes net sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during the three years ended
september24, 2011 (in millions, except unit sales in thousands and per unit amounts):
change
change
net sales by operating segment:
americas net sales
$
38,315
56%
$
24,498
29%
$
18,981
europe net sales
27,778
49%
18,692
58%
11,810
japan net sales
5,437
37%
3,981
75%
2,279
asia-pacific net sales
22,592
174%
8,256
160%
3,179
retail net sales
14,127
44%
9,798
47%
6,656
total net sales
$
108,249
66%
$
65,225
52%
$
42,905
net sales by product:
desktops (a)
$
6,439
4%
$
6,201
43%
$
4,324
portables (b)
15,344
36%
11,278
18%
9,535
total mac net sales
21,783
25%
17,479
26%
13,859
ipod
7,453
(10)%
8,274
2%
8,091
other music related products and services (c)
6,314
28%
4,948
23%
4,036
iphone and related products and services (d)
47,057
87%
25,179
93%
13,033
ipad and related products and services (e)
20,358
311%
4,958
nm
peripherals and other hardware (f)
2,330
28%
1,814
23%
1,475
software, service and other sales (g)
2,954
15%
2,573
7%
2,411
total net sales
$
108,249
66%
$
65,225
52%
$
42,905
unit sales by product:
desktops (a)
4,669
1%
4,627
45%
3,182
portables (b)
12,066
34%
9,035
25%
7,214
total mac unit sales
16,735
22%
13,662
31%
10,396
ipod unit sales
42,620
(15)%
50,312
(7)%
54,132
iphone units sold
72,293
81%
39,989
93%
20,731
ipad units sold
32,394
334%
7,458
nm
(a)
includes imac, mac mini, mac pro and xserve product lines.
(b)
includes macbook, macbook air and macbook pro product lines.
(c)
includes sales from the itunes store, app store, and ibookstore in addition to sales of ipod services and apple-branded and third-party ipod
accessories.
(d)
includes revenue recognized from iphone sales, carrier agreements, services, and apple-branded and third-party iphone accessories.
(e)
includes revenue recognized from ipad sales, services and apple-branded and third-party ipad accessories.
(f)
includes sales of displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories.
(g)
includes sales from the mac app store in addition to sales of other apple-branded and third-party mac software and mac and internet services.
nm
= not meaningful
fiscal year 2011 versus 2010
net sales during 2011 increased $43.0 billion or 66% compared to 2010. several factors contributed positively to this increase, including
the following:
net sales of iphone and related products and services were $47.1 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $21.9 billion or 87% compared to 2010.
iphone handset unit sales totaled 72.3million during 2011, representing an increase of 32.3million units or 81% compared to 2010. iphone year-over-year net sales growth reflected strong demand for iphone 4 in all of the companys
operating segments. the expanded u.s. distribution of iphone to the verizon wireless network beginning in february 2011, continued expansion into new countries, and increased distribution with other new carriers and resellers also contributed to the
year-over-year growth of iphone. as of september24, 2011, the company distributed iphone in 105 countries through 228 carriers. additionally, the company distributes iphone through its direct channels and certain third-party resellers. net
sales of iphone and related products and services accounted for 43% of the companys total net sales for 2011.
net sales of ipad and related products and services, which the company introduced in the third quarter of 2010, were $20.4 billion in 2011,
representing an increase of $15.4 billion or 311% compared to 2010. unit sales of ipad were 32.4million during 2011, an increase of 334% from 2010. the year-over-year unit growth and net sales growth were driven by strong ipad demand in all of
the companys operating segments. the company distributes ipad through its direct channels, certain cellular network carriers distribution channels and certain third-party resellers. the company distributed ipad in 90 countries as of
september24, 2011 compared to 26 countries as of september25, 2010. net sales of ipad and related products and services accounted for 19% of the companys total net sales for 2011.
mac net sales were $21.8 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $4.3 billion or 25% compared to 2010. mac unit sales increased by
3.1million or 22% in 2011 compared to 2010. the year-over-year growth in mac net sales and unit sales was due primarily to higher demand in all of the companys operating segments for macbook air and macbook pro, which were updated in
july 2011 and february 2011, respectively. the year-over-year revenue growth for portables and desktops was 36% and 4%, respectively. net sales of the companys macs accounted for 20% of the companys total net sales for 2011.
net sales of other music related products and services were $6.3 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $1.4 billion or 28% compared to 2010.
the increase was due primarily to increased net sales from the itunes store, which was largely driven by app store expansion into new countries that contributed to strong growth in all of the companys geographic segments. during 2011, the
combined net sales for the itunes store, app store and ibookstore was $5.4 billion, representing an increase of 33% compared to 2010. the company believes this continued growth is the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading third-party
digital content, continued growth in its customer base of iphone, ipad and ipod, expansion of third-party audio and video content available via the itunes store, and continued interest in and growth of the app store. net sales of other music related
products and services accounted for 6% of the companys total net sales for 2011.  partially offsetting
the positive factors contributing to the overall increase in net sales was a decrease in ipod net sales of $821 million or 10% during 2011 compared to 2010. similarly, ipod unit sales decreased by 15% in 2011 compared to 2010. however, net sales per
ipod unit sold increased during 2011 compared to 2010 due primarily to a shift in ipod product mix toward ipod touch. net sales of ipod accounted for 7% of the companys total net sales for 2011.
fiscal year 2010 versus 2009
net sales during 2010 increased $22.3 billion or 52% compared to 2009. several factors contributed positively to this increase, including
the following:
net sales of iphone and related products and services were $25.2 billion in 2010 representing an increase of $12.1 billion or 93% compared to 2009.
iphone unit sales totaled 40million in 2010, which represents an increase of 19.3million or 93% compared to 2009. iphone year-over-year growth was attributable primarily to continued growth from existing carriers, expanded distribution
with new international carriers and resellers, and strong demand for iphone 4, which was released in the u.s. in june 2010 and in many other countries over the remainder of 2010. as of september25, 2010, the company distributed iphone in 89
countries through 166 carriers. net sales of iphone and related products and services accounted for 39% of the companys total net sales for 2010 compared to 30% in 2009.
net sales of ipad and related products and services were $5.0 billion and unit sales of ipad were 7.5million during 2010. ipad was released in
the u.s. in april 2010 and in various other countries over the remainder of 2010. as of september25, 2010, the company distributed ipad in 26 countries. the company distributes ipad through its direct channels, certain cellular network
carriers distribution channels and certain third-party resellers. net sales of ipad and related products and services accounted for 8% of the companys total net sales for 2010, reflecting the strong demand for ipad during the five months
following its release.
mac net sales increased by $3.6 billion or 26% in 2010 compared to 2009, and mac unit sales increased by 3.3million or 31% in 2010 compared to
2009. net sales per mac unit sold decreased by 4% in 2010 compared to 2009 due primarily to lower average selling prices of mac portable systems. during 2010, net sales and unit sales of the companys mac portable systems increased by 18% and
25%, respectively, primarily attributable to strong demand for macbook pro, which was updated in april 2010. net sales and unit sales of the companys mac desktop systems increased by 43% and 45%, respectively, as a result of higher sales of
imac, which was updated in july 2010. net sales of the companys macs accounted for 27% of the companys total net sales in 2010 compared to 32% in 2009.
net sales of other music related products and services increased $912 million or 23% during 2010 compared to 2009. this increase was due primarily
to growth of the itunes store which generated total net sales of $4.1 billion for 2010. the results of the itunes store reflect growth of the itunes app store, continued growth in the installed base of iphone, ipad, and ipod customers, and the
expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale and rent via the itunes store. the company continues to expand its itunes content and applications offerings around the world. net sales of other music related products and services
accounted for 8% of the companys total net sales for 2010 compared to 9% in 2009.
net sales of ipods increased $183 million or 2% during 2010, while ipod unit sales declined by 7% during 2010 compared to 2009. net sales per ipod
unit sold increased by 10% to $164 in 2010 compared to 2009, due to a shift in product mix toward ipod touch. ipod touch experienced strong growth in each of the companys reportable operating segments. net sales of ipods accounted for 13% of
the companys total net sales for 2010 compared to 19% in 2009.  segment operating performance
the company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. the companys reportable operating segments consist of the
americas, europe, japan, asia-pacific and retail operations. the results of the americas, europe, japan and asia-pacific reportable segments do not include the results of the retail segment. the americas segment includes both north and south
america. the europe segment includes european countries, as well as the middle east and africa. the asia-pacific segment includes australia and asian
countries, other than japan. the retail segment operates apple retail stores in 11 countries. each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar
services. further information regarding the companys operating segments may be found in note 8, segment information and geographic data in notes to consolidated financial statements of this form 10-k.
americas  during 2011,
net sales in the americas segment increased $13.8 billion or 56% compared to 2010. the primary contributors to the growth in net sales was a significant year-over-year increase in iphone revenue from carrier expansion and strong demand for iphone 4
and increased sales of ipad and macs, partially offset by a decrease in ipod net sales. higher sales of third-party digital content and applications from the itunes store and app store also drove an increase in sales during 2011. the americas
segment represented approximately 35% and 37% of the companys total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively.  during
2010, net sales in the americas segment increased $5.5 billion or 29% compared to 2009. this increase in net sales was driven by increased iphone revenue, strong demand for ipad, continued demand for mac desktop and portable systems, and higher
sales of third-party digital content and applications from the itunes store. the americas segment represented 37% and 44% of the companys total net sales in 2010 and 2009, respectively.  europe  for 2011, net sales in the europe segment increased $9.1 billion or
49%, compared to 2010. the increase in net sales during 2011 was attributable primarily to the continued year-over-year increase in iphone revenue from carrier expansion and strong demand for iphone 4, and increased sales of ipad and macs, partially
offset by a decrease in ipod net sales. the europe segment represented 26% and 29% of total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively.  during 2010, net sales in europe increased $6.9 billion or 58% compared to 2009. the growth in net sales was due mainly to a significant increase in iphone revenue attributable to continued growth from
existing carriers and country and carrier expansion, increased sales of mac desktop and portable systems and strong demand for ipad, partially offset by a stronger u.s. dollar. the europe segment represented 29% and 28% of the companys total
net sales in 2010 and 2009, respectively.  japan  japans net sales increased $1.5 billion or 37% during 2011 compared to 2010. the key contributors to japans net sales growth were increased iphone revenue, strong sales of ipad, increased
sales of macs, and strength in the japanese yen relative to the u.s. dollar. the japan segment represented 5% and 6% of total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively.  the recent earthquakes and tsunami that struck the northeast coast of japan have created uncertainty regarding general economic and market conditions in japan. any significant impact of these events on
consumer demand could negatively impact the companys net sales in japan in the future. the company does not currently believe that the impact of these events will have a material adverse effect on the company or its results of operations.
during 2010, japans net sales increased $1.7 billion or 75% compared to 2009. the primary contributors to this growth
were significant year-over-year increases in iphone revenue, strong demand for ipad, and to a lesser extent strength in the japanese yen. the japan segment represented 6% and 5% of the companys total net sales for 2010 and 2009, respectively.
asia-pacific  net sales in the asia pacific segment increased $14.3 billion or 174% during 2011 compared to 2010. the company experienced particularly strong year-over-year net sales growth in its asia pacific segment
during 2011, especially in greater china, which includes hong kong and taiwan. korea and australia also experienced strong year-over-year revenue growth. higher net sales in the asia pacific segment were due mainly to the increase in iphone revenue
primarily attributable to the strong demand for iphone 4 and carrier expansion, strong sales of ipad, and increased sales of macs. the asia pacific segment represented 21% and 13% of total net sales in 2011 and 2010, respectively.
net sales in asia-pacific increased $5.1 billion or 160% during 2010 compared to 2009. the significant growth in asia-pacific net sales
was due mainly to increased iphone revenue, which was primarily attributable to country and carrier expansion and continued growth from existing carriers. asia-pacific net sales were also favorably affected by strong demand for mac portable and
desktop systems and for ipad. particularly strong year-over-year growth was experienced in china, korea and australia. the asia-pacific segment represented 13% and 7% of the companys total net sales for 2010 and 2009, respectively.
retail  retail segment
net sales increased $4.3 billion or 44% during 2011 compared to 2010. the increase in net sales was driven primarily by strong demand for ipad, higher sales of macs, and an increase in iphone revenue. the company opened 40 new retail stores during
2011, 28 of which were outside the u.s., ending the year with 357 stores open compared to 317 stores at the end of 2010. as of september24, 2011, the company had a total of 245 u.s. retail stores and 112 international retail stores.
during 2011, the company had an average of 326 stores compared to an average of 288 stores during 2010. the average revenue
per store increased 27% to $43.3 million in 2011 compared to $34.1 million in 2010. the retail segment represented 13% and 15% of total net sales in 2011 and 2010, respectively.
retail net sales increased $3.1 billion or 47% during 2010 compared to 2009. the increase in net sales was driven primarily by strong
demand for ipad, increased sales of mac desktop and portable systems and a significant year-over-year increase in iphone revenue. the company opened 44 new retail stores during 2010, 28 of which were outside the u.s., ending the year with 317 stores
open compared to 273 stores at the end of 2009. with an average of 288 stores and 254 stores opened during 2010 and 2009, respectively, average revenue per store increased to $34.1 million in 2010, compared to $26.2 million in 2009. the retail
segment represented 15% and 16% of the companys total net sales in 2010 and 2009, respectively.  the retail segment
reported operating income of $3.3 billion during 2011 compared to $2.4 billion during 2010. the year-over-year increase in retail operating income was primarily attributable to higher overall net sales that resulted in significantly higher average
revenue per store during 2011 compared to 2010. the retail segment reported operating income of $1.7 billion during 2009. the increase in retail operating income during 2010 compared to 2009 was attributable to higher overall net sales.
expansion of the retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related
infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other operating expenses. capital asset purchases associated with the retail segment since inception totaled $2.8 billion through the end of 2011. as of september24, 2011, the retail
segment had approximately 36,000 full-time equivalent employees and had outstanding lease commitments associated with retail space and related facilities of $2.4 billion. the company would incur substantial costs if it were to close multiple retail
stores and such costs could adversely affect the companys financial condition and operating results.
gross margin  gross margin for the three years ended september24, 2011, are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages):
net sales
$
108,249
$
65,225
$
42,905
cost of sales
64,431
39,541
25,683
gross margin
$
43,818
$
25,684
$
17,222
gross margin percentage
40.5%
39.4%
40.1%
the gross margin percentage in 2011 was 40.5%, compared to 39.4% in 2010. this year-over-year increase in
gross margin was largely driven by lower commodity and other product costs.  the gross margin percentage in 2010 was 39.4%
compared to 40.1% in 2009. this year-over-year decline in gross margin was primarily attributable to new products that had higher cost structures, including ipad, partially offset by a more favorable sales mix of iphone, which had a higher gross
margin than the company average.  the company expects to experience decreases in its gross margin percentage in future
periods, as compared to levels achieved during 2011, largely due to a higher mix of new and innovative products with flat or reduced pricing that have higher cost structures and deliver greater value to customers, and potential future component cost
and other cost increases.  the foregoing statements regarding the companys expected gross margin percentage are
forward-looking and could differ from anticipated levels because of several factors including, but not limited to certain of those set forth below in part i, item1a, risk factors under the subheading future
operating results depend upon the companys ability to obtain components in sufficient quantities, which is incorporated herein by reference. in general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under
downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions and potential increases in the cost of components, as well
as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the companys sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. in response to these competitive pressures, the company expects it will continue
to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. gross margins could also be affected by the companys ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its
products. due to the companys significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates.  operating expenses  operating expenses for the three years ended
september24, 2011, are as follows (in millions, except for percentages):
research and development
$
2,429
$
1,782
$
1,333
percentage of net sales
2%
3%
3%
selling, general and administrative
$
7,599
$
5,517
$
4,149
percentage of net sales
7%
8%
10%
research and development expense (r&d)
r&d expense increased $647 million or 36% to $2.4 billion in 2011 compared to 2010. this increase was due primarily to an increase in
headcount and related expenses to support expanded r&d activities. although total
r&d expense increased 36% during 2011 compared to 2010, it declined slightly as a percentage of net sales, due to the 66% year-over-year growth in the companys net sales during 2011.
r&d expense increased 34% or $449 million to $1.8 billion in 2010 compared to 2009. this increase was due primarily to an
increase in headcount and related expenses in the current year to support expanded r&d activities. also contributing to this increase in r&d expense in 2010 was the capitalization in 2009 of software development costs of $71 million related
to mac os x snow leopard. although total r&d expense increased 34% during 2010, it declined as a percentage of net sales given the 52% year-over-year increase in net sales in 2010.
the company continues to believe that focused investments in r&d are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the
marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the companys core business strategy. as such, the company expects to make further investments in r&d to remain competitive.
selling, general and administrative expense (sg&a)
sg&a expense increased $2.1 billion or 38% to $7.6 billion during 2011 compared to 2010. this increase was due primarily to the
companys continued expansion of its retail segment, increased headcount and related costs, higher spending on professional services and marketing and advertising programs, and increased variable costs associated with the overall growth of the
companys net sales.  sg&a expense increased $1.4 billion or 33% to $5.5 billion in 2010 compared to 2009. this
increase was due primarily to the companys continued expansion of its retail segment, higher spending on marketing and advertising programs, increased share-based compensation expenses and variable costs associated with the overall growth of
the companys net sales.  other income and expense  other income and expense for the three years ended september24, 2011, are as follows (in millions):
interest and dividend income
$
$
$
other expense, net
(104
)
(156
)
(81
)
total other income and expense
$
$
$
total other income and expense increased $260 million or 168% to $415 million during 2011 compared to
$155 million and $326 million in 2010 and 2009, respectively. the year-over-year increase in other income and expense during 2011 was due primarily to higher interest income and net realized gains on sales of marketable securities. the overall
decrease in other income and expense in 2010 compared to 2009 was attributable to the significant declines in interest rates on a year-over-year basis, partially offset by the companys higher cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities
balances. additionally the company incurred higher premium expenses on its foreign exchange option contracts, which further reduced the total other income and expense. the weighted average interest rate earned by the company on its cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities was 0.77%, 0.75% and 1.43% during 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. during 2011, 2010 and 2009, the company had no debt outstanding and accordingly did not incur any related interest expense.
provision for income taxes  the companys effective tax rates were approximately 24.2%, 24.4% and 31.8% for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. the companys effective rates for these periods differ from the statutory
federal income tax rate of
35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no u.s. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the u.s.
as of september24, 2011, the company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax
credits of $3.2 billion, and deferred tax liabilities of $9.2 billion. management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future
reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. the company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of a
valuation allowance.  the internal revenue service (the irs) has completed its field audit of the companys
federal income tax returns for the years 2004 through 2006 and proposed certain adjustments. the company has contested certain of these adjustments through the irs appeals office. the irs is currently examining the years 2007 through 2009. all irs
audit issues for years prior to 2004 have been resolved. in addition, the company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities.management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result
from tax examinations. however, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. if any issues addressed in the companys tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with managements expectations, the company could be
required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs.  liquidity and capital resources
the following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the three years ended september24, 2011 (in
millions):
cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities
$
81,570
$
51,011
$
33,992
accounts receivable, net
$
5,369
$
5,510
$
3,361
inventories
$
$
1,051
$
working capital
$
17,018
$
20,956
$
20,049
annual operating cash flow
$
37,529
$
18,595
$
10,159
cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities increased $30.6 billion or 60% during 2011. the
principal components of this net increase was the cash generated by operating activities of $37.5 billion, which was partially offset by payments for acquisition of property, plant and equipment of $4.3 billion, payments for acquisition of
intangible assets of $3.2 billion and payments made in connection with business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $244 million. the company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to
satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months.
the companys marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly rated securities and its policy generally
limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. the companys investment policy requires investments to generally be investment grade with the objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. as of september24, 2011
and september25, 2010, $54.3 billion and $30.8 billion, respectively, of the companys cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in u.s. dollar-denominated holdings. amounts
held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to u.s. income taxation on repatriation to the u.s.  capital assets
the companys capital expenditures were $4.6 billion during 2011, consisting of approximately $614 million for retail store
facilities and $4.0 billion for other capital expenditures, including product tooling and manufacturing
process equipment, real estate for the future development of the companys second corporate campus, and other corporate facilities and infrastructure. the companys actual cash payments
for capital expenditures during 2011 were $4.3 billion, of which $612 million relates to retail store facilities.  the company
anticipates utilizing approximately $8.0 billion for capital expenditures during 2012, including approximately $900 million for retail store facilities and approximately $7.1 billion for product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and
corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements.  during 2012, the
company expects to open about 40 new retail stores, approximately three-quarters of which will be located outside of the u.s.  off-balance
sheet arrangements and contractual obligations  the company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated
entities whereby the company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation
under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the company.  the following table presents certain payments due by the company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of september24, 2011 and excludes amounts already recorded on the
consolidated balance sheet (in millions):
total
paymentsdue inless than1 year
paymentsdue in 1-3years
paymentsdue in 4-5years
paymentsdue inmorethan5 years
operating leases
$
3,032
$
$
$
$
1,302
purchase obligations
13,949
13,949
other obligations
2,415
2,297
total
$
19,396
$
16,584
$
$
$
1,302
lease commitments  the companys major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally provide renewal options for terms not exceeding five additional years. leases for retail space are for
terms ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. as of september24, 2011, the companys total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases
were $3.0 billion, of which $2.4 billion related to leases for retail space.  purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and
component suppliers  the company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the companys
products and to perform final assembly and test of finished products. these outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. the company
also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. consistent with industry practice, the company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based
on projected demand information. as of september24, 2011, the company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of $13.9 billion.
other obligations  other outstanding obligations were $2.4 billion as of september24, 2011, and were comprised mainly of commitments under long-term supply agreements to make additional inventory component prepayments
and to acquire capital equipment, commitments to acquire product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and commitments related to advertising, research and development, internet and telecommunications services and other obligations.
the companys other non-current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets consist primarily of deferred tax
liabilities, gross unrecognized tax benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. as of september24, 2011, the company had non-current deferred tax liabilities of $8.2 billion. additionally, as of september24, 2011, the company
had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $1.4 billion and an additional $261 million for gross interest and penalties classified as non-current liabilities. at this time, the company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of
payments in individual years in connection with these tax liabilities; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table.  indemnification  the company generally does not indemnify end-users of its
operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. other agreements entered into by the company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the company
could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the company or an indemnified third-party. however, the company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim
asserted against it or an indemnified third-party. in the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end-users of its operating system or
application software for infringement of third-party intellectual property rights. the company did not record a liability for infringement costs related to indemnification as of either september24, 2011 or september25, 2010.
the company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. under these agreements, the company
has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal
proceedings. it is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances
involved in each claim. however, the company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations, and payments made under these agreements historically have not been material.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk  interest rate and foreign currency risk management  the company regularly
reviews its foreign exchange forward and option positions, both on a stand-alone basis and in conjunction with its underlying foreign currency and interest rate related exposures. given the effective horizons of the companys risk management
activities and the anticipatory nature of the exposures, there can be no assurance these positions will offset more than a portion of the financial impact resulting from movements in either foreign exchange or interest rates. further, the
recognition timing of gains and losses related to these instruments for any given period may not coincide with the timing of gains and losses related to the underlying economic exposures and, therefore, may adversely affect the companys
financial condition and operating results.
interest rate risk  while the company is exposed to interest rate fluctuations in many of the worlds leading industrialized countries, the companys interest income and expense is most sensitive to fluctuations in
u.s. interest rates. changes in u.s. interest rates affect the interest earned on the companys cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, the fair value of those securities, as well as costs associated with hedging.
the companys investment policy and strategy are focused on preservation of capital and supporting the liquidity requirements of the
company. a portion of the companys cash is managed by external managers within the guidelines of the companys investment policy and to objective market benchmarks. the companys internal portfolio is benchmarked against external
manager performance.  the companys exposure to changes in interest rates relates primarily to the companys
investment portfolio. the company typically invests in highly rated securities and its policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. the companys investment policy generally requires investments to be investment
grade, with the objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss.  to provide a meaningful assessment of the
interest rate risk associated with the companys investment portfolio, the company performed a sensitivity analysis to determine the impact a change in interest rates would have on the value of the investment portfolio assuming a 100 basis
point parallel shift in the yield curve. based on investment positions as of september24, 2011, a hypothetical 100 basis point increase in interest rates across all maturities would result in a $913 million incremental decline in the fair
market value of the portfolio. as of september25, 2010, a similar 100 basis point shift in the yield curve would have resulted in a $477 million incremental decline in the fair market value of the portfolio. such losses would only be realized
if the company sold the investments prior to maturity.  foreign currency risk
in general, the company is a net receiver of currencies other than the u.s. dollar. accordingly, changes in exchange rates, and in
particular a strengthening of the u.s. dollar, will negatively affect the companys net sales and gross margins as expressed in u.s. dollars. there is a risk that the company will have to adjust local currency product pricing due to competitive
pressures when there have been significant volatility in foreign currency exchange rates.  the company may enter into foreign
currency forward and option contracts with financial institutions to protect against foreign exchange risks associated with certain existing assets and liabilities, certain firmly committed transactions, forecasted future cash flows, and net
investments in foreign subsidiaries. generally, the companys practice is to hedge a majority of its material foreign exchange exposures, typically for up to six months. however, the company may choose not to hedge certain foreign exchange
exposures for a variety of reasons, including but not limited to accounting considerations and the prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular exposures.  to provide a meaningful assessment of the foreign currency risk associated with certain of the companys foreign currency derivative positions, the company performed a sensitivity analysis using a
value-at-risk (var) model to assess the potential impact of fluctuations in exchange rates. the var model consisted of using a monte carlo simulation to generate thousands of random market price paths assuming normal market conditions.
the var is the maximum expected loss in fair value, for a given confidence interval, to the companys foreign currency derivative positions due to adverse movements in rates. the var model is not intended to represent actual losses but is used
as a risk estimation and management tool. the model assumes normal market conditions. forecasted transactions, firm commitments, and assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies were excluded from the model. based on the results of the
model, the company estimates with 95% confidence a maximum one-day loss in fair value of $161 million as of september24, 2011 compared to a
maximum one-day loss in fair value of $103 million as of september25, 2010. because the company uses foreign currency instruments for hedging purposes, the loss in fair value incurred on
those instruments are generally offset by increases in the fair value of the underlying exposures.  actual future gains and
losses associated with the companys investment portfolio and derivative positions may differ materially from the sensitivity analyses performed as of september24, 2011 due to the inherent limitations associated with predicting the timing
and amount of changes in interest rates, foreign currency exchanges rates and the companys actual exposures and positions.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
index to consolidated financial statements
page
consolidated statements of operations for the three years ended september24, 2011
consolidated balance sheets as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010
consolidated statements of shareholders equity for the three years ended september24,
consolidated statements of cash flows for the three years ended september24, 2011
notes to consolidated financial statements
selected quarterly financial information (unaudited)
reports of ernst & young llp, independent registered public accounting firm
all financial statement schedules have been omitted, since the required information is not applicable or
is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto.
consolidated statements of operations
(inmillions, except number of shares which are reflected in thousands and per share amounts)
three years ended september24, 2011
net sales
$
108,249
$
65,225
$
42,905
cost of sales
64,431
39,541
25,683
gross margin
43,818
25,684
17,222
operating expenses:
research and development
2,429
1,782
1,333
selling, general and administrative
7,599
5,517
4,149
total operating expenses
10,028
7,299
5,482
operating income
33,790
18,385
11,740
other income and expense
income before provision for income taxes
34,205
18,540
12,066
provision for income taxes
8,283
4,527
3,831
net income
$
25,922
$
14,013
$
8,235
earnings per common share:
basic
$
28.05
$
15.41
$
9.22
diluted
$
27.68
$
15.15
$
9.08
shares used in computing earnings per share:
basic
924,258
909,461
893,016
diluted
936,645
924,712
907,005
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
consolidated balance sheets
(inmillions, except number of shares which are reflected in thousands)
september24,2011
september25,2010
assets:
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
9,815
$
11,261
short-term marketable securities
16,137
14,359
accounts receivable, less allowances of $53 and $55, respectively
5,369
5,510
inventories
1,051
deferred tax assets
2,014
1,636
vendor non-trade receivables
6,348
4,414
other current assets
4,529
3,447
total current assets
44,988
41,678
long-term marketable securities
55,618
25,391
property, plant and equipment, net
7,777
4,768
goodwill
acquired intangible assets, net
3,536
other assets
3,556
2,263
total assets
$
116,371
$
75,183
liabilities and shareholders equity:
current liabilities:
accounts payable
$
14,632
$
12,015
accrued expenses
9,247
5,723
deferred revenue
4,091
2,984
total current liabilities
27,970
20,722
deferred revenue  non-current
1,686
1,139
other non-current liabilities
10,100
5,531
total liabilities
39,756
27,392
commitments and contingencies
shareholders equity:
common stock, no par value; 1,800,000 shares authorized; 929,277 and 915,970 shares issued and outstanding,
respectively
13,331
10,668
retained earnings
62,841
37,169
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(46
)
total shareholders equity
76,615
47,791
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
116,371
$
75,183
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
consolidated statements of shareholders equity
(inmillions, except number of shares which are reflected in thousands)
common stock
retainedearnings
accum-ulatedothercompre-hensiveincome/(loss)
totalshare-holders
equity
shares
amount
balances as of september27, 2008
888,326
$
7,177
$
15,129
$
(9
)
$
22,297
components of comprehensive income:
net income
8,235
8,235
change in foreign currency translation
(14
)
(14
)
change in unrealized gains/losses on marketable securities, net of tax
change in unrecognized gains/losses on derivative instruments, net of tax
(18
)
(18
)
total comprehensive income
8,321
share-based compensation
common stock issued under stock plans, net of shares withheld for employee taxes
11,480
(11
)
tax benefit from equity awards, including transfer pricing adjustments
(78
)
(78
)
balances as of september26, 2009
899,806
8,210
23,353
31,640
components of comprehensive income:
net income
14,013
14,013
change in foreign currency translation
change in unrealized gains/losses on marketable securities, net of tax
change in unrecognized gains/losses on derivative instruments, net of tax
(253
)
(253
)
total comprehensive income
13,890
share-based compensation
common stock issued under stock plans, net of shares withheld for employee taxes
16,164
(197
)
tax benefit from equity awards, including transfer pricing adjustments
balances as of september25, 2010
915,970
10,668
37,169
(46
)
47,791
components of comprehensive income:
net income
25,922
25,922
change in foreign currency translation
(12
)
(12
)
change in unrealized gains/losses on marketable securities, net of tax
(41
)
(41
)
change in unrecognized gains/losses on derivative instruments, net of tax
total comprehensive income
26,411
share-based compensation
1,168
1,168
common stock issued under stock plans, net of shares withheld for employee taxes
13,307
(250
)
tax benefit from equity awards, including transfer pricing adjustments
balances as of september24, 2011
929,277
$
13,331
$
62,841
$
$
76,615
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
consolidated statements of cash flows
(inmillions)
three years ended september24, 2011
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of the year
$
11,261
$
5,263
$
11,875
operating activities:
net income
25,922
14,013
8,235
adjustments to reconcile net income to cash generated by operating activities:
depreciation, amortization and accretion
1,814
1,027
share-based compensation expense
1,168
deferred income tax expense
2,868
1,440
1,040
changes in operating assets and liabilities:
accounts receivable, net
(2,142
)
(939
)
inventories
(596
)
vendor non-trade receivables
(1,934
)
(2,718
)
other current and non-current assets
(1,391
)
(1,610
)
(713
)
accounts payable
2,515
6,307
deferred revenue
1,654
1,217
other current and non-current liabilities
4,495
(161
)
cash generated by operating activities
37,529
18,595
10,159
investing activities:
purchases of marketable securities
(102,317
)
(57,793
)
(46,724
)
proceeds from maturities of marketable securities
20,437
24,930
19,790
proceeds from sales of marketable securities
49,416
21,788
10,888
payments made in connection with business acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(244
)
(638
)
payments for acquisition of property, plant and equipment
(4,260
)
(2,005
)
(1,144
)
payments for acquisition of intangible assets
(3,192
)
(116
)
(69
)
other
(259
)
(20
)
(175
)
cash used in investing activities
(40,419
)
(13,854
)
(17,434
)
financing activities:
proceeds from issuance of common stock
excess tax benefits from equity awards
1,133
taxes paid related to net share settlement of equity awards
(520
)
(406
)
(82
)
cash generated by financing activities
1,444
1,257
(decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents
(1,446
)
5,998
(6,612
)
cash and cash equivalents, end of the year
$
9,815
$
11,261
$
5,263
supplemental cash flow disclosure:
cash paid for income taxes, net
$
3,338
$
2,697
$
2,997
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
notes to consolidated financial statements
note 1  summary of significant accounting policies  apple inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries (collectively apple or the company) designs, manufactures, and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers, and
portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, networking solutions, and third-party digital content and applications. the company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online
stores, and direct sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value-added resellers. in addition, the company sells a variety of third-party iphone, ipad, mac, and ipod compatible products
including application software, printers, storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and supplies through its online and retail stores. the company sells to consumers, small and mid-sized businesses, education, enterprise
and government customers.  basis of presentation and preparation
the accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the company. intercompany accounts and transactions have been
eliminated. the preparation of these consolidated financial statements in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (gaap) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in
these consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. actual results could differ materially from those estimates. certain prior year amounts in the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto have been reclassified to conform to
the current years presentation.  the companys fiscal year is the 52 or 53-week period that ends on the last
saturday of september. the companys fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009 ended on september24, 2011,september25, 2010 and september26, 2009, respectively, and included 52 weeks each. an additional week is included in the
first fiscal quarter approximately every six years to realign fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. fiscal year 2012 will end on september29, 2012, and will span 53 weeks, with a 14th week added to the first quarter of 2012. unless otherwise
stated, references to particular years or quarters refer to the companys fiscal years ended in september and the associated quarters of those fiscal years.  during the first quarter of 2011, the company adopted the financial accounting standard boards (fasb) new accounting standardon consolidation of variable interest
entities.this new accounting standard eliminates the mandatory quantitative approach in determining control forevaluating whether variable interest entities need to be consolidatedin favor of a qualitative analysis, and requires an
ongoing reassessmentof control over such entities. the adoption of this new accounting standard did not impact the companys consolidated financial statements.  revenue recognition  net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale
of hardware, software, digital content and applications, peripherals, and service and support contracts. the company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or
determinable, and collection is probable. product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. for most of the companys product sales, these criteria are met at the time the
product is shipped. for online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the u.s., and for certain other sales, the company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the company legally retains a portion of
the risk of loss on these sales during transit. the company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware, and third-party digital content sold on the
itunes store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. the company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i)standalone
sales of software products, (ii)sales of software upgrades and (iii)sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware.
the company sells software and peripheral products obtained from other companies. the
company generally establishes its own pricing and retains related inventory risk, is the primary obligor in sales transactions with its customers, and assumes the credit risk for amounts billed to its customers. accordingly, the company generally
recognizes revenue for the sale of products obtained from other companies based on the gross amount billed. for sales of third-party software applications for iphone, ipad and ipod touch (ios devices) and macs made through the app store
and the mac app store, the company is not the primary obligor to users of the software, and third- party developers determine the selling price of their software. therefore, the company accounts for such sales on a net basis by recognizing only the
commission it retains from each sale and including that commission in net sales in the consolidated statements of operations. the portion of the sales price paid by users that is remitted by the company to third-party developers is not reflected in
the companys consolidated statements of operations.  the company records deferred revenue when it receives payments in
advance of the delivery of products or the performance of services. this includes amounts that have been deferred for unspecified and specified software upgrade rights and non-software services that are attached to hardware and software products.
the company sells gift cards redeemable at its retail and online stores, and also sells gift cards redeemable on the itunes store for the purchase of content and software. the company records deferred revenue upon the sale of the card, which is
relieved upon redemption of the card by the customer. revenue from applecare service and support contracts is deferred and recognized over the service coverage periods. applecare service and support contracts typically include extended phone
support, repair services, web-based support resources and diagnostic tools offered under the companys standard limited warranty.  the company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and
volume-based incentives. the estimated cost of these programs is recognized in the period the company has sold the product and committed to a plan. the company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the
companys historical experience. revenue is recorded net of taxes collected from customers that are remitted to governmental authorities, with the collected taxes recorded as current liabilities until remitted to the relevant government
authority.  revenue recognition for arrangements with multiple deliverables
for multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware products functionality,
undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware products essential software, and undelivered non-software services, the company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. in such circumstances, the
company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i)vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (vsoe), (ii)third-party evidence of selling price
(tpe), and (iii)best estimate of the selling price (esp). vsoe generally exists only when the company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the company for that deliverable. esps reflect
the companys best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis.  for sales of iphone, ipad, apple tv, for sales of ipod touch beginning in june 2010, and for sales of mac beginning in june 2011, the company has indicated it may from time-to-time provide future
unspecified software upgrades and features to the essential software bundled with each of these hardware products free of charge to customers. essential software for ios devices includes ios and related applications and for mac includes mac os x and
ilife. in june 2011, the company announced it would provide various non-software services to owners of qualifying versions of ios devices and mac. the company has identified up to three deliverables in arrangements involving the sale of these
devices. the first deliverable is the hardware and software essential to the functionality of the hardware device delivered at the time of sale. the second deliverable is the embedded right included with the purchase of ios devices, mac and apple tv
to receive on a when-and-if-available basis, future unspecified software upgrades and features relating to the products essential software. the third
deliverable is the non-software services to be provided to qualifying versions of ios devices and mac. the company allocates revenue between these deliverables using the relative selling price
method. because the company has neither vsoe nor tpe for these deliverables, the allocation of revenue has been based on the companys esps. amounts allocated to the delivered hardware and the related essential software are recognized at the
time of sale provided the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. amounts allocated to the embedded unspecified software upgrade rights and the non-software services are deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the
estimated lives of each of these devices, which range from 24 to 48 months. cost of sales related to delivered hardware and related essential software, including estimated warranty costs, are recognized at the time of sale. costs incurred to provide
non-software services are recognized as cost of sales as incurred, and engineering and sales and marketing costs are recognized as operating expenses as incurred.  the companys process for determining its esp for deliverables without vsoe or tpe considers multiple factors that may vary depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each
deliverable. the company believes its customers, particularly consumers, would be reluctant to buy unspecified software upgrade rights related to ios devices, mac and apple tv. this view is primarily based on the fact that unspecified upgrade rights
do not obligate the company to provide upgrades at a particular time or at all, and do not specify to customers which upgrades or features will be delivered. the company also believes its customers would be unwilling to pay a significant amount for
access to the non-software services because other companies offer similar services at little or no cost to users. therefore, the company has concluded that if it were to sell upgrade rights or access to the non-software services on a standalone
basis, including those rights and services attached to ios devices, mac and apple tv, the selling prices would be relatively low. key factors considered by the company in developing the esps for software upgrade rights include prices charged by the
company for similar offerings, market trends for pricing of mac and ios compatible software, the companys historical pricing practices, the nature of the upgrade rights (e.g., unspecified and when-and-if-available), and the relative esp of the
upgrade rights as compared to the total selling price of the product. the company may also consider, when appropriate, the impact of other products and services, including advertising services, on selling price assumptions when developing and
reviewing its esps for software upgrade rights and related deliverables. the company may also consider additional factors as appropriate, including the pricing of competitive alternatives if they exist and product-specific business objectives. when
relevant, the same factors are considered by the company in developing esps for offerings such as the non-software services; however, the primary consideration in developing esps for the non-software services is the estimated cost to provide such
services over the estimated life of the related devices, including consideration for a reasonable profit margin.  beginning
with the companys june 2011 announcement of the upcoming release of the non-software services and mac os x lion, the companys combined esp for the unspecified software upgrade rights and the right to receive the non-software services are
as follows: $16 for iphone and ipad, $11 for ipod touch, and $22 for mac. the companys esp for the embedded unspecified software upgrade right included with each apple tv is $5 for 2011 and $10 for fiscal years prior to 2011. amounts allocated
to the embedded unspecified software upgrade rights and the non-software services associated with ios devices and apple tv are recognized on a straight-line basis over 24 months, and amounts allocated to the embedded unspecified software upgrade
rights and the non-software services associated with macs are recognized on a straight-line basis over 48 months.  the
companys esp for the software upgrade right included with each iphone sold beginning with the introduction of iphone in june 2007 through the companys second quarter of 2010 was $25. beginning in april 2010 in conjunction with the
companys announcement of ios 4 for iphone, the company lowered its esp for the software upgrade right included with each iphone to $10. beginning with initial sales of ipad in april 2010, the companys esp for the embedded software
upgrade right included with the sale of each ipad is $10, and the companys esp for the embedded software upgrade right included with each ipod touch sold beginning in june 2010 is $5.
the company accounts for multiple element arrangements that consist only of software or software-related products, including the sale of
upgrades to previously sold software, in accordance with industry specific
software accounting guidance. for such transactions, revenue on arrangements that include multiple elements is allocated to each element based on the relative fair value of each element, and fair
value is determined by vsoe. if the company cannot objectively determine the fair value of any undelivered element included in such multiple-element arrangements, the company defers revenue until all elements are delivered and services have been
performed, or until fair value can objectively be determined for any remaining undelivered elements. beginning in july 2011, the sale of certain upgrades to mac os x and mac versions of ilife include when-and-if-available upgrade rights for which
the company does not have vsoe. therefore, beginning in july 2011 the company defers all revenue from the sale of upgrades to the mac os and mac versions of ilife and recognizes it ratably over 36 months.
shipping costs  for all
periods presented, amounts billed to customers related to shipping and handling are classified as revenue, and the companys shipping and handling costs are included in cost of sales.  warranty expense  the company generally provides for the estimated cost of
hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized. the company assesses the adequacy of its pre-existing warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary based on actual experience and changes in future
estimates.  software development costs  research and development costs are expensed as incurred. development costs of computer software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed are subject to capitalization beginning when a products
technological feasibility has been established and ending when a product is available for general release to customers. in most instances, the companys products are released soon after technological feasibility has been established. therefore,
costs incurred subsequent to achievement of technological feasibility are usually not significant, and generally most software development costs have been expensed as incurred.
the company did not capitalize any software development costs during 2011 and 2010. in 2009, the company capitalized $71 million of costs
associated with the development of mac os x version 10.6 snow leopard (mac os x snow leopard), which was released during the fourth quarter of 2009. the capitalized costs are being amortized to cost of sales on a straight-line basis over
a three year estimated useful life of the underlying technology. total amortization related to capitalized software
development costs was $30 million, $48 million and $25 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.  advertising costs
advertising costs are expensed as incurred. advertising expense was $933 million, $691 million and $501 million for 2011, 2010 and 2009,
respectively.  share-based compensation  the company recognizes expense related to share-based payment transactions in which it receives employee services in exchange for (a)equity instruments of the company or (b)liabilities that
are based on the fair value of the enterprises equity instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of such equity instruments. share-based compensation cost for restricted stock units (rsus) is measured based on the closing
fair market value of the companys common stock on the date of grant. share-based compensation cost for stock options is estimated at the grant date based on each options fair-value as calculated by the black-scholes-merton
(bsm) option-pricing model. the company recognizes share-based compensation cost as expense ratably on a straight-line
basis over the requisite service period. the company recognizes a benefit from share-based compensation in the consolidated statements of shareholders equity if an incremental tax benefit
is realized. in addition, the company recognizes the indirect effects of share-based compensation on research and development tax credits, foreign tax credits and domestic manufacturing deductions in the consolidated statements of operations.
further information regarding share-based compensation can be found in note 6, shareholders equity and share-based compensation of this form 10-k.  income taxes  the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset
and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses
and tax credit carryforwards. deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. the company
records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
the company recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be
sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. the tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50%
likelihood of being realized upon settlement. see note 5, income taxes of this form 10-k for additional information.  earnings
per common share  basic earnings per common share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the
weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. diluted earnings per common share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding
during the period increased to include the number of additional shares of common stock that would have been outstanding if the potentially dilutive securities had been issued. potentially dilutive securities include outstanding stock options, shares
to be purchased under the employee stock purchase plan and unvested rsus. the dilutive effect of potentially dilutive securities is reflected in diluted earnings per common share by application of the treasury stock method. under the treasury stock
method, an increase in the fair market value of the companys common stock can result in a greater dilutive effect from potentially dilutive securities.  the following table sets forth the computation of basic and diluted earnings per common share for the three years ended september24, 2011 (in thousands, except net income in millions and per share
amounts):
numerator:
net income
$
25,922
$
14,013
$
8,235
denominator:
weighted-average shares outstanding
924,258
909,461
893,016
effect of dilutive securities
12,387
15,251
13,989
weighted-average diluted shares
936,645
924,712
907,005
basic earnings per common share
$
28.05
$
15.41
$
9.22
diluted earnings per common share
$
27.68
$
15.15
$
9.08
potentially dilutive securities representing 1.7million, 1.6million and 12.6million
shares of common stock for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, were excluded from the computation of diluted earnings per common share for these periods because their effect would have been antidilutive.
financial instruments  cash equivalents and marketable securities  all highly liquid investments
with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase are classified as cash equivalents. the companys marketable debt and equity securities have been classified and accounted for as available-for-sale. management determines the
appropriate classification of its investments at the time of purchase and reevaluates the designations at each balance sheet date. the company classifies its marketable debt securities as either short-term or long-term based on each
instruments underlying contractual maturity date. marketable debt securities with maturities of 12 months or less are classified as short-term and marketable debt securities with maturities greater than 12 months are classified as long-term.
the company classifies its marketable equity securities, including mutual funds, as either short-term or long-term based on the nature of each security and its availability for use in current operations. the companys marketable debt and equity
securities are carried at fair value, with the unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported as a component of shareholders equity. the cost of securities sold is based upon the specific identification method.
derivative financial instruments  the company accounts for its derivative instruments as either assets or liabilities and carries them at fair value.  for derivative instruments that hedge the exposure to variability in expected future cash flows that are designated as cash flow hedges, the effective portion of the gain or loss on the derivative
instrument is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (aoci) in shareholders equity and reclassified into income in the same period or periods during which the hedged transaction affects earnings. the
ineffective portion of the gain or loss on the derivative instrument, if any, is recognized in current income. to receive hedge accounting treatment, cash flow hedges must be highly effective in offsetting changes to expected future cash flows on
hedged transactions. for options designated as cash flow hedges, changes in the time value are excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and are recognized in income. for derivative instruments that hedge the exposure to changes in the
fair value of an asset or a liability and that are designated as fair value hedges, both the net gain or loss on the derivative instrument as well as the offsetting gain or loss on the hedged item attributable to the hedged risk are recognized in
earnings in the current period. the company had no fair value hedges in 2011, 2010 and 2009. the net gain or loss on the effective portion of a derivative instrument that is designated as an economic hedge of the foreign currency translation
exposure of the net investment in a foreign operation is reported in the same manner as a foreign currency translation adjustment. for forward exchange contracts designated as net investment hedges, the company excludes changes in fair value
relating to changes in the forward carry component from its definition of effectiveness. accordingly, any gains or losses related to this component are recognized in current income. derivatives that do not qualify as hedges must be adjusted to fair
value through current income.  allowance for doubtful accounts  the company records its allowance for doubtful accounts based upon its assessment of various factors. the company considers historical experience, the age of the accounts receivable balances, credit
quality of the companys customers, current economic conditions, and other factors that may affect customers ability to pay.
inventories  inventories
are stated at the lower of cost, computed using the first-in, first-out method, or market. if the cost of the inventories exceeds their market value, provisions are made currently for the difference between the cost and the market value. the
companys inventories consist primarily of components and finished goods for all periods presented.
property, plant and equipment
property, plant and equipment are stated at cost. depreciation is computed by use of the straight-line method over the estimated useful
lives of the assets, which for buildings is the lesser of 30 years or the remaining life of the underlying building, up to five years for equipment, and the shorter of lease terms or ten years for leasehold improvements. the company capitalizes
eligible costs to acquire or develop internal-use software that are incurred subsequent to the preliminary project stage. capitalized costs related to internal-use software are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives
of the assets, which range from three to five years. depreciation and amortization expense on property and equipment was $1.6 billion, $815 million and $606 million during 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.
long-lived assets including goodwill and other acquired intangible assets  the company reviews property, plant and equipment and certain identifiable intangibles, excluding goodwill, for impairment. long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. recoverability of these assets is measured by comparison of their carrying amounts to future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. if property,
plant and equipment and certain identifiable intangibles are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized equals the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds its fair market value. the company did not record any
significant impairments during 2011, 2010 and 2009.  the company does not amortize goodwill and intangible assets with
indefinite useful lives, rather such assets are required to be tested for impairment at least annually or sooner whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the assets may be impaired. the company performs its goodwill and intangible
asset impairment tests in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. the company did not recognize any goodwill or intangible asset impairment charges in 2011, 2010 and 2009. the company established reporting units based on its current reporting
structure. for purposes of testing goodwill for impairment, goodwill has been allocated to these reporting units to the extent it relates to each reporting unit.  the company amortizes its intangible assets with definite lives over their estimated useful lives and reviews these assets for impairment. the company is currently amortizing its acquired intangible
assets with definite lives over periods generally ranging between three to seven years.  fair value measurements
the company applies fair value accounting for all financial assets and liabilities and non-financial assets and liabilities that are
recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis. the company defines fair value as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market
participants at the measurement date. when determining the fair value measurements for assets and liabilities, which are required to be recorded at fair value, the company considers the principal or most advantageous market in which the company
would transact and the market-based risk measurements or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, such as risks inherent in valuation techniques, transfer restrictions and credit risk. fair value is estimated
by applying the following hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value into three levels and bases the categorization within the hierarchy upon the lowest level of input that is available and significant to the fair value
measurement:  level 1  quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
level 2  observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities, quoted prices
for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
level 3  inputs that are generally unobservable and typically reflect
managements estimate of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.  the
companys valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of money market funds and certain marketable equity securities were derived from quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. the valuation techniques used to
measure the fair value of all other financial instruments, all of which have counterparties with high credit ratings, were valued based on quoted market prices or model driven valuations using significant inputs derived from or corroborated by
observable market data.  in accordance with the fair value accounting requirements, companies may choose to measure eligible
financial instruments and certain other items at fair value. the company has not elected the fair value option for any eligible financial instruments.  foreign currency translation and remeasurement  the company translates the
assets and liabilities of its non-u.s. dollar functional currency subsidiaries into u.s. dollars using exchange rates in effect at the end of each period. revenue and expenses for these subsidiaries are translated using rates that approximate those
in effect during the period. gains and losses from these translations are recognized in foreign currency translation included in accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders equity. the companys subsidiaries that use the u.s.
dollar as their functional currency remeasure monetary assets and liabilities at exchange rates in effect at the end of each period, and inventories, property, and nonmonetary assets and liabilities at historical rates. gains and losses from these
remeasurements were insignificant and have been included in the companys results of operations.  segment information
the company reports segment information based on the management approach. the management approach designates the internal
reporting used by management for making decisions and assessing performance as the source of the companys reportable segments. information about the companys products, major customers and geographic areas on a company-wide basis is also
disclosed.
note 2  financial instruments  cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities  the following tables
summarize the companys cash and available-for-sale securities adjusted cost, gross unrealized gains, gross unrealized losses and fair value by significant investment category recorded as cash and cash equivalents or short-term or
long-term marketable securities as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010 (in millions):
september24, 2011
adjustedcost
unrealizedgains
unrealizedlosses
fairvalue
cash andcashequivalents
short-termmarketablesecurities
long-termmarketablesecurities
cash
$
2,903
$
$
$
2,903
$
2,903
$
$
level 1:
money market funds
1,911
1,911
1,911
mutual funds
1,227
(34
)
1,193
1,193
subtotal
3,138
(34
)
3,104
1,911
1,193
level 2:
u.s. treasury securities
10,717
(3
)
10,753
1,250
2,149
7,354
u.s. agency securities
13,467
(3
)
13,488
1,818
11,445
non-u.s. government securities
5,559
(2
)
5,568
1,548
3,469
certificates of deposit and time deposits
4,175
(2
)
4,175
2,470
commercial paper
2,853
2,853
2,237
corporate securities
35,241
(114
)
35,259
7,241
28,008
municipal securities
3,411
3,467
2,872
subtotal
75,423
(124)
75,563
5,001
14,944
55,618
total
$
81,464
$
$
(158
)
$
81,570
$
9,815
$
16,137
$
55,618
september25, 2010
adjustedcost
unrealizedgains
unrealizedlosses
fairvalue
cash andcashequivalents
short-termmarketablesecurities
long-termmarketablesecurities
cash
$
1,690
$
$
$
1,690
$
1,690
$
$
level 1:
money market funds
2,753
2,753
2,753
level 2:
u.s. treasury securities
9,872
9,914
2,571
2,130
5,213
u.s. agency securities
8,717
8,727
1,916
4,339
2,472
non-u.s. government securities
2,648
2,661
1,786
certificates of deposit and time deposits
2,735
(1
)
2,739
1,515
commercial paper
3,168
3,168
1,889
1,279
corporate securities
17,349
(9
)
17,442
4,522
12,862
municipal securities
1,899
(1
)
1,917
1,543
subtotal
46,388
(11
)
46,568
6,818
14,359
25,391
total
$
50,831
$
$
(11
)
$
51,011
$
11,261
$
14,359
$
25,391
the net unrealized gains as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010 related
primarily to long-term marketable securities. the company may sell certain of its marketable securities prior to their stated maturities for strategic reasons including, but not limited to, anticipation of credit deterioration and duration
management. the company recognized net realized gains of $110 million during 2011 and no significant net realized gains or losses during 2010 and 2009 related to such sales. the maturities of the companys long-term marketable securities
generally range from one year to five years.  as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010, gross unrealized
losses related to individual securities that had been in a continuous loss position for 12 months or longer were not significant.  the company considers the declines in market value of its marketable securities investment portfolio to be temporary in nature. the company typically invests in highly-rated securities, and its policy
generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. the companys investment policy requires investments to generally be investment grade, with the primary objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. fair values
were determined for each individual security in the investment portfolio. when evaluating the investments for other-than-temporary impairment, the company reviews factors such as the length of time and extent to which fair value has been below cost
basis, the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto, and the companys intent to sell, or whether it is more likely than not it will be required to sell, the investment before recovery of the investments amortized cost
basis. during 2011, 2010 and 2009, the company did not recognize any significant impairment charges. as of september24, 2011, the company does not consider any of its investments to be other-than-temporarily impaired.
derivative financial instruments  the company uses derivatives to partially offset its business exposure to foreign currency exchange risk. the company may enter into foreign currency forward and option contracts to offset some of the
foreign exchange risk on expected future cash flows on certain forecasted revenue and cost of sales, on net investments in certain foreign subsidiaries, and on certain existing assets and liabilities.
to help protect gross margins from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, certain of the companys subsidiaries whose
functional currency is the u.s. dollar hedge a portion of forecasted foreign currency revenue. the companys subsidiaries whose functional currency is not the u.s. dollar and who sell in local currencies may hedge a portion of forecasted
inventory purchases not denominated in the subsidiaries functional currencies. the company typically hedges portions of its forecasted foreign currency exposure associated with revenue and inventory purchases generally up to six months.
to help protect the net investment in a foreign operation from adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates, the
company may enter into foreign currency forward and option contracts to offset the changes in the carrying amounts of these investments due to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
the company may also enter into foreign currency forward and option contracts to partially offset the foreign currency exchange gains and
losses generated by the re-measurement of certain assets and liabilities denominated in non-functional currencies. however, the company may choose not to hedge certain foreign currency exchange exposures for a variety of reasons including, but not
limited to, accounting considerations and the prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular exposures. there can be no assurance the hedges will offset more than a portion of the financial impact resulting from movements in foreign currency
exchange rates.  the company records all derivatives on the consolidated balance sheets at fair value. the companys
accounting policies for these instruments are based on whether the instruments are designated as hedge or non-hedge instruments. the effective portions of cash flow hedges are recorded in aoci until the hedged item is recognized in earnings. the
effective portions of net investment hedges are recorded in other comprehensive income as a part of the cumulative translation adjustment. the ineffective portions of cash flow hedges and net
investment hedges are recorded in other income and expense. derivatives that are not designated as hedging instruments are adjusted to fair value through earnings in the financial statement line
item the derivative relates to.  the company had a net deferred gain associated with cash flow hedges of approximately $290
million and a net deferred loss associated with cash flow hedges of approximately $252 million, net of taxes, recorded in aoci as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010, respectively. deferred gains and losses associated with cash
flow hedges of foreign currency revenue are recognized as a component of net sales in the same period as the related revenue is recognized, and deferred gains and losses related to cash flow hedges of inventory purchases are recognized as a
component of cost of sales in the same period as the related costs are recognized. substantially all of the companys hedged transactions as of september24, 2011 are expected to occur within six months.
derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges must be de-designated as hedges when it is probable the forecasted hedged
transaction will not occur in the initially identified time period or within a subsequent two-month time period. deferred gains and losses in aoci associated with such derivative instruments are reclassified immediately into other income and
expense. any subsequent changes in fair value of such derivative instruments are reflected in other income and expense unless they are re-designated as hedges of other transactions. the company did not recognize any significant net gains or losses
related to the loss of hedge designation on discontinued cash flow hedges during 2011, 2010 and 2009.  the companys
unrealized net gains and losses on net investment hedges, included in the cumulative translation adjustment account of aoci, were not significant as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010, respectively. the ineffective portions and
amounts excluded from the effectiveness test of net investment hedges are recorded in other income and expense.  the company
recognized in other income and expense a net loss of $158 million, $123 million and $133 million on foreign currency forward and option contracts not designated as hedging instruments during 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. these amounts represent
the net gain or loss on the derivative contracts and do not include changes in the related exposures, which generally offset a portion of the gain or loss on the derivative contracts.
the following table summarizes the notional principal amounts of the companys outstanding derivative instruments and credit risk
amounts associated with outstanding or unsettled derivative instruments as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010 (in millions):
notionalprincipal
creditriskamounts
notionalprincipal
creditriskamounts
instruments qualifying as accounting hedges:
foreign exchange contracts
$
13,705
$
$
13,957
$
instruments other than accounting hedges:
foreign exchange contracts
$
9,891
$
$
10,727
$
the notional principal amounts for outstanding derivative instruments provide one measure of the
transaction volume outstanding and do not represent the amount of the companys exposure to credit or market loss. the credit risk amounts represent the companys gross exposure to potential accounting loss on derivative instruments that
are outstanding or unsettled if all counterparties failed to perform according to the terms of the contract, based on then-current currency exchange rates at each respective date. the companys gross exposure on these transactions may be
further mitigated by collateral received from certain counterparties. the companys exposure to credit loss and market risk will vary over time as a function of currency exchange rates. although the table above reflects the notional principal
and credit risk amounts of the companys foreign exchange instruments, it does not reflect the gains or losses associated with the exposures and transactions that the foreign
exchange instruments are intended to hedge. the amounts ultimately realized upon settlement of these financial instruments, together with the gains and losses on the underlying exposures, will
depend on actual market conditions during the remaining life of the instruments.  the company generally enters into master
netting arrangements, which reduce credit risk by permitting net settlement of transactions with the same counterparty. to further limit credit risk, the company generally enters into collateral security arrangements that provide for collateral to
be received or posted when the net fair value of certain financial instruments fluctuates from contractually established thresholds. the company presents its derivative assets and derivative liabilities at their gross fair values. as of
september24, 2011, the company received cash collateral related to the derivative instruments under its collateral security arrangements of $288 million, which it recorded as accrued expenses in the consolidated balance sheet.as of
september25, 2010, the company posted cash collateral related to the derivative instruments under its collateral security arrangements of $445 million, which it recorded as other current assets in the consolidated balance sheet. the company
did not have any derivative instruments with credit-risk related contingent features that would require it to post additional collateral as of september24, 2011 or september25, 2010.
the following tables summarize the gross fair value of the companys derivative instruments as reflected in the consolidated balance
sheets as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010 (in millions):
september24, 2011
fairvalueofderivativesdesignatedashedgeinstruments
fairvalueofderivativesnotdesignated ashedgeinstruments
totalfairvalue
derivative assets (a):
foreign exchange contracts
$
$
$
derivative liabilities (b):
foreign exchange contracts
$
$
$
september25, 2010
fairvalueofderivativesdesignatedashedgeinstruments
fairvalueofderivativesnotdesignated ashedgeinstruments
totalfairvalue
derivative assets (a):
foreign exchange contracts
$
$
$
derivative liabilities (b):
foreign exchange contracts
$
$
$
(a)
the fair value of derivative assets is measured using level 2 fair value inputs and is recorded as other current assets in the consolidated balance
sheets.
(b)
the fair value of derivative liabilities is measured using level 2 fair value inputs and is recorded as accrued expenses in the consolidated balance
sheets.
the following table summarizes the pre-tax effect of the companys derivative
instruments designated as cash flow and net investment hedges in the consolidated financial statements for the years ended september24, 2011 and september25, 2010 (in millions):
year ended
gains/(losses)recognizedinoci - effective portion (c)
gains/(losses)reclassifiedfromaociinto income - effective portion (c)
gains/(losses) recognized  ineffective
portion andamount excluded from effectiveness testing
september24,2011
september25,2010
september24,2011
(a)
september25,2010 (b)
location
september24,2011
september25,2010
cash flow hedges:
foreign exchange contracts
$
$
(267)
$
(704)
$
other income and expense
$
(213)
$
(175)
net investment hedges:
foreign exchange contracts
(43
)
(41
)
other income and expense
total
$
$
(308
)
$
(704
)
$
$
(212
)
$
(174
)
(a)
includes gains/(losses) reclassified from aoci into income for the effective portion of cash flow hedges, of which $(349) million and $(355) million
were recognized within net sales and cost of sales, respectively, within the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended september24, 2011. there were no amounts reclassified from aoci into income for the effective portion of net
investment hedges for the year ended september24, 2011.
(b)
includes gains/(losses) reclassified from aoci into income for the effective portion of cash flow hedges, of which $158 million and $(43) million
were recognized within net sales and cost of sales, respectively, within the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended september25, 2010. there were no amounts reclassified from aoci into income for the effective portion of net
investment hedges for the year ended september25, 2010.
(c)
refer to note 6, shareholders equity and share-based compensation of this form 10-k, which summarizes the activity in aoci related
to derivatives.  accounts receivable  trade receivables  the company has considerable trade receivables
outstanding with its third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, value-added resellers, small and mid-sized businesses, and education, enterprise and government customers. the company generally does not require collateral from its
customers; however, the company will require collateral in certain instances to limit credit risk. in addition, when possible, the company attempts to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers or by requiring
third-party financing, loans or leases to support credit exposure. these credit-financing arrangements are directly between the third-party financing company and the end customer. as such, the company generally does not assume any recourse or credit
risk sharing related to any of these arrangements.  as of september24, 2011, there were no customers that accounted for
10% or more of the companys total trade receivables. trade receivables from two of the companys customers accounted for 15% and 12% of total trade receivables as of september25, 2010. the companys cellular network carriers
accounted for 52% and 64% of trade receivables as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010, respectively. the additions and write-offs to the companys allowance for doubtful accounts during 2011, 2010 and 2009 were not
significant.
vendor non-trade receivables  the company has non-trade receivables from certain of its manufacturing vendors resulting from the sale of components to these manufacturing vendors who manufacture sub-assemblies or assemble final
products for the company. the company purchases these components directly from suppliers. vendor non-trade receivables from two of the companys vendors accounted for 53% and 29% of total non-trade receivables as of september24, 2011 and
vendor non-trade receivables from two of the companys vendors accounted for 57% and 24% of total non-trade receivables as of september25, 2010. the company does not reflect the sale of these components in net sales and does not recognize
any profits on these sales until the related products are sold by the company, at which time any profit is recognized as a reduction of cost of sales.  note 3  consolidated financial statement details  the
following tables show the companys consolidated financial statement details as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010 (in millions):  property, plant and equipment
land and buildings
$
2,059
$
1,471
machinery, equipment and internal-use software
6,926
3,589
office furniture and equipment
leasehold improvements
2,599
2,030
gross property, plant and equipment
11,768
7,234
accumulated depreciation and amortization
(3,991
)
(2,466
)
net property, plant and equipment
$
7,777
$
4,768
accrued expenses
deferred margin on component sales
$
2,038
$
accrued warranty and related costs
1,240
accrued taxes
1,140
accrued marketing and selling expenses
accrued compensation and employee benefits
other current liabilities
3,641
2,809
total accrued expenses
$
9,247
$
5,723
non-current liabilities
deferred tax liabilities
$
8,159
$
4,300
other non-current liabilities
1,941
1,231
total other non-current liabilities
$
10,100
$
5,531
note 4  goodwill and other intangible assets
the company is currently amortizing its acquired intangible assets with definite lives over periods generally ranging between three to
seven years. the following table summarizes the components of gross and net intangible asset balances as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010 (in millions):
grosscarryingamount
accumulatedamortization
netcarryingamount
grosscarryingamount
accumulatedamortization
netcarryingamount
definite lived and amortizable acquired intangible assets
$
3,873
$
(437
)
$
3,436
$
$
(245
)
$
indefinite lived and non-amortizable trademarks
total acquired intangible assets
$
3,973
$
(437
)
$
3,536
$
$
(245
)
$
during 2011 and 2010, the company completed various business acquisitions. in 2011, the aggregate cash
consideration, net of cash acquired, was $244 million, of which $167 million was allocated to goodwill and $77 million to acquired intangible assets. in 2010, the aggregate cash consideration, net of cash acquired, was $638 million, of which $535
million was allocated to goodwill and $107 million to acquired intangible assets.  during 2011, the company, as part of a
consortium, acquired nortel networks corporations patent portfolio for an overall purchase price of $4.5 billion, of which the companys contribution was approximately $2.6 billion. the majority of the acquisition price has been recorded
in acquired intangible assets, which the company expects to amortize over seven years. the department of justice is reviewing this transaction.  the companys gross carrying amount of goodwill was $896 million and $741 million as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010, respectively. the company did not have any goodwill
impairment during 2011, 2010 or 2009. the companys goodwill is allocated primarily to the americas and europe reportable operating segments.  amortization expense related to acquired intangible assets was $192 million, $69 million and $53 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. as of september24, 2011 the weighted-average
amortization period for acquired intangible assets was 6.2 years. the expected annual amortization expense related to acquired intangible assets as of september24, 2011, is as follows (in millions):
years
$
thereafter
total
$
3,436
note 5  income taxes  the provision for income taxes for the three years ended september24, 2011, consisted of the following (in millions):
federal:
current
$
3,884
$
2,150
$
1,922
deferred
2,998
1,676
1,077
6,882
3,826
2,999
state:
current
deferred
(115
)
(2
)
foreign:
current
deferred
(167
)
(121
)
(35
)
provision for income taxes
$
8,283
$
4,527
$
3,831
the foreign provision for income taxes is based on foreign pretax earnings of $24.0 billion, $13.0
billion and $6.6 billion in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. the companys consolidated financial statements provide for any related tax liability on amounts that may be repatriated, aside from undistributed earnings of certain of the
companys foreign subsidiaries that are intended to be indefinitely reinvested in operations outside the u.s. as of september24, 2011, u.s. income taxes have not been provided on a cumulative total of $23.4 billion of such earnings. the
amount of unrecognized deferred tax liability related to these temporary differences is estimated to be approximately $8.0 billion.  as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010, $54.3 billion and $30.8 billion, respectively, of the companys cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign
subsidiaries and are generally based in u.s. dollar-denominated holdings. amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to u.s. income taxation on repatriation to the u.s.
deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect the effects of tax losses, credits, and the future income tax effects of temporary
differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and are measured using enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary
differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010, the significant components of the
companys deferred tax assets and liabilities were (in millions):
deferred tax assets:
accrued liabilities and other reserves
$
1,610
$
1,369
basis of capital assets and investments
share-based compensation
other
total deferred tax assets
3,150
2,563
less valuation allowance
deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowance
3,150
2,563
deferred tax liabilities:
unremitted earning of foreign subsidiaries
8,896
4,979
other
total deferred tax liabilities
9,168
5,129
net deferred tax liabilities
$
(6,018
)
$
(2,566
)
a reconciliation of the provision for income taxes, with the amount computed by applying the statutory
federal income tax rate (35% in 2011, 2010 and 2009) to income before provision for income taxes for the three years ended september24, 2011, is as follows (in millions):
computed expected tax
$
11,973
$
6,489
$
4,223
state taxes, net of federal effect
indefinitely invested earnings of foreign subsidiaries
(3,898
)
(2,125
)
(647
)
research and development credit, net
(167
)
(23
)
(84
)
domestic production activities deduction
(168
)
(48
)
(36
)
other
(9
)
(117
)
provision for income taxes
$
8,283
$
4,527
$
3,831
effective tax rate
24.2%
24.4%
31.8%
the companys income taxes payable have been reduced by the tax benefits from employee stock plan
awards. for stock options, the company receives an income tax benefit calculated as the difference between the fair market value of the stock issued at the time of the exercise and the option price, tax effected.for rsus, the company receives
an income tax benefit upon the awards vesting equal to the tax effect of the underlying stocks fair market value. the company had net excess tax benefits from equity awards of $1.1 billion, $742 million and $246 million in 2011, 2010 and
2009, respectively, which were reflected as increases to common stock.  uncertain tax positions
tax positions are evaluated in a two-step process. the company first determines whether it is more likely than not that a tax position
will be sustained upon examination. if a tax position meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold it is then measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. the tax position is measured as the largest
amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. the company classifies gross interest and penalties and unrecognized tax benefits that are not expected to result in payment or receipt of cash within one
year as non-current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
as of september24, 2011, the total amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits was $1.4
billion, of which $563 million, if recognized, would affect the companys effective tax rate. as of september25, 2010, the total amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits was $943 million, of which $404 million, if recognized, would
affect the companys effective tax rate.  the aggregate changes in the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits, which
excludes interest and penalties, for the three years ended september24, 2011, is as follows (in millions):
beginning balance
$
$
increases related to tax positions taken during a prior year
decreases related to tax positions taken during a prior year
(39
)
(224
)
(24
)
increases related to tax positions taken during the current year
decreases related to settlements with taxing authorities
(102
)
decreases related to expiration of statute of limitations
(3
)
(3
)
(3
)
ending balance
$
1,375
$
$
the company includes interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for
income taxes. as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010, the total amount of gross interest and penalties accrued was $261 million and $247 million, respectively, which is classified as non-current liabilities in the consolidated
balance sheets. in connection with tax matters, the company recognized interest expense in 2011 and 2009 of $14 million and $64 million, respectively, and in 2010 the company recognized an interest benefit of $43 million.
the company is subject to taxation and files income tax returns in the u.s. federal jurisdiction and in many state and foreign
jurisdictions. for u.s. federal income tax purposes, all years prior to 2004 are closed. the internal revenue service (the irs) has completed its field audit of the companys federal income tax returns for the years 2004 through
2006 and proposed certain adjustments. the company has contested certain of these adjustments through the irs appeals office. the irs is currently examining the years 2007 through 2009. in addition, the company is also subject to audits by state,
local and foreign tax authorities.in major states and major foreign jurisdictions, the years subsequent to 1988 and 2001, respectively, generally remain open and could be subject to examination by the taxing authorities.
management believes that an adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. however, the
outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. if any issues addressed in the companys tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with managements expectations, the company could be required to adjust its provision for
income tax in the period such resolution occurs. although timing of the resolution and/or closure of audits is not certain, the company does not believe it is reasonably possible that its unrecognized tax benefits would materially change in the next
12months.  note 6  shareholders equity and share-based compensation
preferred stock  the
company has five million shares of authorized preferred stock, none of which is issued or outstanding. under the terms of the companys restated articles of incorporation, the board of directors is authorized to determine or alter the rights,
preferences, privileges and restrictions of the companys authorized but unissued shares of preferred stock.  comprehensive income
comprehensive income consists of two components, net income and other comprehensive income. other comprehensive income
refers to revenue, expenses, gains and losses that under gaap are recorded as an element
of shareholders equity but are excluded from net income. the companys other comprehensive income consists of foreign currency translation adjustments from those subsidiaries not using
the u.s. dollar as their functional currency, unrealized gains and losses on marketable securities classified as available-for-sale, and net deferred gains and losses on certain derivative instruments accounted for as cash flow hedges.
the following table summarizes the components of aoci, net of taxes, as of september24, 2011, september25, 2010, and
september26, 2009 (in millions):
net unrealized gains/losses on marketable securities
$
$
$
net unrecognized gains/losses on derivative instruments
(252
)
cumulative foreign currency translation
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
$
$
(46
)
$
the change in fair value of available-for-sale securities included in other comprehensive income was
$(41) million, $123 million and $118 million, net of taxes in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. the tax effect related to the change in unrealized gains/losses on available-for-sale securities was $24 million, $(72) million and $(78) million for
2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.  the following table summarizes activity in other comprehensive income related to
derivatives, net of taxes, held by the company during the three years ended september24, 2011 (in millions):
changes in fair value of derivatives
$
$
(180
)
$
adjustment for net gains/losses realized and included in net income
(73
)
(222
)
change in unrecognized gains/losses on derivative instruments
$
$
(253
)
$
(18
)
the tax effect related to the changes in fair value of derivatives was $(50) million, $97 million and
$(135) million for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. the tax effect related to derivative gains/losses reclassified from other comprehensive income to income was $(250) million, $43 million and $149 million for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.
employee benefit plans
2003 employee stock plan
the 2003 employee stock plan (the 2003 plan) is a shareholder approved plan that provides for broad-based equity grants to
employees, including executive officers. the 2003 plan permits the granting of incentive stock options, nonstatutory stock options, rsus, stock appreciation rights, stock purchase rights and performance-based awards. options granted under the 2003
plan generally expire seven to ten years after the grant date and generally become exercisable over a period of four years, based on continued employment, with either annual, semi-annual or quarterly vesting. in general, rsus granted under the 2003
plan vest over two to four years, based on continued employment and are settled upon vesting in shares of the companys common stock on a one-for-one basis. each share issued with respect to an award granted under the 2003 plan (other than a
stock option or stock appreciation right) reduces the number of shares available for grant under the plan by two shares, whereas shares issued in respect of an option or stock appreciation right count against the number of shares available for grant
on a one-for-one basis. as of september24, 2011, approximately 50.8million shares were reserved for future issuance under the 2003 plan.
1997 director stock plan  the 1997 director stock plan (the director plan) is a shareholder approved plan that (i)permits the company to grant awards of rsus or stock options to the companys non-employee
directors, (ii)provides for automatic initial grants of rsus upon a non-employee director joining the board and automatic annual grants of rsus at each annual meeting of shareholders, and (iii)permits the board to prospectively change
the relative mixture of stock options and rsus for the initial and annual award grants and the methodology for determining the number of shares of the companys common stock subject to these grants without shareholder approval. each share
issued with respect to rsus granted under the director plan reduces the number of shares available for grant under the plan by two shares. the director plan expires november9, 2019. as of september24, 2011, approximately 190,000 shares
were reserved for future issuance under the director plan.  rule 10b5-1 trading plans
during the fourth quarter of 2011, executive officers timothy d. cook, peter oppenheimer, d. bruce sewell, phil schiller and jeffrey e.
williams, and directors william v. campbell and arthur d. levinson had trading plans pursuant to rule 10b5-1(c)(1) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (the exchange act). a trading plan is a written document that
pre-establishes the amounts, prices and dates (or a formula for determining the amounts, prices and dates) of future purchases or sales of the companys stock, including the exercise and sale of employee stock options and shares acquired
pursuant to the companys employee stock purchase plan and upon vesting of rsus.  employee stock purchase plan
the employee stock purchase plan (the purchase plan) is a shareholder approved plan under which substantially all employees
may purchase the companys common stock through payroll deductions at a price equal to 85% of the lower of the fair market values of the stock as of the beginning or the end of six-month offering periods. an employees payroll deductions
under the purchase plan are limited to 10% of the employees compensation and employees may not purchase more than $25,000 of stock during any calendar year. as of september24, 2011, approximately 3.1million shares were reserved for
future issuance under the purchase plan.  employee savings plan
the employee savings plan (the savings plan) is a deferred salary arrangement under section401(k) of the internal
revenue code. under the savings plan, participating u.s. employees may defer a portion of their pre-tax earnings, up to the irs annual contribution limit ($16,500 for calendar year 2011). the company matches 50% to 100% of each employees
contributions, depending on length of service, up to a maximum 6% of the employees eligible earnings. the companys matching contributions to the savings plan were $90 million, $72 million and $59 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009,
respectively.
restricted stock units  a summary of the companys rsu activity and related information for the three years ended september24, 2011, is as follows (in thousands, except per share amounts):
numberof rsus
weighted-averagegrantdate fairvalue
aggregateintrinsicvalue
balance at september27, 2008
7,040
$
134.91
rsus units granted
7,786
$
111.80
rsus vested
(1,935
)
$
124.87
rsus cancelled
(628
)
$
121.28
balance at september26, 2009
12,263
$
122.52
rsus units granted
6,178
$
214.37
rsus vested
(4,685
)
$
119.85
rsus cancelled
(722
)
$
147.56
balance at september25, 2010
13,034
$
165.63
rsus units granted
6,667
$
312.63
rsus vested
(4,513
)
$
168.08
rsus cancelled
(742
)
$
189.08
balance at september24, 2011
14,446
$
231.49
$
5,840,503
the fair value as of the vesting date of rsus was $1.5 billion, $1.0 billion and $221 million for 2011,
2010 and 2009, respectively. the majority of rsus that vested in 2011, 2010 and 2009, were net-share settled such that the company withheld shares with value equivalent to the employees minimum statutory obligation for the applicable income
and other employment taxes, and remitted the cash to the appropriate taxing authorities. the total shares withheld were approximately 1.6million, 1.8million and 707,000 for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, and were based on the value
of the rsus on their vesting date as determined by the companys closing stock price. total payments for the employees tax obligations to the taxing authorities were $520 million, $406 million and $82 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009,
respectively, and are reflected as a financing activity within the consolidated statements of cash flows.these net-share settlements had the effect of share repurchases by the company as they reduced and retired the number of shares that would
have otherwise been issued as a result of the vesting and did not represent an expense to the company.
stock option activity  a summary of the companys stock option activity and related information for the three years ended september24, 2011, is as follows (in thousands, except per share amounts and contractual term
in years):
outstanding options
numberofoptions
weighted-averageexerciseprice
weighted-averageremainingcontractualterm
aggregateintrinsicvalue
balance at september27, 2008
44,146
$
74.39
options granted
$
106.84
options cancelled
(1,241
)
$
122.98
options exercised
(8,764
)
$
41.78
balance at september26, 2009
34,375
$
81.17
options granted
$
202.00
options assumed
$
11.99
options cancelled
(430
)
$
136.27
options exercised
(12,352
)
$
62.69
balance at september25, 2010
21,725
$
90.46
options granted
$
342.62
options cancelled
(163
)
$
128.42
options exercised
(9,697
)
$
67.63
balance at september24, 2011
11,866
$
108.64
2.38
$
3,508,243
exercisable at september24, 2011
11,089
$
104.97
2.31
$
3,319,374
expected to vest after september24, 2011
$
161.23
3.38
$
188,869
aggregate intrinsic value represents the value of the companys closing stock price on the last
trading day of the fiscal period in excess of the weighted-average exercise price multiplied by the number of options outstanding or exercisable. total intrinsic value of options at time of exercise was $2.6 billion, $2.0 billion and $827 million
for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.  share-based compensation
share-based compensation cost for rsus is measured based on the closing fair market value of the companys common stock on the date
of grant. share-based compensation cost for stock options and employee stock purchase plan rights (stock purchase rights) is estimated at the grant date and offering date, respectively, based on the fair-value as calculated by the bsm
option-pricing model. the bsm option-pricing model incorporates various assumptions including expected volatility, expected life and interest rates.the expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of the companys common
stock over the most recent period commensurate with the expected life of the companys stock options and other relevant factors including implied volatility in market traded options on the companys common stock. the company bases its
expected life assumption on its historical experience and on the terms and conditions of the stock awards it grants to employees. the company recognizes share-based compensation cost as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service
period.  the company granted 1,370 stock options, 34,000 stock options and 234,000 stock options during 2011, 2010 and 2009,
respectively. the weighted-average grant date fair value of stock options granted during 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $181.13, $108.58 and $46.71 per share, respectively.
the company did not assume any stock options in conjunction with business combinations
during 2011 or 2009. during 2010, the company assumed 98,000 stock options, which had a weighted-average fair value of $216.82 per share.  the weighted-average fair value of stock purchase rights per share was $71.47, $45.03 and $30.62 during 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.
the following table provides a summary of the share-based compensation expense included in the consolidated statements of operations for
the three years ended september24, 2011 (in millions):
cost of sales
$
$
$
research and development
selling, general and administrative
total share-based compensation expense
$
1,168
$
$
the income tax benefit related to share-based compensation expense was $467 million, $314 million and
$266 million for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. as of september24, 2011, the total unrecognized compensation cost related to outstanding stock options and rsus was $2.6 billion, which the company expects to recognize over a
weighted-average period of 3.7 years.  note 7  commitments and contingencies
accrued warranty and indemnification  the company offers a basic limited parts and labor warranty on its hardware products. the basic warranty period for hardware products is typically one year from the date of purchase by the end-user. the
company also offers a 90-day basic warranty for its service parts used to repair the companys hardware products. the company provides currently for the estimated cost that may be incurred under its basic limited product warranties at the time
related revenue is recognized. factors considered in determining appropriate accruals for product warranty obligations include the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection, historical and projected warranty claim rates,
historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the companys typical experience. the company assesses the adequacy of its pre-existing warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as
necessary based on actual experience and changes in future estimates.  the following table reconciles changes in the
companys accrued warranty and related costs for the three years ended september24, 2011 (in millions):
beginning accrued warranty and related costs
$
$
$
cost of warranty claims
(1,147
)
(713
)
(534
)
accruals for product warranty
1,626
ending accrued warranty and related costs
$
1,240
$
$
the company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software
against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. other agreements entered into by the company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the company could be subject to costs and/or damages in
the event of an infringement claim against the company or an indemnified third-party. however, the company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against it or an indemnified
third-party. in the opinion of management, there was not
at least a reasonable possibility the company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end-users of its operating system or application software for infringement of
third-party intellectual property rights. the company did not record a liability for infringement costs related to indemnification as of either september24, 2011 or september25, 2010.
the company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. under these agreements, the company
has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal
proceedings. it is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances
involved in each claim. however, the company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations, and payments made under these agreements historically have not been material.
concentrations in the available sources of supply of materials and product
although most components essential to the companys business are generally available from multiple sources, a number of components
are currently obtained from single or limited sources, which subjects the company to significant supply and pricing risks. many components that are available from multiple sources are at times subject to industry-wide shortages and significant
commodity pricing fluctuations. in addition, the company has entered into various agreements for the supply of components; however there can be no guarantee that the company will be able to extend or renew these agreements on similar terms, or at
all. therefore, the company remains subject to significant risks of supply shortages and price increases that can materially adversely affect its financial condition and operating results.
the company and other participants in the mobile communication and media device, and personal computer industries also compete for
various components with other industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. the company also uses some custom components that are not common to the rest of these industries, and new products introduced by the company often
utilize custom components available from only one source. when a component or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until the suppliers yields have matured or manufacturing capacity has increased. if the
companys supply of components for a new or existing product were delayed or constrained, or if an outsourcing partner delayed shipments of completed products to the company, the companys financial condition and operating results could be
materially adversely affected. the companys business and financial performance could also be materially adversely affected depending on the time required to obtain sufficient quantities from the original source, or to identify and obtain
sufficient quantities from an alternative source. continued availability of these components at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected if those suppliers concentrated on the production of common components instead of components customized to
meet the companys requirements.  substantially all of the companys hardware products are manufactured by
outsourcing partners that are primarily located in asia. a significant concentration of this manufacturing is currently performed by a small number of outsourcing partners, often in single locations. certain of these outsourcing partners are the
sole-sourced suppliers of components and manufacturer for many of the companys products. although the company works closely with its outsourcing partners on manufacturing schedules, the companys operating results could be adversely
affected if its outsourcing partners were unable to meet their production commitments. the companys purchase commitments typically cover its requirements for periods up to 150 days.  long-term supply agreements  the company has entered into long-term
agreements to secure the supply of certain inventory components. these agreements generally expire between 2012 and 2022. as of september24, 2011, the company had a total of $2.3 billion of inventory component prepayments outstanding, of which
$728 million are classified as other
current assets and $1.6 billion are classified as other assets in the consolidated balance sheets. the company had a total of $956 million of inventory component prepayments outstanding as of
september25, 2010. the companys outstanding prepayments will be applied to certain inventory component purchases made during the term of each respective agreement.  other off-balance sheet commitments  lease commitments
the company leases various equipment and facilities, including retail space, under noncancelable operating lease arrangements. the company
does not currently utilize any other off-balance sheet financing arrangements. the major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally provide renewal options for terms not exceeding five additional years. leases for
retail space are for terms ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for ten years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. as of september24, 2011, the companys total future minimum lease payments under
noncancelable operating leases were $3.0 billion, of which $2.4 billion related to leases for retail space.  rent expense
under all operating leases, including both cancelable and noncancelable leases, was $338 million, $271 million and $231 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases having remaining
terms in excess of one year as of september24, 2011, are as follows (in millions):
years
$
thereafter
1,302
total minimum lease payments
$
3,032
other commitments  as of september24, 2011, the company had outstanding off-balance sheet commitments for outsourced manufacturing and component purchases of $13.9 billion.
additionally, other outstanding obligations were $2.4 billion as of september24, 2011, and were comprised mainly of commitments
under long-term supply agreements to make additional inventory component prepayments and to acquire capital equipment, commitments to acquire product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and commitments related to advertising, research and
development, internet and telecommunications services and other obligations.  contingencies
the company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in the ordinary course of business and have not been fully
adjudicated, which are discussed in part i, item3 of this form 10-k under the heading legal proceedings and in part i item1a under the heading risk factors. in the opinion of management, there was not at least a
reasonable possibility the company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies. however, the outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain. therefore, although management
considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the company in the same reporting period for amounts in excess of managements expectations, the companys consolidated
financial statements of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected.
note 8  segment information and geographic data
the company reports segment information based on the management approach. the management approach designates the internal
reporting used by management for making decisions and assessing performance as the source of the companys reportable segments.  the company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. accordingly, the company determined its reportable operating segments, which are generally based on the nature and location of its
customers, to be the americas, europe, japan, asia-pacific and retail operations. the results of the americas, europe, japan and asia-pacific reportable segments do not include results of the retail segment. the americas segment includes both north
and south america. the europe segment includes european countries, as well as the middle east and africa. the asia-pacific segment includes australia and asian countries, other than japan. the retail segment operates apple retail stores in 11
countries. each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. the accounting policies of the various segments are the same as those described in note 1, summary of significant accounting
policies.  the company evaluates the performance of its operating segments based on net sales and operating income. net
sales for geographic segments are generally based on the location of customers, while retail segment net sales are based on sales from the companys retail stores. operating income for each segment includes net sales to third parties, related
cost of sales and operating expenses directly attributable to the segment. advertising expenses are generally included in the geographic segment in which the expenditures are incurred. operating income for each segment excludes other income and
expense and certain expenses managed outside the operating segments. costs excluded from segment operating income include various corporate expenses, such as manufacturing costs and variances not included in standard costs, research and development,
corporate marketing expenses, share-based compensation expense, income taxes, various nonrecurring charges, and other separately managed general and administrative costs. the company does not include intercompany transfers between segments for
management reporting purposes. segment assets exclude corporate assets, such as cash and cash equivalents, short-term and long-term marketable securities, other long-term investments, manufacturing and corporate facilities, product tooling and
manufacturing process equipment, miscellaneous corporate infrastructure, goodwill and other acquired intangible assets. except for the retail segment, capital asset purchases for long-lived assets are not reported to management by segment. cash
payments for capital asset purchases by the retail segment were $612 million, $392 million and $369 million for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.  the company has certain retail stores that have been designed and built to serve as high-profile venues to promote brand awareness and serve as vehicles for corporate sales and marketing activities.
because of their unique design elements, locations and size, these stores require substantially more investment than the companys more typical retail stores. the company allocates certain operating expenses associated with its high-profile
stores to corporate expense to reflect the estimated company-wide benefit. the allocation of these operating costs to corporate expense is based on the amount incurred for a high-profile store in excess of that incurred by a more typical company
retail location. the company had opened a total of 19 high-profile stores as of september24, 2011. amounts allocated to corporate expense resulting from the operations of high-profile stores were $102 million, $75 million and $65 million for
2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.
summary information by operating segment for the three years ended september24, 2011
is as follows (in millions):
americas:
net sales
$
38,315
$
24,498
$
18,981
operating income
$
13,538
$
7,590
$
6,658
depreciation, amortization and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets (a)
$
3,807
$
2,809
$
1,896
europe:
net sales
$
27,778
$
18,692
$
11,810
operating income
$
11,528
$
7,524
$
4,296
depreciation, amortization and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets
$
2,985
$
1,926
$
1,352
japan:
net sales
$
5,437
$
3,981
$
2,279
operating income
$
2,481
$
1,846
$
depreciation, amortization and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets
$
$
$
asia-pacific:
net sales
$
22,592
$
8,256
$
3,179
operating income
$
9,587
$
3,647
$
1,100
depreciation, amortization and accretion
$
$
$
segment assets
$
1,913
$
1,622
$
retail:
net sales
$
14,127
$
9,798
$
6,656
operating income
$
3,344
$
2,364
$
1,677
depreciation, amortization and accretion (b)
$
$
$
segment assets (b)
$
2,940
$
1,829
$
1,344
(a)
the americas asset figures do not include fixed assets held in the u.s. such fixed assets are not allocated specifically to the americas segment and
are included in the corporate and retail assets figures below.
(b)
retail segment depreciation and asset figures reflect the cost and related depreciation of its retail stores and related infrastructure.
a reconciliation of the companys segment operating income and assets to the consolidated financial
statements for the three years ended september24, 2011 is as follows (in millions):
segment operating income
$
40,478
$
22,971
$
14,692
other corporate expenses, net (a)
(5,520
)
(3,707
)
(2,242
)
share-based compensation expense
(1,168
)
(879
)
(710
)
total operating income
$
33,790
$
18,385
$
11,740
segment assets
$
12,449
$
9,177
$
5,604
corporate assets
103,922
66,006
41,897
consolidated assets
$
116,371
$
75,183
$
47,501
segment depreciation, amortization and accretion
$
$
$
corporate depreciation, amortization and accretion
1,561
consolidated depreciation, amortization and accretion
$
1,814
$
1,027
$
(a)
other corporate expenses include research and development, corporate marketing expenses, manufacturing costs and variances not included in standard
costs, and other separately managed general and administrative expenses, including certain corporate expenses associated with support of the retail segment.  the u.s. and china were the only countries that accounted for more than 10% of companys net sales in 2011. no single country other than the u.s. accounted for more than 10% of net sales in 2010 or
2009. there was no single customer that accounted for more than 10% of net sales in 2011 or 2010. one of the companys customers accounted for 11% of net sales in 2009. net sales for the three years ended september24, 2011 and long-lived
assets as of september24, 2011,september25, 2010 and september26, 2009 are as follows (in millions):
net sales:
u.s.
$
41,812
$
28,633
$
22,325
china (a)
12,472
2,764
other countries
53,965
33,828
19,811
total net sales
$
108,249
$
65,225
$
42,905
long-lived assets:
u.s.
$
4,375
$
3,096
$
2,348
china (a)
2,613
1,245
other countries
1,090
total long-lived assets
$
8,078
$
5,002
$
3,193
(a)
china includes hong kong. long-lived assets located in china consist primarily of product tooling and manufacturing process equipment and assets
related to retail stores and related infrastructure.  information regarding net sales by product for the
three years ended september24, 2011, is as follows (in millions):
desktops (a)
$
6,439
$
6,201
$
4,324
portables (b)
15,344
11,278
9,535
total mac net sales
21,783
17,479
13,859
ipod
7,453
8,274
8,091
other music related products and services (c)
6,314
4,948
4,036
iphone and related products and services (d)
47,057
25,179
13,033
ipad and related products and services (e)
20,358
4,958
peripherals and other hardware (f)
2,330
1,814
1,475
software, service and other net sales (g)
2,954
2,573
2,411
total net sales
$
108,249
$
65,225
$
42,905
(a)
includes imac, mac mini, mac pro and xserve product lines.
(b)
includes macbook, macbook air and macbook pro product lines.
(c)
includes sales from the itunes store, app store, and ibookstore in addition to sales of ipod services and apple-branded and third-party ipod
accessories.
(d)
includes revenue recognized from iphone sales, carrier agreements, services, and apple-branded and third-party iphone accessories.
(e)
includes revenue recognized from ipad sales, services and apple-branded and third-party ipad accessories.
(f)
includes sales of displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories.
(g)
includes sales from the mac app store in addition to sales of other apple-branded and third-party macsoftware and mac and internet services.
note 9  selected quarterly financial information (unaudited)
the following tables set forth a summary of the companys quarterly financial information for each of the four
quarters ended september24, 2011 and september25, 2010 (in millions, except per share amounts):
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
net sales
$
28,270
$
28,571
$
24,667
$
26,741
gross margin
$
11,380
$
11,922
$
10,218
$
10,298
net income
$
6,623
$
7,308
$
5,987
$
6,004
earnings per common share:
basic
$
7.13
$
7.89
$
6.49
$
6.53
diluted
$
7.05
$
7.79
$
6.40
$
6.43
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
net sales
$
20,343
$
15,700
$
13,499
$
15,683
gross margin
$
7,512
$
6,136
$
5,625
$
6,411
net income
$
4,308
$
3,253
$
3,074
$
3,378
earnings per common share:
basic
$
4.71
$
3.57
$
3.39
$
3.74
diluted
$
4.64
$
3.51
$
3.33
$
3.67
basic and diluted earnings per share are computed independently for each of the quarters presented.
therefore, the sum of quarterly basic and diluted per share information may not equal annual basic and diluted earnings per share.
report of ernst& young llp, independent registered
public accounting firm  the board of directors and shareholders of apple inc.
we have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of apple inc. as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010, and
the related consolidated statements of operations, shareholders equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended september24, 2011. these financial statements are the responsibility of the companys management.
our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.  we conducted our audits in
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as
well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.  in our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of apple inc. at september24, 2011 and september25,
2010, and the consolidated results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended september24, 2011, in conformity with u.s.generally accepted accounting principles.
we also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), apple
inc.s internal control over financial reporting as of september24, 2011, based on criteria established in internal control  integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission
and our report dated october26, 2011 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.  /s/ ernst&
young llp  san jose, california
october26, 2011
report of ernst& young llp, independent registered public accounting firm
the board of directors and shareholders of apple inc.  we have audited apple inc.s internal control over financial reporting as of september24, 2011, based on criteria established in internal control  integrated framework issued by
the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (the coso criteria). apple inc.s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the accompanying managements annual report on internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on the companys internal control
over financial reporting based on our audit.  we conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our
audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk,
and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.  a companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)pertain to the maintenance of records that,
in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
in our opinion, apple inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of
september24, 2011, based on the coso criteria.  we also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states), the 2011 consolidated financial statements of apple inc. and our report dated october26, 2011 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
/s/ ernst& young llp  san jose, california  october26, 2011
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
item9a.
controls and procedures  evaluation of
disclosure controls and procedures  based on an evaluation under the supervision and with the participation of the
companys management, the companys principal executive officer and principal financial officer have concluded that the companys disclosure controls and procedures as defined in rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the exchange act
were effective as of september24, 2011 to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by the company in reports that it files or submits under the exchange act is (i)recorded, processed, summarized and reported
within the time periods specified in the securities and exchange commission rules and forms and (ii)accumulated and communicated to the companys management, including its principal executive officer and principal financial officer, as
appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.  inherent limitations over internal controls
the companys internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with gaap. the companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that:
(i)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the
companys assets;
(ii)
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with gaap, and
that the companys receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations of the companys management and directors; and
(iii)
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets
that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  management, including the companys
chief executive officer and chief financial officer, does not expect that the companys internal controls will prevent or detect all errors and all fraud. a control system, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable,
not absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. further, the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs.
because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of internal controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, have been detected. also, any evaluation of the effectiveness of
controls in future periods are subject to the risk that those internal controls may become inadequate because of changes in business conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
managements annual report on internal control over financial reporting
the companys management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting (as
defined in rule 13a-15(f) under the exchange act. management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria set forth in internal control  integrated framework
issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on the companys assessment, management has concluded that its internal control over financial reporting was effective as of
september24, 2011 to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles. the companys independent
registered public accounting firm, ernst& young llp, has issued an audit report on the companys internal control over financial reporting, which appears in item15(a) of this annual report on form 10-k.
changes in internal control over financial reporting
there were no changes in the companys internal control over financial reporting during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, which were
identified in connection with managements evaluation required by paragraph (d)of rules 13a-15 and 15d-15 under the exchange act, that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys internal
control over financial reporting.
item9b.
other information  not
applicable.
part iii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance  the information required by this item is set forth under the heading directors, executive officers and corporate governance in the companys 2012 proxy statement to be filed with the u.s.
securities and exchange commission (sec) in connection with the solicitation of proxies for the companys 2012 annual meeting of shareholders (2012 proxy statement) and is incorporated herein by reference. such proxy
statement will be filed with the sec within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year to which this report relates.
item11.
executive compensation
the information required by this item is set forth under the headings executive compensation and compensation discussion
and analysis in the companys 2012 proxy statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
the information required by this item is set forth under the headings security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and equity compensation plan information in the companys 2012 proxy statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence  the information required by this item is set forth under the heading review, approval or ratification of transactions with related persons in the companys 2012 proxy statement and is
incorporated herein by reference.
item14.
principal accounting fees and services  the information required by this item is set forth under the heading fees paid to auditors in the companys 2012 proxy statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
(a)
documents filed as part of this report
(1)
all financial statements
index to consolidated financial statements
page
consolidated statements of operations for the three years ended september24, 2011
consolidated balance sheets as of september24, 2011 and september25, 2010
consolidated statements of shareholders equity for the three years ended september24,
consolidated statements of cash flows for the three years ended september24, 2011
notes to consolidated financial statements
selected quarterly financial information (unaudited)
reports of ernst & young llp, independent registered public accounting firm
(2)
financial statement schedules  all financial statement schedules have been omitted, since the required information is not applicable or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the
information required is included in the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto.
(b)
exhibits required by item601 of regulation s-k
the information required by this item is set forth on the exhibit index that follows the signature page of this report.
signatures  pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d)of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized, this 26th day of october 2011.
apple inc.
by:
/s/peter oppenheimer
peter oppenheimer
senior vice president,
chief financial officer
power of attorney  know all persons by these presents, that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints timothy d. cook and peter oppenheimer, jointly and severally, his attorneys-in-fact, each with
the power of substitution, for him in any and all capacities, to sign any amendments to this annual report on form10-k, and to file the same, with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the securities and exchange
commission, hereby ratifying and confirming all that each of said attorneys-in-fact, or his substitute or substitutes, may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.  pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates
indicated:
name
title
date
/s/timothy d.
cook timothy d. cook
chief executive officer and director (principal executive officer)
october26, 2011
/s/peter
oppenheimer peter oppenheimer
senior vice president, chief
financial officer (principal financial officer)
october26,2011
/s/betsy
rafael betsy rafael
vice president corporate
controller (principal accounting officer)
october26, 2011
/s/william v.
campbell william v. campbell
director
october26, 2011
/s/millard s.
drexler millard s. drexler
director
october26, 2011
/s/albert gore,
jr. albert gore, jr.
director
october26, 2011
/s/andrea
jung andrea jung
director
october26, 2011
/s/arthur d.
levinson arthur d. levinson
director
october26, 2011
/s/ronald d.
sugar ronald d. sugar
director
october26, 2011
exhibit index
exhibit number
exhibit description
incorporated
byreference
form
filingdate/ periodend date
3.1
restated articles of incorporation, filed with the secretary of state of the state of california on july 10, 2009.
10-q
6/27/09
3.2
bylaws of the registrant, as amended through april 20, 2011.
10-q
3/26/11
4.1
form of stock certificate of the registrant.
10-q
12/30/06
10.1*
employee stock purchase plan, as amended through march 8, 2010.
10-q
3/27/10
10.2*
form of indemnification agreement between the registrant and each director and executive officer of the registrant.
10-q
6/27/09
10.3*
1997 director stock plan, as amended through february 25, 2010.
8-k
3/1/10
10.4*
2003 employee stock plan, as amended through february 25, 2010.
8-k
3/1/10
10.5*
form of restricted stock unit award agreement effective as of august 28, 2007.
10-k
9/29/07
10.6*
form of restricted stock unit award agreement effective as of november 11, 2008.
10-q
12/27/08
10.7*
form of restricted stock unit award agreement effective as of november 16, 2010.
10-q
12/25/10
14.1**
business conduct policy of the registrant dated july 2011.
21.1**
subsidiaries of the registrant.
23.1**
consent of ernst & young llp, independent registered public accounting firm.
24.1**
power of attorney (included on the signature page of this annual report on form 10-k).
31.1**
rule 13a-14(a) / 15d-14(a) certification of chief executive officer.
31.2**
rule 13a-14(a) / 15d-14(a) certification of chief financial officer.
32.1***
section 1350 certifications of chief executive officer and chief financial officer.
101.ins
xbrl instance document
101.sch
xbrl taxonomy extension schema document
101.cal
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document
101.def
xbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase document
101.lab
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase document
101.pre
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase document
*
indicates management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
**
filed herewith.
***
furnished herewith.
