10-k
d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states  securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k    (mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934  for the fiscal year ended december31, 2007  or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934  for the transition period from
to
.  commission file no. 000-22513  amazon.com, inc.  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
91-1646860
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
1200 12th avenue south, suite 1200  seattle, washington 98144-2734  (206) 266-1000  (address and telephone number, including area code, of registrants principal executive offices)  securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, par value $.01 per share
nasdaq global select market
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:  none  indicate by check mark if the registrant
is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act.yesxno  indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the exchange
act.yesnox  indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required
to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.yesxno  indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained,
to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.x  indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of
accelerated filer and large accelerated filer in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.  largeacceleratedfilerxaccelerated filernon-accelerated filer  indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act).yesnox
aggregate market value of voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of june30, 2007
$21,097,741,621
number of shares of common stock outstanding as of february1, 2008
416,817,690
documents incorporated by reference  the information required by part iii of this report, to the extent not set forth herein, is incorporated herein by reference from the registrants
definitive proxy statement relating to the annual meeting of shareholders to be held in 2008, which definitive proxy statement shall be filed with the securities and exchange commission within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year to which this
report relates.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  form 10-k  for the fiscal year ended december31, 2007
index
page
part i
item 1.
business
item 1a.
risk factors
item 1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item 5.
market for the registrants common stock, related shareholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6.
selected consolidated financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
item9b.
other information
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related shareholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item 14.
principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  part i
item1.business   this annual report on form 10-k and the
documents incorporated herein by reference contain forward-looking statements based on expectations, estimates, and projections as of the date of this filing. actual results may differ materially from those expressed in forward-looking statements.
see item1a of part irisk factors.  amazon.com, inc. was incorporated in 1994 in the state of washington and
reincorporated in 1996 in the state of delaware. our principal corporate offices are located in seattle, washington. we completed our initial public offering in may 1997 and our common stock is listed on the nasdaq global select market under the
symbol amzn.  as used herein, amazon.com, we, our and similar terms include amazon.com,
inc. and its subsidiaries, unless the context indicates otherwise.  general  amazon.com, a fortune 500 company, opened its virtual doors on the world wide web in july 1995. we offer earths biggest selection and seek to be
earths most customer-centric company for three primary customer sets: consumer customers, seller customers and developer customers. in addition, we generate revenue through co-branded credit card agreements and other marketing and promotional
services, such as online advertising.  we have organized our operations into two principal segments: north america and international. see
item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary datanote 13segment information. see item7 of partii, managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operationsresults of operationssupplemental information for supplemental information about our net sales.  consumer customers
we serve consumer customers through our retail websites, which include www.amazon.com, www.amazon.ca, www.amazon.de,
www.amazon.fr, www.amazon.co.jp, www.amazon.co.uk, www.shopbop.com, www.endless.com and the joyo amazon websites at www.joyo.cn and www.amazon.cn. we seek to enable our consumer customers to find and discover anything
they might want to buy online, and endeavor to offer the lowest possible prices. we source and sell a broad range of products worldwide across dozens of product categories, including digital media. we also design, manufacture, market and sell a
wireless e-reading device, the amazon kindle. our customer-facing businesses relentlessly focus on customer experience by offering a wide selection of merchandise, low prices, and convenience.  selection  we endeavor to
provide the widest possible selection for customers worldwide, while continuing to focus on in-stock inventory availability. we have designed our websites to enable millions of unique products to be sold by us and by third parties across dozens of
product categories, such as:
books  electronics &
computers  toys, kids & baby   sports & outdoors
movies, music & games  home &
garden  apparel, shoes & jewelry  tools, auto & industrial
digital downloads  grocery  health &
beauty
table of contents
price  we endeavor to offer our customers the lowest prices possible through low everyday product pricing and free shipping offers. we also strive to improve our operating efficiencies so that we can continue to lower prices
for our customers. we enable sellers to offer their products on our sites, in many instances alongside our product selection, and to set their own retail prices.  convenience  our software engineers, computer scientists, merchandisers, and management team
focus on continuous innovation to enhance convenience. we work to earn repeat purchases by providing easy-to-use functionality, fast and reliable fulfillment, timely customer service, feature-rich and authoritative content, and a trusted transaction
environment. key features of our websites include editorial and customer reviews; manufacturer product information; gift guides; web pages tailored to individual preferences, such as recommendations and notifications; 1-click technology; secure
payment systems; digital content; searching; browsing; and the ability to view selected interior pages and citations, and search the entire contents of many of the books we offer with our search inside the book feature. our community of
online customers also creates feature-rich content, including product reviews, online recommendation lists, wish lists, image uploads, video reviews, buying guides, customer discussions, and wedding and baby registries.  we endeavor to fulfill customer orders quickly and accurately, and to provide intuitive self-service features that assist our customers when they have
questions. we communicate our fulfillment promise in several ways, such as presenting up-to-date inventory availability information, delivery date estimates, and options for expedited delivery, as well as delivery shipment notifications. customers
can use the your account website features to track order and shipment status, review estimated delivery dates, cancel items not yet shipped, change delivery instructions and payment options, combine orders, edit gift options, and return
items. additionally, when customers have questions, we provide an email address and phone number to contact customer service directly and an intuitive click-to-call feature on our help pages so customers can quickly and conveniently speak with a
customer service representative.  we fulfill customer orders in a number of ways, including through the u.s. and international fulfillment
centers and warehouses that we operate; through fulfillment centers operated under co-sourcing arrangements, including our fulfillment center supporting www.amazon.co.jp; through outsourced fulfillment providers, including our fulfillment
providers supporting www.amazon.ca; and through fulfillment arrangements with other sellers. we operate customer service centers globally, which are supplemented by several co-sourcing customer service arrangements with third parties. see
item2 of parti, properties, for additional information about fulfillment centers and customer service locations.  marketing and promotion  our marketing strategy is designed to increase customer traffic to our websites, drive
awareness of products and services we offer, promote repeat purchases, develop incremental product and service revenue opportunities, and strengthen and broaden the amazon.com brand name. we believe our most effective marketing efforts result from
our focus on continuously improving the customer experience, which drives word-of-mouth promotion and repeat customer visits. we also deliver personalized web pages and services and employ a variety of media, business development activities, and
promotional methods. we employ various means of advertising, which consist primarily of online advertising, including through our associates program, sponsored search, portal advertising, e-mail campaigns, and other initiatives. our associates
program directs customers to our websites by enabling independent websites to make millions of products available to their audiences with fulfillment performed by us or third parties. we pay commissions to participants in our associates program for
click-through customer referrals and customer referrals resulting in product sales, subject to the terms of the specific commission agreement.
table of contents
we offer everyday free shipping options worldwide. we also offer amazon prime, a membership program in
which members receive free or discounted express shipping, in the united states, the united kingdom, germany and japan. although marketing expenses do not include the costs of our free shipping or promotional offers, we view such offers as effective
marketing tools.  seller customers  through amazon services, we offer programs that enable seller customers to sell their products on our websites and fulfill orders through us, allow consumer customers to shop for products owned by sellers using our features and
technologies, and allow individual customers to complete transactions that include multiple sellers in a single checkout process. we are not the seller of record in these transactions, but instead earn fixed fees, sales commissions, per-unit
activity fees, or some combination thereof.  our seller programs serve individuals, small businesses, and large branded businesses,
enabling them to offer their new and used products for sale on our websites alongside our products and products made available by other sellers. we also offer fulfillment-related services to sellers through fulfillment by amazon.  in addition, amazon enterprise solutions offers sellers e-commerce expertise, proven technology, and operational infrastructure to enable e-commerce
businesses operating under their own brand name and website address (e.g. www.target.com).  developer customers  we serve developer customers through amazon web services, which provides access to technology infrastructure that developers can use to enable virtually
any type of business.  these services include:
amazon simple storage service (amazon s3), which provides a simple web services interface for storing and retrieving data from anywhere on the web;
amazon elastic compute cloud (amazon ec2), which provides a scalable up and down virtual computing environment, allowing developers to use web service interfaces to
requisition machines for use and load them with their custom application environment, making web-scale computing easier for developers;
amazon simple queue service (amazon sqs), which offers a reliable, highly scalable hosted queue for storing messages as they travel between computers;
amazon simpledb, which provides a web service to create and store multiple data sets, query data easily, and return the results;
amazon flexible payments service (amazon fps), which provides a payments service designed specifically for developers, providing greater flexibility in the movement
of money;
amazon mechanical turk, which provides a web service for computers to integrate a network of humans directly into their processes; and
alexas web services, which offer a platform for creating innovative web solutions and services based on alexas vast repository of information about the
web.  competition  our market segments are rapidly evolving and intensely competitive. our current and potential competitors include: (1)physical-world retailers, publishers, vendors, distributors, manufacturers and producers of our products;
(2)other online e-commerce and mobile e-commerce sites, including sites that sell or distribute digital content; (3)a number of indirect competitors, including media companies, web portals, comparison shopping websites, and web search
engines, either directly or in collaboration with other retailers; (4)companies that
table of contents
provide e-commerce services, including website development; fulfillment and customer service; (5)companies that provide infrastructure web services or
other information storage or computing services or products; and (6)companies that design, manufacture, market or sell digital media devices. we believe that the principal competitive factors in our retail market segments include selection,
price, availability, convenience, information, discovery, brand recognition, personalized services, accessibility, customer service, reliability, speed of fulfillment, ease of use, and ability to adapt to changing conditions, as well as our
customers overall experience and trust in transactions with us and facilitated by us on behalf of sellers. for our seller and web services, additional competitive factors include the quality of our services and tools, the speed and reliability
of our services and our ability to build technology infrastructure while remaining competitive with our services from a cost perspective. many of our current potential competitors have greater resources, longer histories, more customers, and greater
brand recognition. they may secure better terms from vendors, adopt more aggressive pricing and devote more resources to technology, fulfillment, and marketing. other companies also may enter into business combinations or alliances that strengthen
their competitive positions.  intellectual property  we regard our trademarks, service marks, copyrights, patents, domain names, trade dress, trade secrets, proprietary technologies, and similar intellectual property as critical to our success, and we rely on trademark,
copyright and patent law, trade-secret protection, and confidentiality and/or license agreements with our employees, customers, partners, and others to protect our proprietary rights. we have registered a number of domain names and been issued a
number of trademarks, service marks, patents, and copyrights by u.s. and foreign governmental authorities. we also have applied for the registration of other trademarks, service marks, domain names, and copyrights in the u.s. and internationally,
and we have filed u.s. and international patent applications covering certain of our proprietary technology. we have licensed in the past, and expect that we may license in the future, certain of our proprietary rights, such as trademarks, patents,
technologies or copyrighted materials, to third parties.  seasonality  our business is affected by seasonality, which historically has resulted in higher sales volume during our fourth quarter, which ends december31.  employees  we employed approximately 17,000 full-time and part-time employees at december31,
2007. however, employment levels fluctuate due to seasonal factors affecting our business. additionally, we utilize independent contractors and temporary personnel to supplement our workforce, particularly on a seasonal basis. our employees are not
represented by a labor union and we consider our employee relations to be good. competition for qualified personnel in our industry is intense, particularly for software engineers, computer scientists, and other technical staff. we believe that our
future success will depend in part on our continued ability to attract, hire, and retain qualified personnel.  available information  our investor relations website is www.amazon.com/ir. we make available on this website under financial documents, free of charge, our
annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form8-k, and amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file or furnish such materials to the u.s. securities and
exchange commission (sec). we also make available on this website under the heading corporate governance our code of business conduct and ethics.
table of contents
executive officers and directors  the following tables set forth certain information regarding our executive officers and directors as of february8, 2008:  executive officers
name
age
position
jeffrey p. bezos
president, chief executive officer, and chairman of the board
jeffrey m. blackburn
senior vice president, business development
sebastian j. gunningham
senior vice president, seller services
andrew r. jassy
senior vice president, web services
steven kessel
senior vice president, worldwide digital media
marc a. onetto
senior vice president, worldwide operations
diego piacentini
senior vice president, international retail
shelley l. reynolds
vice president, worldwide controller, and principal accounting officer
thomas j. szkutak
senior vice president and chief financial officer
h. brian valentine
senior vice president, ecommerce platform
jeffrey a. wilke
senior vice president, north america retail
l. michelle wilson
senior vice president, general counsel, and secretary
jeffrey p. bezos.mr. bezos has been chairman of the board of
amazon.com since founding it in 1994 and chief executive officer since may 1996. mr.bezos served as president of the company from founding until june 1999 and again from october 2000 to the present.  jeffreym. blackburn.mr.blackburn has served as senior vice president, business development, since april 2006.
from june 2004 to april 2006, he was vice president, business development, from july 2003 to june 2004, he was vice president, european customer service and from november 2002 to july 2003, mr.blackburn was vice president, operations
integration.  sebastian j. gunningham.mr.gunningham has served as senior vice president, seller
services, since joining amazon.com in march 2007. prior to joining amazon.com, mr.gunningham was president of first data utilities from august 2006 to february 2007, following first datas acquisition of peace software, inc., where he was
chief executive officer from february 2004 to august 2006 and president and chief operating officer from april 2002 to march 2003. from march 2003 to february 2004, he served as vice president of enterprise sales at apple, inc.  andrew r. jassy.mr.jassy has served as senior vice president, web services, since april 2006. from january 2005 to
april 2006, he was vice president, web services, from august 2003 to january 2005, he was vice president, associates and web services, and, from november 2002 to august 2003, he was vice president and technical assistant.  steven kessel.mr.kessel has served as senior vice president, worldwide digital media, since april 2006. from april
2004 to april 2006, he was vice president, digital and, from july 2002 to april 2004, he was vice president, u.s. books, music, video and dvd.  marc a. onetto.mr.onetto has served as senior vice president, worldwide operations, since joining amazon.com in december 2006. prior to joining amazon.com, mr.onetto was executive vice president,
worldwide operations, at solectron corporation, an electronics manufacturing and technology company, from june 2003 to june 2006, and, prior to solectron, he held various positions at ge, including vice president, european operations, ge europe,
from september 2002 to june 2003.
table of contents
diego piacentini.mr. piacentini has served as senior vice president,
international retail, since january 2007. from november 2001 until december 2006, mr.piacentini served as senior vice president, worldwide retail and marketing.  shelley l. reynolds.ms.reynolds has served as vice president, worldwide controller, and principal accounting officer since april 2007. from february 2006 to april 2007, she was
vice president, finance and controller. prior to joining amazon.com, ms.reynolds was a partner at deloitte& touche llp since 1998.  thomas j. szkutak.mr. szkutak has served as senior vice president and chief financial officer since joining amazon.com in october 2002.  h. brian valentine.mr.valentine has served as senior vice president, ecommerce platform, since joining amazon.com in
september 2006. prior to joining amazon.com, mr.valentine held various positions with microsoft corporation, including senior vice president, windows core operating system division, from january 2004 to september 2006 and senior vice
president, windows, from december 1999 to january 2004.  jeffrey a. wilke.mr. wilke has served as senior
vice president, north america retail, since january 2007. from january 2002 until december 2006, he was senior vice president, worldwide operations.  l. michelle wilson.ms. wilson has served as senior vice president, general counsel, and secretary since june 2003. from march 2001 until june 2003, she was senior vice president, human
resources, general counsel, and secretary.  board of directors
name
age
position
jeffrey p. bezos
president, chief executive officer, and chairman of the board
tom a. alberg
managing director, madrona venture group
john seely brown
visiting scholar and advisor to the provost, university of southern california
l. john doerr
general partner, kleiner perkins caufield & byers
william b. gordon
executive vice president and chief creative officer, electronic arts,inc.
myrtle s. potter
chief executive officer, chapman properties, inc., and consultant, myrtle potter and company, llc
thomas o. ryder
retired, former chairman, readers digest association, inc.
patricia q. stonesifer
chief executive officer, bill & melinda gates foundation
item1a.risk factors  please carefully consider the following
risk factors. if any of the following risks occur, our business, financial condition, operating results, and cash flows could be materially adversely affected. in addition, these risks are not the only ones we face.  we face intense competition  our market segments are rapidly evolving and intensely competitive, and we have many competitors in different industries, including retail, e-commerce services, digital and web services. many of our current and potential competitors have
greater resources, longer histories, more customers, and greater brand recognition. they may secure better terms from vendors, adopt more aggressive pricing and devote more resources to technology, fulfillment, and marketing.
table of contents
competition may intensify as our competitors enter into business combinations or alliances and
established companies in other market segments expand into our market segments. in addition, new and enhanced technologies, including search, web services, and digital, may increase our competition. the internet facilitates competitive entry and
comparison shopping and renders e-commerce inherently more competitive than other retail. increased competition may reduce our sales and profits.  our expansion places a significant strain on our management, operational, financial and other resources  we are
rapidly and significantly expanding our global operations, including increasing our product and service offerings and scaling our infrastructure to support our retail and services businesses. this expansion increases the complexity of our business
and places significant strain on our management, personnel, operations, systems, technical performance, financial resources, and internal financial control and reporting functions. we may not be able to manage growth effectively, which could damage
our reputation, limit our growth and negatively affect our operating results.  our expansion into new products, services,
technologies and geographic regions subjects us to additional business, legal, financial and competitive risks  we may have limited
or no experience in our newer market segments, and our customers may not adopt our new product or service offerings, which include seller services, digital, web services and electronic devices. these offerings may present new and difficult
technology challenges, and we may be subject to claims if customers of these offerings experience service disruptions or failures or other quality issues. in addition, our gross profits in our newer activities may be lower than in our older
activities, and we may not be successful enough in these newer activities to recoup our investments in them. if any of this were to occur, it could damage our reputation, limit our growth and negatively affect our operating results.  we may experience significant fluctuations in our operating results and growth rate  we may not be able to accurately forecast our growth rate. we base our expense levels and investment plans on sales estimates. a significant portion of
our expenses and investments is fixed, and we may not be able to adjust our spending quickly enough if our sales are less than expected.  our revenue growth may not be sustainable, and our percentage growth rates may decrease. our revenue and operating profit growth depends on the continued growth of demand for the products and services offered by us or our sellers, and our
business is affected by general economic and business conditions worldwide. a softening of demand, whether caused by changes in customer preferences or a weakening of the u.s. or global economies, may result in decreased revenue or growth.
our net sales and operating results will also fluctuate for many other reasons, including due to risks described elsewhere in this section
and the following:
our ability to retain and increase sales to existing customers, attract new customers, and satisfy our customers demands;
our ability to expand our network of sellers;
our ability to acquire merchandise, manage inventory, and fulfill orders;
the introduction of competitive websites, products, services, price decreases, or improvements;
changes in usage of the internet and e-commerce, including in non-u.s. markets;
timing, effectiveness, and costs of expansion and upgrades of our systems and infrastructure;
the success of our geographic, service and product line expansions;
table of contents
the outcomes of legal proceedings and claims;
variations in the mix of products and services we sell;
variations in our level of merchandise and vendor returns;
the extent to which we offer free shipping, continue to reduce product prices worldwide, and provide additional benefits to our customers;
the extent to which we invest in technology and content, fulfillment and other expense categories;
increases in the prices of fuel and gasoline, as well as increases in the prices of other energy products and commodities like paper and packing supplies;
the extent to which operators of the networks between our customers and our websites successfully charge fees to grant our customers unimpaired and unconstrained
access to our online services;
our ability to collect amounts owed to us when they become due;
the extent to which use of our services is affected by spyware, viruses, phishing and other spam emails, denial of service attacks, data
theft, computer intrusions and similar events; and
terrorist attacks and armed hostilities.  we may not be successful in our efforts to expand into international market segments  our international activities
are significant to our revenues and profits, and we plan to further expand internationally. we have relatively little experience operating in these or future market segments and may not benefit from any first-to-market advantages or otherwise
succeed. it is costly to establish, develop and maintain international operations and websites and promote our brand internationally. our international operations may not be profitable on a sustained basis.  in addition to risks described elsewhere in this section, our international sales and operations are subject to a number of risks, including:
local economic and political conditions;
government regulation of e-commerce or other online services and restrictive governmental actions (such as trade protection measures, including export duties and
quotas and custom duties and tariffs), nationalization and restrictions on foreign ownership;
restrictions on sales or distribution of certain products or services and uncertainty regarding liability for products, services and content, including uncertainty
as a result of less internet-friendly legal systems, local laws, lack of legal precedent, and varying rules, regulations, and practices regarding the distribution of media products and enforcement of intellectual property rights;
import, export, or other business licensing requirements;
limitations on the repatriation and investment of funds and foreign currency exchange restrictions;
limited fulfillment and technology infrastructure;
shorter payable and longer receivable cycles and the resultant negative impact on cash flow;
laws and regulations regarding consumer and data protection, privacy, network security, encryption, and restrictions on pricing or discounts;
lower levels of use of the internet;
lower levels of consumer spending and fewer opportunities for growth compared to the u.s.;
lower levels of credit card usage and increased payment risk;
table of contents
difficulty in staffing, developing and managing foreign operations as a result of distance, language and cultural differences;
different employee/employer relationships and the existence of workers councils and labor unions;
laws and policies of the u.s. and other jurisdictions affecting trade, foreign investment, loans and taxes; and
geopolitical events, including war and terrorism.  as the international e-commerce channel grows, competition will intensify. local companies may have a substantial competitive advantage because of their greater understanding of, and focus on, the local customer, as
well as their more established local brand names. we may not be able to hire, train, retain, and manage required personnel, which may limit our international growth.  in 2004, we acquired joyo.com limited, which is organized under the laws of the british virgin islands and through a peoples republic of china (prc) entity, provides technology and services for the
joyo amazon websites at www.joyo.cn and www.amazon.cn. the prc regulates joyo amazons business through regulations and license requirements restricting (i)foreign investment in the internet, retail and delivery sectors,
(ii)internet content and (iii)the sale of media products. in order to meet local ownership and regulatory licensing requirements, joyo amazons business is operated by prc companies owned by nominee shareholders who are prc
nationals. although we believe joyo amazons structure complies with existing prc laws, it involves unique risks. there are substantial uncertainties regarding the interpretation of prc laws and regulations, and it is possible that the prc
government will ultimately take a view contrary to ours. if joyo amazon (including its subsidiary and affiliates) were found to be in violation of any existing or future prc laws or regulations or if interpretations of those laws and regulations
were to change, the business could be subject to fines and other financial penalties, have its licenses revoked or be forced to shut down entirely. in addition, if joyo amazon were unable to enforce its contractual relationships with respect to
management and control of its business, it might be unable to continue to operate the business.  if we do not successfully optimize
and operate our fulfillment centers, our business could be harmed  if we do not successfully operate our fulfillment centers, it
could significantly limit our ability to meet customer demand. because it is difficult to predict demand, we may not manage our facilities in an optimal way, which may result in excess or insufficient inventory or warehousing, fulfillment, and
distribution capacity. a failure to optimize inventory will increase our net shipping cost by requiring long-zone or partial shipments. orders from several of our websites are fulfilled primarily from a single location, and we have only a limited
ability to reroute orders to third parties for drop-shipping. we and our co-sourcers may be unable to adequately staff our fulfillment and customer service centers. as we continue to add fulfillment and warehouse capability or add new businesses
with different fulfillment requirements, our fulfillment network becomes increasingly complex and operating it becomes more challenging. if the other businesses on whose behalf we perform inventory fulfillment services deliver product to our
fulfillment centers in excess of forecasts, we may be unable to secure sufficient storage space and may be unable to optimize our fulfillment centers. there can be no assurance that we will be able to operate our network effectively.  we rely on a limited number of shipping companies to deliver inventory to us and completed orders to our customers. if we are not able to negotiate
acceptable terms with these companies or they experience performance problems or other difficulties, it could negatively impact our operating results and customer experience. in addition, our ability to receive inbound inventory efficiently and ship
completed orders to customers also may be negatively affected by inclement weather, fire, flood, power loss, earthquakes, labor disputes, acts of war or terrorism, acts of god and similar factors.  third parties either drop-ship or otherwise fulfill an increasing portion of our customers orders, and we are increasingly reliant on the
reliability, quality and future procurement of their services. under some of our
table of contents
commercial agreements, we maintain the inventory of other companies, thereby increasing the complexity of tracking inventory and operating our fulfillment
centers. our failure to properly handle such inventory or the inability of these other companies to accurately forecast product demand would result in unexpected costs and other harm to our business and reputation.  the seasonality of our business places increased strain on our operations  we expect a disproportionate amount of our net sales to occur during our fourth quarter. if we do not stock or restock popular products in sufficient
amounts such that we fail to meet customer demand, it could significantly affect our revenue and our future growth. if we overstock products, we may be required to take significant inventory markdowns or write-offs, which could reduce gross profits.
we may experience an increase in our net shipping cost due to complimentary upgrades, split-shipments, and additional long-zone shipments necessary to ensure timely delivery for the holiday season. if too many customers access our websites within a
short period of time due to increased holiday demand, we may experience system interruptions that make our websites unavailable or prevent us from efficiently fulfilling orders, which may reduce the volume of goods we sell and the attractiveness of
our products and services. in addition, we may be unable to adequately staff our fulfillment and customer service centers during these peak periods and delivery and other fulfillment companies and customer service co-sourcers may be unable to meet
the seasonal demand. we also face risks described elsewhere in this item1a relating to fulfillment center optimization and inventory.  we generally have payment terms with our vendors that extend beyond the amount of time necessary to collect proceeds from our customers. as a result of holiday sales, at december31 of each year, our cash, cash equivalents, and
marketable securities balances typically reach their highest level (other than as a result of cash flows provided by or used in investing and financing activities). this operating cycle results in a corresponding increase in accounts payable at
december31. our accounts payable balance generally declines during the first three months of the year, resulting in a corresponding decline in our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities balances.  our business could suffer if we are unsuccessful in making, integrating, and maintaining commercial agreements, strategic alliances, and other
business relationships  we provide e-commerce services to other businesses, such as through our marketplace programs, amazon
enterprise solutions, website by amazon and fulfillment by amazon program initiatives, as well as other commercial agreements, strategic alliances and business relationships. under these agreements, we provide technology, fulfillment and other
services, as well as enable sellers to offer products or services through our websites and power their websites. these arrangements are complex and require substantial personnel and resource commitments by us, which may limit the agreements we are
able to enter into and our ability to integrate and deliver services under them. if we fail to implement, maintain, and develop the components of these commercial relationships, which may include fulfillment, customer service, inventory management,
tax collection, payment processing, licensing of third-party software, hardware, and content, and engaging third parties to perform hosting and other services, these initiatives may not be viable. the amount of compensation we receive under certain
of these agreements is partially dependent on the volume of the other companys sales. therefore, if the other companys offering is not successful, the compensation we receive may be lower than expected or the agreement may be terminated.
moreover, we may not be able to enter into additional commercial relationships and strategic alliances on favorable terms. we also may be subject to claims from businesses to which we provide these services if we are unsuccessful in implementing,
maintaining or developing these services.  as our commercial agreements terminate, we may be unable to renew or replace these agreements on
comparable terms, or at all. some of our agreements involve high margin services, such as marketing and promotional agreements, and as they expire they may be replaced, if at all, by agreements involving lower margin services. we may in the future
enter into amendments on less favorable terms or encounter parties that have difficulty meeting their contractual obligations to us, which could adversely affect our operating results.
table of contents
our present and future e-commerce services agreements, other commercial agreements, and strategic
alliances create additional risks such as:
disruption of our ongoing business, including loss of management focus on existing businesses;
impairment of other relationships;
variability in revenue and income from entering into, amending, or terminating such agreements or relationships; and
difficulty integrating under the commercial agreements.  our business could suffer if we are unsuccessful in making, integrating, and maintaining acquisitions and investments  we have acquired and invested in a number of companies, and we may acquire or invest in or enter into joint ventures with additional companies. these transactions create risks such as:
disruption of our ongoing business, including loss of management focus on existing businesses;
problems retaining key personnel;
additional operating losses and expenses of the businesses we acquired or in which we invested;
the potential impairment of amounts capitalized as intangible assets as part of the acquisition;
the potential impairment of customer and other relationships of the company we acquired or in which we invested or our own customers as a result of any integration
of operations;
the difficulty of incorporating acquired technology and rights into our offerings and unanticipated expenses related to such integration;
the difficulty of integrating a new companys accounting, financial reporting, management, information, human resource and other administrative systems to
permit effective management, and the lack of control if such integration is delayed or not implemented;
the difficulty of implementing at companies we acquire the controls, procedures and policies appropriate for a larger public company;
potential unknown liabilities associated with a company we acquire or in which we invest; and
for foreign transactions, additional risks related to the integration of operations across different cultures and languages, and the economic, political, and
regulatory risks associated with specific countries.  finally, as a result of future acquisitions or mergers, we might
need to issue additional equity securities, spend our cash, or incur debt, contingent liabilities, or amortization expenses related to intangible assets, any of which could reduce our profitability and harm our business.  we have foreign exchange risk  the results of operations of, and certain of our intercompany balances associated with, our international websites are exposed to foreign exchange rate fluctuations. upon translation, operating results may differ materially from
expectations, and we may record significant gains or losses on the remeasurement of intercompany balances. as we have expanded our international operations, our exposure to exchange rate fluctuations has increased.  in addition, our 6.875% premium adjustable convertible securities due 2010 (6.875% peacs) are denominated in euros and increases in the euro
relative to the u.s.dollar increase the u.s.dollar amount we owe as interest and principal on the 6.875% peacs. we also hold cash equivalents and/or marketable securities primarily in euros, british pounds, and japanese yen. if the
u.s.dollar strengthens compared to these currencies, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, when translated, may be materially less than expected and vice versa.
table of contents
the loss of key senior management personnel could negatively affect our business
we depend on our senior management and other key personnel, particularly jeffrey p. bezos, our president, ceo, and chairman. we do
not have key person life insurance policies. the loss of any of our executive officers or other key employees could harm our business.  system interruption and the lack of integration and redundancy in our systems may affect our sales  customer access
to our websites and the speed with which a customer navigates and makes purchases on our websites affect our net sales, operating results and the attractiveness of our products and services. we experience occasional system interruptions and delays
that make our websites unavailable or slow to respond and prevent us from efficiently fulfilling orders or providing services to third parties, which may reduce our net sales and the attractiveness of our products and services. if we are unable to
continually add software and hardware, effectively upgrade our systems and network infrastructure and take other steps to improve the efficiency of our systems, it could cause system interruptions or delays and adversely affect our operating
results.  our computer and communications systems and operations could be damaged or interrupted by fire, flood, power loss,
telecommunications failure, earthquakes, acts of war or terrorism, acts of god, computer viruses, physical or electronic break-ins, and similar events or disruptions. any of these events could cause system interruption, delays, and loss of critical
data, and could prevent us from accepting and fulfilling customer orders and providing services, which would make our product and service offerings less attractive. our systems are not fully redundant and our disaster recovery planning may not be
sufficient. in addition, we may have inadequate insurance coverage to compensate us for any related losses. any of these events could damage our reputation and be expensive to remedy.  we have significant indebtedness  we have significant debt and may incur substantial additional debt in the future. a significant portion of our future cash flow from operating activities may be dedicated to the payment of interest and the repayment of principal on our
indebtedness. there is no guarantee that we will be able to meet our debt service obligations. if we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow or obtain funds for required payments, or if we fail to comply with our debt covenants, we will be in
default. in addition, we may not be able to refinance our debt on terms acceptable to us, or at all. our indebtedness could limit our ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, debt service requirements,
acquisitions or other purposes in the future, as needed; to plan for, or react to, changes in technology and in our business and competition; and to react in the event of an economic downturn.  we face significant inventory risk  in addition to risks described elsewhere in this item1a relating to fulfillment center and inventory optimization by us and third parties, we are exposed to significant inventory risks that may adversely effect our operating results
as a result of seasonality, new product launches, rapid changes in product cycles, changes in consumer tastes with respect to our products and other factors. we must accurately predict these trends and avoid overstocking or under-stocking products
we manufacture and/or sell. demand for products, however, can change significantly between the time inventory or components are ordered and the date of sale. in addition, when we begin selling or manufacturing a new product, it may be difficult to
establish vendor relationships, determine appropriate product or component selection, and accurately forecast demand. the acquisition of certain types of inventory or components may require significant lead-time and prepayment and they may not be
returnable. we carry a broad selection and significant inventory levels of certain products, such as consumer electronics, and we may be unable to sell products in sufficient quantities or during the relevant selling seasons. any one of the
inventory risk factors set forth above may adversely affect our operating results.
table of contents
we may not be able to adequately protect our intellectual property rights or may be accused of
infringing intellectual property rights of third parties  we regard our trademarks, service marks, copyrights, patents, trade dress,
trade secrets, proprietary technology, and similar intellectual property as critical to our success, and we rely on trademark, copyright, and patent law, trade secret protection, and confidentiality and/or license agreements with our employees,
customers, and others to protect our proprietary rights. effective intellectual property protection may not be available in every country in which our products and services are made available. we also may not be able to acquire or maintain
appropriate domain names in all countries in which we do business. furthermore, regulations governing domain names may not protect our trademarks and similar proprietary rights. we may be unable to prevent third parties from acquiring domain names
that are similar to, infringe upon, or diminish the value of our trademarks and other proprietary rights.  we may not be able to discover
or determine the extent of any unauthorized use of our proprietary rights. third parties that license our proprietary rights also may take actions that diminish the value of our proprietary rights or reputation. the protection of our intellectual
property may require the expenditure of significant financial and managerial resources. moreover, the steps we take to protect our intellectual property may not adequately protect our rights or prevent third parties from infringing or
misappropriating our proprietary rights. we also cannot be certain that others will not independently develop or otherwise acquire equivalent or superior technology or other intellectual property rights.  other parties also may claim that we infringe their proprietary rights. we have been subject to, and expect to continue to be subject to, claims and
legal proceedings regarding alleged infringement by us of the intellectual property rights of third parties. the ready availability of damages, royalties and the potential for injunctive relief has increased the costs associated with the litigation
and settlement of patent infringement claims, especially those asserted by third parties whose sole or primary business is to assert such claims. such claims, whether or not meritorious, may result in the expenditure of significant financial and
managerial resources, injunctions against us or the payment of damages. we may need to obtain licenses from third parties who allege that we have infringed their rights, but such licenses may not be available on terms acceptable to us or at all. in
addition, we may not be able to obtain or utilize on terms that are favorable to us, or at all, licenses or other rights with respect to intellectual property we do not own in providing e-commerce services to other businesses and individuals under
commercial agreements.  our digital content offerings depend in part on effective digital rights management technology to control access to
digital content. if the digital rights management technology that we use is compromised or otherwise malfunctions, we could be subject to claims, and content providers may be unwilling to include their content in our service.  we have a rapidly evolving business model and our stock price is highly volatile  we have a rapidly evolving business model. the trading price of our common stock fluctuates significantly in response to, among other risks, the risks
described elsewhere in this item1a, as well as:
changes in interest rates;
conditions or trends in the internet and the e-commerce industry;
quarterly variations in operating results;
fluctuations in the stock market in general and market prices for internet-related companies in particular;
changes in financial estimates by us or securities analysts and recommendations by securities analysts;
changes in our capital structure, including issuance of additional debt or equity to the public;
table of contents
changes in the valuation methodology of, or performance by, other e-commerce companies; and
transactions in our common stock by major investors and certain analyst reports, news, and speculation.  volatility in our stock price could adversely affect our business and financing opportunities and force us to increase our cash compensation to employees
or grant larger stock awards than we have historically, which could hurt our operating results or reduce the percentage ownership of our existing stockholders, or both.  government regulation of the internet and e-commerce is evolving and unfavorable changes could harm our business  we are subject to general business regulations and laws, as well as regulations and laws specifically governing the internet and e-commerce. existing and future laws and regulations may impede the growth of the
internet or online services. these regulations and laws may cover taxation, privacy, data protection, pricing, content, copyrights, distribution, mobile communications, electronic contracts and other communications, consumer protection, the
provision of online payment services, unencumbered internet access to our services, the design and operation of websites, and the characteristics and quality of products and services. it is not clear how existing laws governing issues such as
property ownership, libel, and personal privacy apply to the internet and e-commerce. jurisdictions may regulate consumer-to-consumer online businesses, including certain aspects of our seller programs. unfavorable regulations and laws could
diminish the demand for our products and services and increase our cost of doing business.  taxation risks could subject us to
liability for past sales and cause our future sales to decrease  we do not collect sales or other taxes on shipments of most of our
goods into most states in the u.s. under some of our commercial agreements, the other company is the seller of record, and we are obligated to collect sales tax in accordance with that companys instructions. we may enter into additional
agreements requiring similar tax collection obligations. our fulfillment center and customer service center networks, and any future expansion of them, along with other aspects of our evolving business, may result in additional sales and other tax
obligations. we collect consumption tax (including value added tax, goods and services tax, and provincial sales tax) as applicable on goods and services sold by us that are ordered on our international sites. one or more states or foreign countries
may seek to impose sales or other tax collection obligations on out-of-jurisdiction e-commerce companies. a successful assertion by one or more states or foreign countries that we should collect sales or other taxes on the sale of merchandise or
services could result in substantial tax liabilities for past sales, decrease our ability to compete with traditional retailers, and otherwise harm our business.  currently, u.s. supreme court decisions restrict the imposition of obligations to collect state and local sales and use taxes with respect to sales made over the internet. however, a number of states, as well as the
u.s. congress, have been considering initiatives that could limit or supersede the supreme courts position regarding sales and use taxes on internet sales. if any of these initiatives were successful, we could be required to collect sales and
use taxes in additional states. the imposition by state and local governments of various taxes upon internet commerce could create administrative burdens for us, put us at a competitive disadvantage if they do not impose similar obligations on all
of our online competitors and decrease our future sales.  we could be subject to additional income tax liabilities
we are subject to income taxes in the united states and numerous foreign jurisdictions. significant judgment is required in
evaluating our worldwide provision for income taxes. during the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. for example, our effective tax rates could be adversely affected by
earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory rates and higher than anticipated in countries where we have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities, or by
changes in the relevant tax, accounting and other laws, regulations, principles and interpretations. we are subject to audit in various jurisdictions, and
table of contents
such jurisdictions may assess additional income tax against us. although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the final determination of tax audits
and any related litigation could be materially different from our historical income tax provisions and accruals. the results of an audit or litigation could have a material effect on our operating results or cash flows in the period or periods for
which that determination is made.  our vendor relationships subject us to a number of risks  we have significant vendors that are important to our sourcing, manufacturing and any related ongoing servicing of merchandise and content. we do not have
long-term arrangements with most of our vendors to guarantee availability of merchandise, content, components or services, particular payment terms, or the extension of credit limits. if our current vendors were to stop selling merchandise, content,
components or services to us on acceptable terms, we may be unable to procure from other vendors in a timely and efficient manner and on acceptable terms, or at all.  we may be subject to product liability claims if people or property are harmed by the products we sell  some of the products we sell or manufacture may expose us to product liability claims relating to personal injury, death, or property damage, and may require product recalls or other actions. certain third parties also sell products using
our e-commerce platform that may increase our exposure to product liability claims, such as if these sellers do not have sufficient protection from such claims. although we maintain liability insurance, we cannot be certain that our coverage will be
adequate for liabilities actually incurred or that insurance will continue to be available to us on economically reasonable terms, or at all. in addition, some of our agreements with our vendors and sellers do not indemnify us from product
liability.  we are subject to payments-related risks  we accept payments using a variety of methods, including credit card, debit card, credit accounts (including promotional financing), gift certificates,
direct debit from a customers bank account, physical bank check and payment upon delivery. as we offer new payment options to our customers, we may be subject to additional regulations, compliance requirements, and fraud. for certain payment
methods, including credit and debit cards, we pay interchange and other fees, which may increase over time and raise our operating costs and lower our profit margins. we rely on third parties to provide payment processing services, including the
processing of credit cards, debit cards, electronic checks, and promotional financing, and it could disrupt our business if these companies become unwilling or unable to provide these services to us. we are also subject to payment card association
operating rules, certification requirements and rules governing electronic funds transfers, which could change or be reinterpreted to make it difficult or impossible for us to comply. if we fail to comply with these rules or requirements, we may be
subject to fines and higher transaction fees and lose our ability to accept credit and debit card payments from our customers, process electronic funds transfers, or facilitate other types of online payments, and our business and operating results
could be adversely affected. we also offer co-branded credit card programs that represent a significant component of our services revenue and generate high margins. if one or more of these agreements are terminated and we are unable to replace them
on similar terms, or at all, it could adversely affect our operating results.  in addition, we qualify as a money services business in
certain jurisdictions because we enable customers to keep account balances with us and transfer money to third parties, and because we provide services to third parties to facilitate payments on their behalf. in these jurisdictions, we may be
subject to requirements for licensing, regulatory inspection, bonding, the handling of transferred funds and consumer disclosures. we are also subject to or voluntarily comply with a number of other laws and regulations relating to money laundering,
international money transfers, privacy and information security and electronic fund transfers. if we were found to be in violation of applicable laws or regulations, we could be subject to civil and criminal penalties or forced to cease our payments
services business.
table of contents
we could be liable for breaches of security on our websites  although we have developed systems and processes that are designed to protect consumer information and prevent fraudulent payment transactions and other
security breaches, failure to prevent or mitigate such fraud or breaches may adversely affect our operating results.  we could be
liable for fraudulent or unlawful activities of sellers  the law relating to the liability of providers of online payment services
is currently unsettled. in addition, governmental agencies could require changes in the way this business is conducted. under our seller programs, we may be unable to prevent sellers from collecting payments,fraudulently or otherwise, when
buyers never receive the products they ordered or when the products received are materially different from the sellers descriptions. under our a2z guarantee, we reimburse buyers for payments up to certain limits in these situations, and as our
marketplace seller sales grow, the cost of this program will increase and could negatively affect our operating results. we also may be unable to prevent sellers on our sites or through amazon enterprise solutions, and certain other programs, from
selling unlawful goods, from selling goods in an unlawful manner, or violating the proprietary rights of others, and could face civil or criminal liability for unlawful activities by our sellers.  item1b.
unresolved staff comments  none.  item2.
properties  we do not own any real estate. as of december31, 2007, we operated the following
facilities:
description of use
squarefootage(1)
operatingsegments
leaseexpirations(1)(2)
(inthousands)
corporate office facilities
1,266
northamerica
from2008through2017
corporate office facilities
international
from 2008through 2016
sub-total
1,691
fulfillment and warehouse operations (3)
8,905
north america
from 2008through 2018
fulfillment and warehouse operations
4,729
international
from 2008through 2025
sub-total
13,634
customer service and other
north america
from 2008through 2021
customer service and other
international
from 2008through 2016
sub-total
total
15,837
(1)
represents the total leased space excluding sub-leased space.
(2)
most leases expiring in 2008 have renewal features at our option.
(3)
excludes a facility operated under an outsourced arrangement in canada.
table of contents
we lease our corporate headquarters in seattle, washington. we also lease additional corporate office,
fulfillment and warehouse operations, customer service, and other facilities throughout the united states, principally in arizona, california, delaware, florida, indiana, kansas, kentucky, michigan, nevada, new hampshire, north dakota, pennsylvania,
south carolina, texas, virginia, washington, west virginia, and wisconsin. outside of the united states, we also lease corporate office, fulfillment and warehouse operations, customer service, and other facilities, principally in china, france,
germany, india, ireland, japan, luxembourg, and the united kingdom.  we believe our properties are suitable and adequate for our present
needs, and we periodically evaluate whether additional facilities are necessary.  item3.
legal proceedings  see item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary
datanote 6commitments and contingencieslegal proceedings.  item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders  no matters were submitted for a vote of our
shareholders during the fourth quarter of 2007.
table of contents
part ii  item5.
market for the registrants common stock, related shareholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities  market information  our common stock is traded on the nasdaq global select market under the symbol
amzn. the following table sets forth the high and low closing prices for our common stock for the periods indicated, as reported by the nasdaq global select market.
high
low
year ended december 31, 2006
first quarter
$
47.87
$
35.25
second quarter
38.68
31.61
third quarter
38.61
26.07
fourth quarter
42.96
30.87
year ended december 31, 2007
first quarter
$
41.51
$
36.43
second quarter
73.65
40.42
third quarter
93.48
68.73
fourth quarter
100.82
77.00
holders  as of february1, 2008, there were 3,587 shareholders of record of our common stock, although there are a much larger number of beneficial owners.  dividends  we have never declared or
paid cash dividends on our common stock. see item7 of part ii, managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsliquidity and capital resources.  recent sales of unregistered securities  none.  issuer purchases of equity securities  none.
table of contents
item6.
selected consolidated financial data   the following selected consolidated financial data should be
read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto in item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary data, and the information contained in item7 of part ii, managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. historical results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
year ended december31,
(in millions, except per share data)
income statement:
net sales
$
14,835
$
10,711
$
8,490
$
6,921
$
5,264
income from operations
income before change in accounting principle
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
net income
basic earnings per share (1):
prior to cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
$
1.15
$
0.46
$
0.81
$
1.45
$
0.09
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
0.06
basic earnings per share (1)
$
1.15
$
0.46
$
0.87
$
1.45
$
0.09
diluted earnings per share (1):
prior to cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
$
1.12
$
0.45
$
0.78
$
1.39
$
0.08
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
0.06
diluted earnings per share (1)
$
1.12
$
0.45
$
0.84
$
1.39
$
0.08
weighted average shares used in computation of earnings per share:
basic
diluted
cash flow statement:
net cash provided by operating activities
$
1,405
$
$
$
$
purchases of fixed assets, including internal-use software and website development
(224
)
(216
)
(204
)
(89
)
(46
)
free cash flow (2)
$
1,181
$
$
$
$
december31,
(in millions)
balance sheet:
total assets
$
6,485
$
4,363
$
3,696
$
3,248
$
2,162
long-term debt
1,282
1,247
1,480
1,835
1,919
(1)
for further discussion of earnings per share, see item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary datanote 1description of business and accounting
policies.
(2)
free cash flow, a non-gaap financial measure, is defined as net cash provided by operating activities less purchases of fixed assets, including capitalized internal-use software and
website development, both of which are presented on our consolidated statements of cash flows. see item7 of part ii, managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsresults of
operationsnon-gaap financial measures.
table of contents
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations   forward-looking
statements  this annual report on form 10-k includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995. all statements other than statements of historical fact, including statements regarding guidance, industry prospects or future results of operations or financial position, made in this annual report on form 10-k are
forward-looking. we use words such as anticipates, believes, expects, future, intends, and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. forward-looking statements reflect managements current expectations and are inherently
uncertain. actual results could differ materially for a variety of reasons, including, among others, fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, changes in global economic conditions and consumer spending, world events, the rate of growth of the
internet and online commerce, the amount that amazon.com invests in new business opportunities and the timing of those investments, the mix of products sold to customers, the mix of net sales derived from products as compared with services, the
extent to which we owe income taxes, competition, management of growth, potential fluctuations in operating results, international growth and expansion, outcomes of legal proceedings and claims, fulfillment center optimization, risks of inventory
management, seasonality, the degree to which the company enters into, maintains, and develops commercial agreements, acquisitions, and strategic transactions, payments risks, and risks of fulfillment throughput and productivity. these risks and
uncertainties, as well as other risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ significantly from managements expectations, are described in greater detail in item1a of part i, risk factors, which,
along with the previous discussion, describes some, but not all, of the factors that could cause actual results to differ significantly from managements expectations.  overview  our primary source of revenue is the sale of a wide range of products and services to
customers. the products offered on our customer-facing websites primarily include merchandise and content we have purchased for resale from vendors and products offered by marketplace sellers. generally, we recognize gross revenue from items we
sell from our inventory and recognize our net share of revenue of items sold by other sellers. we also offer services such as amazon web services, amazon enterprise solutions, co-branded credit cards, fulfillment, and miscellaneous marketing and
promotional offers.  our financial focus is on long-term, sustainable growth in
free cash flow1 per share. free cash flow is driven primarily by increasing operating income and efficiently managing working capital and capital expenditures. increases in operating income primarily result from increases in sales
through our websites and efficiently managing our operating costs, offset by investments we make in longer-term strategic initiatives, which generally require us to hire additional software engineers, computer scientists, and merchandisers. to
increase product sales, we focus on improving all aspects of the customer experience, including lowering prices, improving availability, offering faster delivery times, increasing selection, increasing product categories, expanding product
information, improving ease of use, and earning customer trust. we generally focus on growing gross profit and operating profit dollars rather than maximizing margin percentages.  we also seek to efficiently manage shareholder dilution while maintaining the flexibility to issue shares for strategic purposes, such as financings and
aligning employee compensation with shareholders interests. we utilize restricted stock units as our primary vehicle for equity compensation because we believe they alignthe interests of our shareholders and employees. in managing
shareholder dilution, we include all stock awards outstanding, without regard to estimated forfeitures, consisting of vested and unvested awards and in-the-money
free cash flow, a non-gaap financial measure, is defined as net cash provided by operating activities less purchases of
fixed assets, including capitalized internal-use software and website development, both of which are presented on our consolidated statements of cash flows. see results of operationsnon-gaap financial measures below.
table of contents
and out-of-the-money stock options. total shares outstanding plus outstanding stock awards were 435million and 436million at december31,
2007 and 2006. these amounts exclude 14million shares issuable upon conversion of our long-term debt. in 2007, we repurchased 6million shares of our common stock under a repurchase program authorized by our board of directors.
we seek to reduce our variable costs per unit and work to leverage our fixed costs. our variable costs include product and content
costs, payment processing and related transaction costs, picking, packaging, and preparing orders for shipment, transportation, customer service support, and most aspects of our marketing costs. our fixed costs include the costs necessary to run our
technology infrastructure, build, enhance, and add features to our websites and build and optimize our fulfillment centers. variable costs generally change directly with sales volume, while fixed costs generally increase depending on the timing of
capacity needs, geographic expansion, category expansion, and other factors. to decrease our variable costs on a per unit basis and enable us to lower prices for customers, we seek to increase our direct to publisher and manufacturer sourcing,
maximize discounts available to us from suppliers and reduce defects in our processes. to minimize growth in fixed costs, we seek to improve process efficiencies and maintain a lean culture.  because of our model we are able to turn our inventory quickly and have a cash-generating
operating cycle2. on average, our high inventory velocity means we generally collect from our customers before our payments to suppliers come due. inventory turnover3 was 13, 13, and 14 for 2007, 2006, and 2005.
inventory turnover has declined slightly over the last several years, primarily due to category expansion and changes in product mix, and our continuing focus on in-stock inventory availability. we expect some variability in inventory turnover over
time since it is affected by several factors, including our product mix, the mix of sales by us and by other sellers, our continuing focus on in-stock inventory availability, our investment in new geographies and product lines, and the extent to
which we choose to utilize outsource fulfillment providers. accounts payable days4 were 57, 53, and 54 for 2007, 2006 and 2005. we expect some variability in accounts payable days over time since they are affected by several
factors, including the mix of product sales, the mix of sales by other sellers, the mix of suppliers, seasonality, and changes in payment terms over time, including the effect of balancing pricing and timing of payment terms with suppliers.
our spending in technology and content will increase as we add computer scientists, software engineers, and employees involved in
category expansion, editorial content, buying, merchandising selection, and systems support. we will continue to invest in several areas of technology and content, including seller platforms, web services, digital initiatives, and expansion of new
and existing product categories, as well as in technology infrastructure to enhance the customer experience, improve our process efficiencies and support our infrastructure web services. we believe that advances in technology, specifically the
speed and reduced cost of processing power, the improved customer experience of the internet outside of the workplace through lower-cost broadband service to the home, and the advances of wireless connectivity, will continue to improve the customer
experience on the internet and increase its ubiquity in peoples lives. amazon web services provides technology services that give developers access to technology infrastructure that they can use to enable virtually any type of business. our
challenge will be to continue to build and deploy innovative and efficient software that will best take advantage of continued advances in technology.  our financial reporting currency is the u.s.dollar and changes in exchange rates significantly affect our reported results and consolidated trends. for example, if the u.s.dollar weakens
year-over-year relative to currencies in our international locations, our consolidated net sales, gross profit, and operating expenses will be
the operating cycle is number of days of sales in inventory plus number of days of sales in accounts receivable minus
accounts payable days.
inventory turnover is the quotient of annualized cost of sales to average inventory over five quarters.
accounts payable days, calculated as the quotient of accounts payable to cost of sales, multiplied by the number of days
in the period.
table of contents
higher than if currencies had remained constant. likewise, if the u.s.dollar strengthens year-over-year relative to currencies in our international
locations, our consolidated net sales, gross profit, and operating expenses will be lower than if currencies had remained constant. we believe that our increasing diversification beyond the u.s. economy through our growing international businesses
benefits our shareholders over the long term. we also believe it is important to evaluate our operating results and growth rates before and after the effect of currency changes.  in addition, the remeasurement of our 6.875% peacs and intercompany balances can result in significant gains and charges associated with the effect of
movements in currency exchange rates. currency volatilities may continue, which may significantly impact (either positively or negatively) our reported results and consolidated trends and comparisons.  for additional information about each line item summarized above, refer to item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary
datanote 1description of business and accounting policies.  critical accounting judgments  the preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles of the united states (gaap) requires
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. the sec has
defined a companys critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the companys financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective
judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies and judgments addressed below. we also have other key accounting
policies, which involve the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are significant to understanding our results. for additional information, see item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary datanote
1description of business and accounting policies. although we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. actual results may differ significantly from these
estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions.  revenue recognition  we recognize revenue from product sales or services rendered when the following four revenue recognition criteria are met: persuasive evidence of an
arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or services have been rendered, the selling price is fixed or determinable, and collectibility is reasonably assured. additionally, revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables are divided into separate
units of accounting if the deliverables in the arrangement meet the following criteria: the delivered item has value to the customer on a standalone basis; there is objective and reliable evidence of the fair value of undelivered items; and delivery
of any undelivered item is probable.  we evaluate the criteria of emerging issues task force (eitf) issue no.99-19, reporting
revenue gross as a principal versus net as an agent, in determining whether it is appropriate to record the gross amount of product sales and related costs or the net amount earned as commissions. generally, when we are the primary party
obligated in a transaction, are subject to inventory risk, have latitude in establishing prices and selecting suppliers, or have several but not all of these indicators, revenue is recorded gross. if we are not primarily obligated and amounts earned
are determined using a percentage, a fixed-payment schedule, or a combination of the two, we generally record the net amounts as commissions earned.  product sales and shipping revenues, net of promotional discounts, rebates, and return allowances, are recorded when the products are shipped and title passes to customers. retail items sold to customers are made
pursuant to sales contracts that generally provide for transfer of both title and risk of loss upon our delivery to the
table of contents
carrier. return allowances, which reduce product revenue by our best estimate of expected product returns, are estimated using historical experience. revenue
from product sales and services rendered is recorded net of sales taxes. amounts paid in advance for subscription services, including amounts received for amazon prime and other membership programs, are deferred and recognized as revenue over the
subscription term. for our products with multiple elements, where a standalone value for each element cannot be established, we recognize the revenue and related cost over the estimated economic life of the product.  we periodically provide incentive offers to our customers to encourage purchases. such offers include current discount offers, such as percentage
discounts off current purchases, inducement offers, such as offers for future discounts subject to a minimum current purchase, and other similar offers. current discount offers, when accepted by our customers, are treated as a reduction to the
purchase price of the related transaction, while inducement offers, when accepted by our customers, are treated as a reduction to purchase price based on estimated future redemption rates. redemption rates are estimated using our historical
experience for similar inducement offers. current discount offers and inducement offers are classified as an offsetting amount in net sales.  commissions and per-unit fees received from sellers and similar amounts earned through amazon enterprise solutions are recognized when the item is sold by the seller and our collectibility is reasonably assured. when
we are responsible for fulfillment-related services, commissions are recognized when risk of loss and title transfer to the customer. we record an allowance for estimated refunds on such commissions using historical experience.  inventories  inventories, consisting
of products available for sale, are accounted for using the first-in first-out (fifo) method, and are valued at the lower of cost or market value. this valuation requires us to make judgments, based on currently-available information,
about the likely method of disposition, such as through sales to individual customers, returns to product vendors, or liquidations, and expected recoverable values of each disposition category. based on this evaluation, we adjust the carrying amount
of our inventories to lower of cost or market value.  we provide fulfillment-related services in connection with certain of our agreements.
in those arrangements, as well as other product sales by other sellers, the seller maintains ownership of the related products. as such, these amounts are not included in our consolidated balance sheets.  internal-use software and website development  included in fixed assets is the capitalized cost of internal-use software and website development, including software used to upgrade and enhance our websites and processes supporting our business. as required by statement of position (sop)
98-1, accounting for the costs of computer software developed or obtained for internal use, we capitalize costs incurred during the application development stage of internal-use software and amortize these costs over the estimated
useful life of two years. costs incurred related to design or maintenance of internal-use software are expensed as incurred.  currency
effect on intercompany balances  gains and losses arising from intercompany foreign currency transactions are included in net income.
stock-based compensation  we measure compensation cost for stock awards at fair value and recognize compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. the fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock units is determined
table of contents
based on the number of shares granted and the quoted price of our common stock. since we primarily issue restricted stock units to our employees, the
complexity of valuation issues for stock compensation is greatly reduced. the estimation of stock awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results or updated estimates differ from our current estimates, such
amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. we consider many factors when estimating expected forfeitures, including types of awards, employee class, and historical experience. actual results and future
estimates may differ substantially from our current estimates.  we utilize the accelerated method, rather than a straight-line method, for
recognizing compensation expense. under this method, over 50% of the compensation cost would be expensed in the first year of a four year vesting term. the accelerated method also adds a level of complexity in estimating forfeitures. if forfeited
early in the life of an award, the forfeited amount is much greater under an accelerated method than under a straight-line method.  income taxes  we are subject to income taxes in both the u.s. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. significant judgment is
required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. during the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. we establish
reserves for tax-related uncertainties based on estimates of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. these reserves for tax contingencies are established when we believe that certain positions might be challenged despite our
belief that our tax return positions are fully supportable. we adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the outcome of tax audit. the provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes
to reserves that are considered appropriate.  deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary differences between the
carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases and are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. the majority of our gross deferred tax assets relate to net operating loss
carryforwards that related to differences in stock-based compensation between the financial statements and our tax returns.  statement of
financial accounting standards (sfas) no.109, accounting for income taxes, requires that deferred tax assets be evaluated for future realization and reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe a portion will not be
realized. we consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our recent cumulative earnings experience and expectations of future taxable income by taxing jurisdiction, the
carry-forward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes, and other relevant factors. in accordance with the provisions of sfas no.109, we allocate our valuation allowance to current and long-term deferred tax assets on a pro-rata
basis.  if we determine that additional portions of our deferred tax assets are realizable the majority of the benefit will come from the
assets associated with the stock-based compensation that was not recognized in the financial statements but was claimed on the tax return. since this compensation did not originally run through our consolidated statements of operations, the benefit
generated will be recorded to stockholders equity.  effective january1, 2007, we adopted the provisions of fasb interpretation
(fin) no.48, accounting for uncertainty in income taxesan interpretation of fasb statement no.109. fin 48 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions accounted for in accordance with
sfas no.109. the first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related
appeals or litigation processes, if any. the second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount which is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement.we consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our
tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately anticipate actual outcomes.
table of contents
recent accounting pronouncements  in september 2006, the financial accounting standards board (fasb) issued sfasno.157, fair value measurements, which defines fair
value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. sfas no.157 is effective for fiscal years beginning after
november15, 2007, and interim periods within those fiscal years. we do not expect the adoption of sfas no.157 to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. the fasb may delay a portion of this standard.
in february 2007, the fasb issued sfasno.159, the fair value option for financial assets and financial liabilities. sfas
no.159 permits companies to choose to measure many financial instruments and certain other items at fair value. sfas no.159 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after november15, 2007. we do not
expect the adoption of sfas no. 159 to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.  in december 2007, the fasb issued
sfas no.141 (r), business combinations, and sfas no.160, noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial statements. sfas no.141 (r)requires an acquirer to measure the identifiable assets acquired, the
liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree at their fair values on the acquisition date, with goodwill being the excess value over the net identifiable assets acquired. sfas no.160 clarifies that a noncontrolling
interest in a subsidiary should be reported as equity in the consolidated financial statements. the calculation of earnings per share will continue to be based on income amounts attributable to the parent. sfas no.141 (r)and sfas
no.160 are effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after december15, 2008. early adoption is prohibited. we have not yet determined the effect on our consolidated financial statements, if any, upon adoption
of sfas no.141 (r)or sfas no.160.  liquidity and capital resources  cash flow information is as follows:
year ended december31,
(in millions)
cash provided by (used in):
operating activities
$
1,405
$
$
investing activities
(333
)
(778
)
financing activities
(400
)
(193
)
free cash flow, a non-gaap financial measure, was $1.18 billion for 2007, compared to $486 million
and $529 million for 2006 and 2005. see results of operationsnon-gaap financial measures below for a reconciliation of free cash flow to cash provided by operating activities. the increase in free cash flow in 2007 primarily
resulted from the increased growth rate of our revenue and gross profit relative to operating expenses. the decrease in free cash flow in 2006 was primarily driven by our increased expenditure in technology and content and excess tax benefits from
stock-based compensation deductions now classified as financing cash flows. free cash flow for 2005 included the effect of our payment of a $40 million patent litigation settlement. operating cash flows and free cash flows can be volatile and are
sensitive to many factors, including changes in working capital, and the timing and magnitude of capital expenditures. working capital at any specific point in time is subject to many variables, including seasonality, inventory management and
category expansion, the timing of cash receipts and payments, vendor payment terms, and fluctuations in foreign exchange rates.  our
principal sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from operations and our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities balances, which, at fair value, were $3.1 billion, $2.0 billion, and $2.0 billion at december31, 2007, 2006 and
2005. amounts held in foreign currencies were $1.2 billion, $623 million, and
table of contents
$905 million at december31, 2007, 2006, and 2005 and were primarily euros, british pounds, and japanese yen.  cash provided by operating activities was $1.4 billion, $702 million, and $733 million in 2007, 2006, and 2005. our operating cash flows result primarily
from cash received from our customers, from sellers, and from non-retail activities such as our co-branded credit card agreements, amazon enterprise solutions, and miscellaneous marketing and promotional agreements, offset by cash payments we make
for products and services, employee compensation (less amounts capitalized pursuant to sop 98-1 that are reflected as cash used in investing activities), payment processing and related transaction costs, operating leases, and interest payments on
our long-term debt obligations. cash received from customers, sellers, developers, and other activities generally corresponds to our net sales. because our customers primarily use credit cards to buy from us, our receivables from customers settle
quickly.  cash provided by (used in) investing activities corresponds with purchases, sales, and maturities of marketable securities, cash
outlays for acquisitions and intellectual property rights, and purchases of fixed assets, including internal-use software and website development costs. cash provided by (used in) investing activities was $42 million, $(333) million, and $(778)
million in 2007, 2006, and 2005, with the variability caused primarily by purchases, maturities, and sales of marketable securities. capital expenditures were $224 million, $216 million and $204 million in 2007, 2006 and 2005, with the sequential
increases primarily reflecting additional investments in technology infrastructure, fulfillment-related assets and the development of new features and product offerings on our websites. capital expenditures included $108 million, $108 million and
$79 million for internal-use software and website development during 2007, 2006 and 2005. stock-based compensation capitalized for internal-use software and website development costs does not affect cash flows. we made payments for the acquisition
of certain companies and intellectual property rights, resulting in cash payments, net of acquired cash, of $75 million, $32 million, and $24 million in 2007, 2006 and 2005 attributable to cash provided by investing activities.  cash provided by (used in) financing activities was $50 million, $(400) million, and $(193) million in 2007, 2006, and 2005. cash outflows from financing
activities result from repurchases of common stock, repayments of long-term debt, and payments on capital lease obligations. we repurchased 6million shares of common stock for $248 million in 2007, and 8million shares of common stock for
$252 million in 2006, under a $500 million repurchase program authorized by our board of directors in 2006. repayments on long-term debt and payments on capital lease obligations were $74 million, $383 million, and $270 million in 2007, 2006, and
2005. repayments on long-term debt include 250million and 200million of our 6.875% peacs for $300 million and $265 million in 2006 and 2005. see item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary
datanote4long-term debt. cash inflows from financing activities primarily result from proceeds from tax benefits relating to excess stock-based compensation deductions and exercises of employee stock options. sfas
no.123(r), accounting for stock based compensation, requires tax benefits relating to excess stock-based compensation deductions be presented as financing cash flows. cash inflows from tax benefits related to stock-based compensation
deductions were $257 million, $102 million and $7 million in 2007, 2006, and 2005. cash inflows from proceeds from exercise of employee stock options were $91 million, $35 million, and $59 million in 2007, 2006, and 2005. we expect cash proceeds
from exercises of stock options will decline over time as we continue issuing restricted stock units as our primary vehicle for stock-based awards.  in 2007, 2006 and 2005 we recorded net tax provisions of $184 million, $187 million, and $95 million. a majority of this provision is non-cash. we have current tax benefits and net operating losses relating to excess stock-based
compensation deductions that are being utilized to reduce our u.s. taxable income. as such, cash taxes paid were $24 million, $15 million, and $12 million for 2007, 2006, and 2005. we endeavor to optimize our global taxes on a cash basis, rather
than on a financial reporting basis.  in february 2008, our board of directors authorized a debt repurchase program, replacing our previous
debt repurchase authorization in its entirety, pursuant to which we may from time to time repurchase (through open
table of contents
market repurchases or private transactions), redeem, or otherwise retire up to all of our outstanding 4.75% convertible subordinated notes due 2009
(4.75% convertible subordinated notes) and 6.875% peacs. the outstanding principal of our 4.75% convertible subordinated notes as of this authorization was $899 million, and the outstanding principal amount of our 6.875% peacs was
240 million. in august 2006, our board of directors authorized a 24-month program to repurchase up to $500 million of our common stock, pursuant to which we repurchased $252 million and $248 million of our common stock in 2006 and 2007,
respectively. in april 2007, our board authorized a new 24-month program to repurchase up to $500 million of our common stock, which was replaced in february 2008 by a 24-month program to repurchase up to $1 billion of our common stock.
since our 6.875% peacs, which are due in 2010, are denominated in euros, our u.s.dollar equivalent interest payments and principal obligations
fluctuate with the euro to u.s.dollar exchange rate. as a result, any fluctuations in the exchange rate will have an effect on our interest expense and, to the extent we make principal payments, the amount of u.s.dollar equivalents
necessary for principal settlement. additionally, since our interest payable on our 6.875% peacs is due in euros, the balance of interest payable is subject to gains or losses on currency movements until the date of the interest payment. gains or
losses on the remeasurement of our euro-denominated interest payable are classified as other income (expense), net on our consolidated statements of operations.  on average, our high inventory velocity means we collect from our customers before our payments to suppliers come due. inventory turnover was 13, 13, and
14 for 2007, 2006, and 2005. inventory turnover has declined slightly over the last several years, primarily due to category expansion and changes in product mix, and our continuing focus on in-stock inventory availability, which enables faster
delivery of products to our customers. we expect some variability in inventory turnover over time as it is affected by several factors, including our product mix, the mix of sales by us and by other sellers, our continuing focus on in-stock
inventory availability, our investment in new geographies and product lines, and the extent to which we choose to utilize outsource fulfillment providers.  the following summarizes our principal contractual commitments as of december31, 2007:
thereafter
total
(in millions)
operating and capital commitments:
debt principal (1)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,299
debt interest (1)
capital leases, including interest
operating leases
other commitments (2)(3)
purchase obligations (4)
total commitments
$
$
1,178
$
$
$
$
$
3,560
(1)
at december31, 2007, the euro to u.s.dollar exchange rate was 1.459. due to changes in the euro/u.s. dollar exchange ratio, our remaining principal debt obligation under
the 6.875% peacs since issuance in february 2000 has increased by $114 million as of december31, 2007. the principal and interest commitments reflect the partial redemptions of the 6.875% peacs and 4.75% convertible subordinated notes.
(2)
includes the estimated timing and amounts of payments for rent, operating expenses, and tenant improvements associated with approximately 800,000 square feet of
corporate office space in seattle, washington. we also have the right to occupy up to an additional approximately 800,000 square feet subjectto a termination fee, estimated to be up to approximately $40 million, if we do not elect to occupy
this additional space. the amount of space available and our financial and other obligations under the lease agreements are affected by various factors, including government approvals and permits, interest rates, development costs and other expenses
and our exercise of certain rights under the lease agreements. see
table of contents
item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary datanote 6commitments and contingenciescommitments.
(3)
includes commitments to acquire intellectual property and unrecognized tax benefits under fin 48, but excludes $105 million of such unrecognized tax benefits for which we cannot
make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period of payment. see item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary datanote 12income taxes.
(4)
consists of legally-binding commitments to purchase inventory and significant non-inventory commitments.  in january 2008 we closed or entered into agreements, subject to regulatory approvals and other conditions, to acquire or invest in certain companies.
these acquisitions and investments result in aggregate cash payments of approximately $400 million, net of cash acquired.  pledged
securities  we are required to pledge or otherwise restrict a portion of our cash and marketable securities as collateral for standby
letters of credit, guarantees, debt, and real estate leases. we classify cash and marketable securities with use restrictions of twelve months or longer as non-current other assets on our consolidated balance sheets. the balance of
pledged securities at december31, 2007 consisted of $14 million in cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, and $197 million in other assets. the amount required to be pledged for certain real
estate lease agreements changes over the life of our leases based on our credit rating and changes in our market capitalization (common shares outstanding multiplied by the closing price of our common stock). information about collateral required to
be pledged under these agreements is as follows:
standbyandtradeletters of creditand guarantees
debt(1)
realestateleases(2)
total
(in millions)
balance at december31, 2006
$
$
$
$
net change in collateral pledged
(7
)
balance at december31, 2007
$
$
$
$
(1)
represents collateral for certain debt related to our international operations.
(2)
at december31, 2006, our market capitalization was $38.6 billion. the required amount of collateral to be pledged will increase by $5 million if our market capitalization is
equal to or below $18 billion and by an additional $6 million if our market capitalization is equal to or below $13 billion.  we believe that current cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities balances will be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating cash needs for at least the next 12 months. however, any projections of future cash needs and cash flows
are subject to substantial uncertainty. see item1a of part i, risk factors. we continually evaluate opportunities to sell additional equity or debt securities, obtain credit facilities, repurchase common stock, pay dividends, or
repurchase, refinance, or otherwise restructure our long-term debt for strategic reasons or to further strengthen our financial position. the sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities would likely be dilutive to our shareholders. in
addition, we will, from time to time, consider the acquisition of, or investment in, complementary businesses, products, services, and technologies, which might affect our liquidity requirements or cause us to issue additional equity or debt
securities. there can be no assurance that additional lines-of-credit or financing instruments will be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
table of contents
results of operations  we have organized our operations into two principal segments: north america and international. we present our segment information along the same lines that our chief executive reviews our operating results in
assessing performance and allocating resources.  net sales and gross profit  net sales information is as follows:
year ended december31,
(in millions)
net sales:
north america
$
8,095
$
5,869
$
4,711
international
6,740
4,842
3,779
consolidated
$
14,835
$
10,711
$
8,490
year-over-year percentage growth:
north america
%
%
%
international
consolidated
year-over-year percentage growth, excluding effect of exchange rates:
north america
%
%
%
international
consolidated
net sales mix:
north america
%
%
%
international
consolidated
%
%
%
revenue increased 39% in 2007, reflecting revenue growth in both our north america and
international segments. additionally, changes in currency exchange rates positively affected net sales by $399 million for 2007. for a discussion of the effect on revenue growth of exchange rates, see effect of exchange rates below.
the north america revenue growth rate was 38% in 2007. this revenue growth primarily reflects increased unit sales driven largely by our
continued efforts to reduce prices for our customers, including from our free shipping offers and amazon prime, a larger base of sales in faster growing categories such as electronics and other general merchandise, increased in-stock inventory
availability, and increased selection of product offerings.  the international revenue growth rate was 39% in 2007. this revenue growth
reflects increased unit sales driven largely by our continued efforts to reduce prices for our customers, including from our free shipping offers, a larger base of sales in faster growing categories such as electronics and other general merchandise,
increased in-stock inventory availability, and increased selection of product offerings. additionally, changes in currency exchange rates positively affected international net sales by $390 million in 2007.  we expect that, over time, our international segment will represent 50% or more of our consolidated net sales. additionally, as we continue to offer
increased selection, lower prices, and additional product lines within our electronics and other general merchandise category, we expect to see the relative mix of sales from this category increase. see supplemental information below.
table of contents
gross profit information is as follows:
year ended december31,
(in millions)
gross profit:
north america
$
2,031
$
1,525
$
1,267
international
1,322
consolidated
$
3,353
$
2,456
$
2,039
gross profit growth rate:
north america
%
%
%
international
consolidated
gross margin:
north america
25.1
%
26.0
%
26.9
%
international
19.6
19.2
20.4
consolidated
22.6
22.9
24.0
the increase in gross profit in absolute terms during 2007, compared to 2006 and 2005, corresponds
with increases in sales, offset by lower prices for customers including from free shipping offers and amazon prime. generally, our gross margins fluctuate based on several factors, including our product, service, and geographic mix of sales; sales
volumes by marketplace sellers; changes in vendor pricing, including the extent to which we receive discounts and allowances; lowering prices for customers, including from competitive pricing decisions; improvements in product sourcing and inventory
management; and the extent to which our customers accept our free shipping and amazon prime offers. such free shipping and amazon prime offers reduce shipping revenue and reduce our gross margins on retail sales. we view our shipping offers as an
effective worldwide marketing tool and intend to continue offering them indefinitely.  sales of products by marketplace sellers on our
websites represented 28% of unit sales in 2007, 2006, and 2005. since revenues from these sales are recorded as a net amount, they generally result in lower revenues but higher gross margin per unit. since we focus on profit dollars rather than
margins, we are largely neutral on whether an item is sold by us or by another seller .  gross profit growth is also affected by changes in
exchange ratessee effect of exchange rates below.  north america segment gross margins in 2007 decreased by 90 basis
points compared to 2006 resulting primarily from our efforts to continue reducing prices for our customers, including from our free shipping offers and amazon prime, and a larger percent of overall sales in lower margin categories such as
electronics.  north america segment gross margins in 2006 decreased by 92 basis points compared to 2005 resulting primarily from changes in
our revenue mix, as revenue in our retail business grew faster than revenue from marketplace sellers. in addition, sales from electronics and other general merchandise grew faster than sales from media and we continued our efforts to reduce prices
for our customers, including from our free shipping offers and amazon prime.  international segment gross margins in 2007 increased by 38
basis points compared to 2006 resulting primarily from increases in sales of products by marketplace sellers, offset partially by our efforts to continue reducing prices for our customers, including from our free shipping offers and amazon prime,
and a larger percent of overall sales in lower margin categories such as electronics.  international segment gross margins in 2006
decreased by 120 basis points compared to 2005 resulting primarily from changes in our revenue mix as sales from electronics and other general merchandise grew faster than sales from media.
table of contents
supplemental information  supplemental information about shipping results is as follows:
december31,
(in millions)
shipping activity:
shipping revenue (1)(2)
$
$
$
outbound shipping costs
(1,174
)
(884
)
(750
)
net shipping cost
$
(434
)
$
(317
)
$
(239
)
year-over-year percentage growth:
shipping revenue
%
%
%
outbound shipping costs
net shipping cost
percent of net sales:
shipping revenue
5.0
%
5.3
%
6.0
%
outbound shipping costs
(7.9
)
(8.3
)
(8.8
)
net shipping cost
(2.9
)%
(3.0
)%
(2.8
)%
(1)
excludes amounts earned on shipping activities by sellers where we do not provide the fulfillment service.
(2)
includes amounts earned from amazon prime membership and fulfillment by amazon programs.  we believe that offering low prices to our customers is fundamental to our future success. one way we offer lower prices is through free-shipping offers that result in a net cost to us in delivering products, as well
as through membership in amazon prime. to the extent our customers accept and use our free shipping offers at an increasing rate, including memberships in amazon prime, our net cost of shipping will increase. we seek to partially mitigate the costs
of lowering prices over time through achieving higher sales volumes, negotiating better terms with our suppliers, and achieving better operating efficiencies.
table of contents
supplemental information about our net sales is as follows:
year ended december31,
(in millions)
net sales:
north america
media
$
4,630
$
3,582
$
3,046
electronics and other general merchandise
3,139
2,024
1,443
other (1)
total north america
$
8,095
$
5,869
$
4,711
international
media
$
4,612
$
3,485
$
2,885
electronics and other general merchandise
2,071
1,337
other (1)
total international
$
6,740
$
4,842
$
3,779
consolidated
media
$
9,242
$
7,067
$
5,931
electronics and other general merchandise
5,210
3,361
2,329
other (1)
total consolidated
$
14,835
$
10,711
$
8,490
year-over-year percentage growth:
north america
media
%
%
%
electronics and other general merchandise
other
total north america
international
media
%
%
%
electronics and other general merchandise
other
total international
consolidated
media
%
%
%
electronics and other general merchandise
other
total consolidated
year-over-year percentage growth:
excluding the effect of exchange rates
international
media
%
%
%
electronics and other general merchandise
other
total international
consolidated
media
%
%
%
electronics and other general merchandise
other
total consolidated
consolidated net sales mix:
media
%
%
%
electronics and other general merchandise
other
total consolidated
%
%
%
(1)
includes non-retail activities, such as amazon enterprise solutions, our co-branded credit card agreements, and miscellaneous marketing and promotional services.
table of contents
information about operating expenses with and without stock-based compensation is as follows (in
millions):
year ended december31, 2007
year ended december31, 2006
year ended december31, 2005
asreported
stock-basedcompensation
net
asreported
stock-basedcompensation
net
asreported
stock-basedcompensation
net
operating expenses:
fulfillment
$
1,292
$
(39
)
$
1,253
$
$
(24
)
$
$
$
(16
)
$
marketing
(8
)
(4
)
(6
)
technology and content
(103
)
(54
)
(45
)
general and administrative
(35
)
(19
)
(20
)
other operating expense
total operating expenses
$
2,698
$
(185
)
$
2,513
$
2,067
$
(101
)
$
1,966
$
1,607
$
(87
)
$
1,520
year-over-year percentage growth:
fulfillment
%
%
%
%
%
%
marketing
technology and content
general and administrative
percent of net sales:
fulfillment
8.7
%
8.4
%
8.7
%
8.5
%
8.8
%
8.6
%
marketing
2.3
2.3
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.3
technology and content
5.5
4.8
6.2
5.7
5.3
4.8
general and administrative
1.6
1.3
1.8
1.6
1.9
1.7
operating expenses without stock-based compensation are non-gaap financial measures. see
non-gaap financial measures and item8 of part i, financial statements and supplementary datanote 1description of business and accounting policiesstock-based compensation.  fulfillment  the increase in
fulfillment costs in absolute dollars during 2007 in comparison with the prior years relates to variable costs corresponding with sales volume and inventory levels; our mix of product sales; payment processing and related transaction costs,
including mix of payment methods and costs from our guarantee for certain marketplace seller transactions; and costs from expanding fulfillment capacity.  fulfillment costs as a percentage of net sales may vary due to several factors, such as payment processing and related transaction costs, including those from our guarantee for certain seller transactions, our level
of productivity and accuracy, changes in volume, size, and weight of units received and fulfilled, the extent we utilize fulfillment services provided by third parties, and our ability to affect customer service contacts per unit by implementing
improvements in our operations and enhancements to our customer self-service features. additionally, because payment processing costs associated with seller transactions are based on the gross purchase price of underlying transactions, and payment
processing and related transaction costs are higher as a percentage of revenue versus our retail sales, our sales by our sellers have higher fulfillment costs as a percent of net sales.  we expanded our fulfillment capacity in 2007, 2006, and 2005 through gains in efficiencies and increases in leased warehouse space. this expansion is
designed to accommodate greater selection and in-stock inventory levels and meet anticipated shipment volumes from sales of our own products as well as sales by third parties for which we provide the fulfillment.  marketing  we direct customers
to our websites primarily through a number of targeted online marketing channels, such as our associates program, sponsored search, portal advertising, e-mail campaigns, and other initiatives.
table of contents
our marketing expenses are largely variable, based on growth in sales and changes in rates. to the extent there is increased or decreased competition for
these traffic sources, or to the extent our mix of these channels shifts, we would expect to see a corresponding change in our marketing expense or its effect.  marketing costs increased in absolute dollars in 2007 compared to 2006 and 2005, due to increased spending in variable online marketing channels, such as our associates program, sponsored search, and other variable
marketing initiatives.  while costs associated with free shipping are not included in marketing expense, we view free shipping offers and
amazon prime as effective worldwide marketing tools, and intend to continue offering them indefinitely.  technology and content
we continue to invest in several areas of technology and content including seller platforms, web services, and digital initiatives,
as well as expansion of new and existing product categories. we are also investing in technology infrastructure so that we can continue to enhance the customer experience, improve our process efficiency and support our infrastructure web services.
see overview above for a discussion of how management views advances in technology and the importance of innovation. the growth rate of our technology and content spending decreased in 2007 compared to the prior year. we intend to
continue investing in areas of technology and content as we continue to add employees to our staff and add technology infrastructure.  for
the years ended 2007, 2006, and 2005, we capitalized $129 million, $123 million, and $90 million of costs associated with internal-use software and website development. amortization of previously capitalized amounts was $116 million, $86 million,
and $50 million for 2007, 2006, and 2005.  a significant majority of our technology costs are incurred in the u.s. and most of them are
allocated to our north america segment.  general and administrative  the increase in spending in general and administrative in 2007 compared to 2006 and 2005 is primarily due to increases in payroll and related expenses,
and professional fees.  stock-based compensation  as of january1, 2005, we adopted sfas no.123(r), which requires measurement of compensation cost for all stock-based awards at fair value on
date of grant and recognition of compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. the fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock units is determined based on the number of shares granted and the quoted price of our common
stock. such value is recognized as expense over the service period, net of estimated forfeitures, using the accelerated method. the estimation of stock awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results or updated
estimates differ from our current estimates, such amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. we consider many factors when estimating expected forfeitures, including types of awards, employee class, and
historical experience. actual results and future estimates may differ substantially from our current estimates.  the adoption of sfas
no.123(r) resulted in a cumulative benefit from accounting change of $26 million in 2005, which reflects the net cumulative impact of estimating future forfeitures in the determination of period expense, rather than recording forfeitures when
they occur as previously permitted.  stock-based compensation was $185 million, $101 million and $87 million during 2007, 2006, and 2005.
the increase in stock-based compensation is primarily attributable to an increase in total stock compensation value granted to our employees.
table of contents
other operating expense, net  other operating expense, net, was $9 million and $10 million during 2007 and 2006, primarily attributable to amortization of other intangibles. other
operating expense, net, was $47 million in 2005, primarily attributable to our settlement of a patent lawsuit for $40 million, as well as amortization of other intangibles of $5 million.  income from operations  income
from operations was $655 million, $389 million, and $432 million during 2007, 2006, and 2005. the increase in 2007 from 2006 is primarily a result of the increased growth rate of our revenue and gross profit relative to operating expenses. the
decrease in 2006 from 2005 is primarily a result of an increase in spending for technology and content.  interest expense and income
the primary component of our net interest expense is the interest we incur on our long-term debt instruments, including a $899
million principal balance of our 4.75% convertible subordinated notes and a 240million ($350 million based on the exchange rate at december31, 2007) principal balance of our 6.875% peacs at december31, 2007. interest expense
was $77 million, $78 million, and $92 million in 2007, 2006, and 2005, with declines primarily relating to principal repayments of $300 million and $265 million in 2006 and 2005.  our total long-term indebtedness was $1.3 billion at both december31, 2007 and 2006. see item8 of part ii, financial statements and
supplementary datanote 4long-term debt.  our interest income was $90 million, $59 million, and $44 million during 2007,
2006, and 2005. we generally invest our excess cash in investment grade short- to intermediate-term fixed income securities and aaa-rated money market mutual funds. our interest income corresponds with the average balance of invested funds and the
prevailing rates we are earning on them, which vary depending on the geographies and currencies in which they are invested.  other
income (expense), net  other income (expense), net, was $(1) million, $(4) million, and $2 million, in 2007, 2006 and 2005, and
consisted primarily of gains and losses on sales of marketable securities, foreign-currency transaction gains and losses, and other miscellaneous losses.  foreign-currency transaction gains and losses primarily relate to the interest payable on our 6.875% peacs, as well as foreign-currency gains and losses on cross-currency investments. since interest payments on our
6.875% peacs are settled in euros, the balance of interest payable is subject to gains or losses resulting from changes in exchange rates between the u.s.dollar and euro between reporting dates and payment.  remeasurements and other  remeasurements and other consisted of the following:
yearendeddecember31,
(in millions)
foreign-currency gain (loss) on remeasurement of 6.875% peacs
$
(33
)
$
(37
)
$
loss on redemption of long-term debt
(6
)
(6
)
foreign-currency gain (loss) on intercompany balances
(47
)
other
(6
)
total remeasurements and other
$
(7
)
$
$
(1)
each period the remeasurement of our 6.875% peacs from euros to u.s. dollars results in gains or losses recorded to remeasurements and other on our consolidated
statements of operations.
table of contents
(2)
represents the gains (losses) associated with the remeasurement of intercompany balances due to changes in foreign exchange rates. see item8 of part ii, financial
statements and supplementary datanote 1description of business and accounting policiesforeign currency.  income taxes  we recorded a provision for income taxes of $184 million, $187 million, and $95 million, in 2007, 2006
and 2005. the effective tax rate in 2007 was lower than the 35% u.s. federal statutory rate primarily due to earnings of our subsidiaries outside of the u.s. in jurisdictions where our effective tax rate is lower than in the u.s. the effective tax
rate in 2006 was higher than the 35% u.s. federal statutory rate resulting from establishment of our european headquarters in luxembourg, which we expect will benefit our effective tax rate over time. associated with the establishment of our
european headquarters, we transferred certain of our operating assets in 2005 and 2006 from the u.s. to international locations. these transfers resulted in taxable income and exposure to additional taxable income assertions by taxing jurisdictions.
included in the 2005 provision and reducing the impact of the international restructure is a tax benefit of $90 million, resulting from
certain of our deferred tax assets becoming more likely than not realizable. this tax benefit represented $0.22 and $0.21 of basic and diluted earnings per share.  we expect our effective tax rate in 2008 to be approximately 30%. however, our effective tax rate is subject to significant variation due to several factors, including from accurately predicting our taxable income,
the taxable jurisdictions to which it relates, and business acquisitions and investments. we have current tax benefits and net operating losses relating to excess stock-based compensation deductions that are being utilized to reduce our u.s. taxable
income. as such, we expect a majority of our net tax provision to be non-cash.  effect of exchange rates  the effect on our consolidated statements of operations from changes in exchange rates versus the u.s.dollar is as follows (in millions, except per
share data):
year endeddecember31, 2007
year endeddecember31, 2006
year endeddecember31, 2005
at prioryearrates (1)
exchangerateeffect (2)
asreported
at prioryearrates (1)
exchangerateeffect (2)
asreported
atprioryearrates(1)
exchangerateeffect (2)
asreported
net sales
$
14,436
$
$
14,835
$
10,687
$
$
10,711
$
8,563
$
(73
)
$
8,490
gross profit
3,274
3,353
2,455
2,456
2,052
(13
)
2,039
operating expenses
2,648
2,698
2,064
2,067
1,612
(5
)
1,607
income from operations
(2
)
(8
)
net interest income (expense) and other(3)
(17
)
(6
)
(23
)
(52
)
(46
)
remeasurementsand other income (expense) (4)
(6
)
(1
)
(7
)
(2
)
net income
(1)
represents the outcome that would have resulted had exchange rates in the reported period been the same as those in effect in the comparable prior year period for operating results,
and if we did not incur the variability associated with remeasurements for our 6.875% peacs and intercompany balances.
(2)
represents the increase or decrease in reported amounts resulting from changes in exchange rates from those in effect in the comparable prior year period for operating results, and
if we did not incur the variability associated with remeasurements for our 6.875% peacs and intercompany balances.
table of contents
(3)
includes foreign-currency gains and losses on cross-currency investments.
(4)
includes foreign-currency gains and losses on remeasurement of 6.875% peacs and intercompany balances.  non-gaap financial measures  regulation g, conditions for use of non-gaap financial measures, and other sec regulations define and prescribe the conditions for use of certain non-gaap financial information. our measure of free cash flow meets the
definition of a non-gaap financial measure. free cash flow is used in addition to and in conjunction with results presented in accordance with gaap and free cash flow should not be relied upon to the exclusion of gaap financial measures. free cash
flow reflects an additional way of viewing our liquidity that, when viewed with our gaap results, provides a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our cash flows. management strongly encourages shareholders to review our
financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.  free cash flow, which
we reconcile to net cash provided by operating activities, is cash flow from operations reduced by purchases of fixed assets, including internal-use software and website development. we use free cash flow, and ratios based on
it, to conduct and evaluate our business because, although it is similar to cash flow from operations, we believe it is a more conservative measure of cash flows since purchases of fixed assets are a necessary component of ongoing operations. in
limited circumstances in which proceeds from sales of fixed assets exceed purchases, free cash flow would exceed cash flow from operations. however, since we do not anticipate being a net seller of fixed assets, we expect free cash flow to be less
than operating cash flows.  free cash flow has limitations due to the fact that it does not represent the residual cash flow available for
discretionary expenditures. for example, free cash flow does not incorporate payments made on capital lease obligations or cash payments for business acquisitions. therefore, we believe it is important to view free cash flow as a complement to our
entire consolidated statements of cash flows.  the following is a reconciliation of free cash flow to the most comparable gaap measure,
net cash provided by operating activities for 2007, 2006, and 2005 (in millions):
year ended december31,
net cash provided by operating activities
$
1,405
$
$
purchases of fixed assets, including internal-use software and website development
(224
)
(216
)
(204
)
free cash flow
$
1,181
$
$
net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
$
$
(333
)
$
(778
)
net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
$
$
(400
)
$
(193
)
in addition, we provide operating expenses with and without stock-based compensation. we provide
this information to show the impact of stock-based compensation, which is non-cash and excluded from our internal operating plans and measurement of financial performance (although we consider the dilutive impact to our shareholders when awarding
stock-based compensation and value such awards accordingly). in addition, unlike other centrally-incurred operating costs, stock-based compensation is not allocated to segment results and therefore excluding it from operating expense is consistent
with our segment presentation in our footnotes to the consolidated financial statements.  operating expenses without stock-based
compensation have limitations due to the fact that they do not include all expenses primarily related to our workforce. more specifically, if we did not pay out a portion of our compensation in
table of contents
the form of stock-based compensation, our cash salary expense included in the fulfillment, technology and content,
marketing, and general and administrative line items would be higher. we compensate for this limitation by providing supplemental information about outstanding stock-based awards in the footnotes to our financial statements.
stock-based compensation programs are an important element of our compensation structure and all forms of stock-based awards are valued and included as appropriate in results of operations.  guidance  the company provided guidance on
january30, 2008 in its earnings release furnished on form 8-k as follows:  first quarter 2008 guidance
net sales are expected to be between $3.95 billion and $4.15 billion, or to grow between 31% and 38% compared with first quarter 2007.
operating income is expected to be between $155 million and $200 million, or to grow between 7% and 38% compared with first quarter 2007. this guidance includes $55
million for stock-based compensation and amortization of intangible assets, and it assumes, among other things, that no additional acquired intangible assets are recorded and that there are no further revisions to stock-based compensation estimates.
full year 2008 expectations
net sales are expected to be between $18.75 billion and $19.75 billion, or to grow between 26% and 33% compared with 2007.
operating income is expected to be between $785 million and $985 million, or to grow between 20% and 50% compared with 2007. this guidance includes $240 million for
stock-based compensation and amortization of intangible assets, and it assumes, among other things, that no additional acquired intangible assets are recorded and that there are no further revisions to stock-based compensation estimates.
these projections are subject to substantial uncertainty. see item1a of part i, risk factors.
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk  we are exposed to market risk for the effect of interest rate changes, foreign currency fluctuations, and changes in the market values of our investments.  information relating to quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk is set forth below and in item7 of part ii, managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operationsliquidity and capital resources.  interest rate risk  our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment portfolio and our long-term debt. all of our cash equivalent
and marketable fixed income securities are designated as available-for-sale and, accordingly, are presented at fair value on our balance sheets. we generally invest our excess cash in investment grade short- to intermediate-term fixed income
securities and aaa-rated money market mutual funds. fixed rate securities may have their fair market value adversely affected due to a rise in interest rates, and we may suffer losses in principal if forced to sell securities that have declined in
market value due to changes in interest rates.
table of contents
the following table provides information about our cash equivalent and marketable fixed income
securities, including principal cash flows by expected maturity and the related weighted average interest rates at december31, 2007 (in millions, except percentages):
thereafter
total
estimatedfair value atdecember31,2007
money market funds
$
1,408
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,408
$
1,408
weighted average interest rate
4.42
%
4.42
%
certificates of deposit
weighted average interest rate
corporate debt securities
weighted average interest rate
5.11
%
4.65
%
4.78
%
4.59
%
4.85
%
4.71
%
u.s. government and agency securities
weighted average interest rate
4.26
%
3.20
%
3.69
%
3.72
%
3.46
%
3.81
%
asset backed securities
weighted average interest rate
5.17
%
4.80
%
4.74
%
4.99
%
4.62
%
4.65
%
4.87
%
foreign government and agency securities
weighted average interest rate
4.28
%
3.49
%
3.71
%
3.89
%
3.83
%
4.15
%
other securities
weighted average interest rate
4.55
%
4.55
%
cash equivalents and marketable fixed-income securities
$
1,818
$
$
$
$
$
$
2,282
$
2,287
the following table provides information about
our cash equivalent and marketable fixed income securities, including principal cash flows by expected maturity and the related weighted average interest rates at december31, 2006 (in millions, except percentages):
thereafter
total
estimatedfair value atdecember31,2006
money market funds
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
weighted average interest rate
3.92
%
3.92
%
certificates of deposit
weighted average interest rate
5.25
%
5.25
%
corporate debt securities
weighted average interest rate
5.47
%
5.43
%
5.23
%
5.04
%
4.83
%
5.35
%
u.s. government and agency securities
weighted average interest rate
5.24
%
4.77
%
4.88
%
4.85
%
4.95
%
5.46
%
5.06
%
asset backed securities
weighted average interest rate
5.47
%
5.42
%
5.28
%
5.19
%
5.91
%
5.43
%
foreign government and agency securities
weighted average interest rate
3.74
%
3.83
%
3.83
%
3.86
%
3.87
%
3.82
%
other securities
weighted average interest rate
5.08
%
5.12
%
5.10
%
cash equivalents and marketable fixed-income securities
$
1,391
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,897
$
1,894
at december31, 2007, we had long-term debt of $1.3 billion primarily associated with our
4.75% convertible subordinated notes and 6.875% peacs, which are due in 2009 and 2010. the fair value of our long-term debt will fluctuate with movements of interest rates, increasing in periods of declining rates of interest and declining in
periods of increasing rates of interest.
table of contents
based upon quoted market prices, the fair value of the 4.75% convertible subordinated notes was $1.1
billion at december31, 2007 (outstanding principal of $899 million) and $883 million (outstanding principal of $900 million) at december31, 2006. the fair value of the 6.875% peacs was $358 million at december31, 2007 (outstanding
principal of 240 million), and $320 million at december31, 2006 (outstanding principal of 240 million).  foreign
exchange risk  during 2007, net sales from our international segment accounted for 45% of our consolidated revenues. net sales and
related expenses generated from our international websites, as well as those relating to www.amazon.ca (which is included in our north america segment), are denominated in the functional currencies of the corresponding websites and primarily
include euros, british pounds, and japanese yen. the functional currency of our subsidiaries that either operate or support these websites is the same as the corresponding local currency. the results of operations of, and certain of our intercompany
balances associated with, our internationally-focused websites are exposed to foreign exchange rate fluctuations. upon consolidation, as exchange rates vary, net sales and other operating results may differ materially from expectations, and we may
record significant gains or losses on the remeasurement of intercompany balances. for example, as a result of fluctuations in foreign exchange rates during 2007, international segment revenues increased $390 million in comparison with the prior
year.  we have foreign exchange risk related to foreign-denominated cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities (foreign
funds). based on the balance of foreign funds at december31, 2007 of $1.2 billion, an assumed 5%, 10%, and 20% negative currency movement would result in fair value declines of $60 million, $120 million, and $240 million. all investments
are classified as available for sale, as defined by sfas no.115, accounting for certain investments in debt and equity securities. fluctuations in fair value are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income
(loss), a separate component of stockholders equity.  we have foreign exchange risk related to our intercompany balances
denominated in foreign currency. based on the net intercompany balances at december31, 2007 of $250 million, an assumed 5%, 10%, and 20% strengthening of the u.s.dollar in relation to these foreign currencies would result in losses of
$15 million, $25 million, and $50 million, recorded to remeasurements and other.  we have foreign exchange risk related to our
6.875% peacs, which have an outstanding principal balance at december31, 2007 of 240million ($350 million, based on the exchange rate as of december31, 2007). due to fluctuations in the euro/u.s. dollar exchange ratio, which
we cannot predict, our remaining principal debt obligation under the 6.875% peacs since issuance in february 2000 has increased by $114 million as of december31, 2007. based on the outstanding 6.875% peacs principal balance, an assumed
5%, 10%, and 20% weakening of the u.s.dollar in relation to the euro would result in additional losses of approximately $20 million, $35 million, and $70 million, recorded to remeasurements and other. additionally, we have not
hedged our interest payments under our 6.875% peacs to protect against exchange rate fluctuations. assuming the u.s.dollar weakens against the euro by 5%, 10%, and 20% in 2007, we would incur $1 million, $2 million, and $5 million additional
annual interest expense due solely to fluctuations in foreign exchange.  see effect of exchange rates for additional
information on the effect on reported results of changes in exchange rates.  investment risk  as of december31, 2007, our recorded basis in equity securities (including both publicly-traded and private companies) was $29 million, including
$12 million classified as marketable securities, and $17 million classified as other assets. we regularly review the carrying value of our investments and identify and record losses when events and circumstances indicate that
declines in the fair value of such assets below our accounting basis are other-than-temporary. the fair values of our investments are subject to significant fluctuations due to volatility of the stock market in general, company-specific
circumstances, and changes in general economic conditions. based on the fair value of the publicly-traded equity securities we held at december31, 2007 of $55 million (recorded basis of $12 million), an assumed 15%, 30%, and 50% adverse change
to market prices of these securities would result in a corresponding decline in total fair value of approximately $10 million, $15 million, and $25 million.
table of contents
item8.financial statements and supplementary data  index
to consolidated financial statements
page
report of ernst& young llp, independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of operations
consolidated balance sheets
consolidated statements of stockholders equity
notes to consolidated financial statements
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm  the board of directors and stockholders  amazon.com, inc.  we have audited the accompanying
consolidated balance sheets of amazon.com, inc. as of december31, 2007 and 2006, and the related consolidated statements of operations, stockholders equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended december31,
2007. our audits also included the financial statement schedule listed in the index at item15(a)(2). these financial statements and schedule are the responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to express an opinion
on these financial statements and schedule based on our audits.  we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a
test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.  in our opinion, the financial statements
referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of amazon.com, inc. at december31, 2007 and 2006, and the consolidated results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended december31, 2007, in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles. also, in our opinion, the related financial statement schedule, when considered in relation to the basic financial statements taken as a
whole, presents fairly in all material respects the information set forth therein.  as discussed in note 1 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company adopted fasb interpretation no.48 accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, effective january1, 2007.  we also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the effectiveness of amazon.com, inc.s internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2007,
based on criteria established in internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission and our report dated february8, 2008 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
/s/ernst & young llp  seattle, washington  february 8, 2008
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  consolidated statements of cash flows  (in millions)
year ended december31,
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
$
1,022
$
1,013
$
1,303
operating activities:
net income
adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash from operating activities:
depreciation of fixed assets, including internal-use software and website development, and other amortization
stock-based compensation
other operating expense, net
losses (gains) on sales of marketable securities, net
(2
)
(1
)
remeasurements and other
(6
)
(37
)
deferred income taxes
(99
)
excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
(257
)
(102
)
(7
)
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
(26
)
changes in operating assets and liabilities:
inventories
(303
)
(282
)
(104
)
accounts receivable, net and other
(255
)
(103
)
(84
)
accounts payable
accrued expenses and other
additions to unearned revenue
amortization of previously unearned revenue
(211
)
(180
)
(149
)
net cash provided by operating activities
1,405
investing activities:
purchases of fixed assets, including internal-use software and website development
(224
)
(216
)
(204
)
acquisitions, net of cash acquired, and other
(75
)
(32
)
(24
)
sales and maturities of marketable securities and other investments
1,271
1,845
purchases of marketable securities and other investments
(930
)
(1,930
)
(1,386
)
net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
(333
)
(778
)
financing activities:
proceeds from exercises of stock options
excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
common stock repurchased
(248
)
(252
)
proceeds from long-term debt and other
repayments of long-term debt and capital lease obligations
(74
)
(383
)
(270
)
net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
(400
)
(193
)
foreign-currency effect on cash and cash equivalents
(52
)
net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
1,517
(290
)
cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
2,539
$
1,022
$
1,013
supplemental cash flow information:
cash paid for interest
$
$
$
cash paid for income taxes
fixed assets acquired under capital leases and other financing arrangements
fixed assets acquired under build-to-suit leases
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  consolidated statements of operations  (in millions, except per share data)
year ended december31,
net sales
$
14,835
$
10,711
$
8,490
cost of sales
11,482
8,255
6,451
gross profit
3,353
2,456
2,039
operating expenses (1):
fulfillment
1,292
marketing
technology and content
general and administrative
other operating expense, net
total operating expenses
2,698
2,067
1,607
income from operations
interest income
interest expense
(77
)
(78
)
(92
)
other income (expense), net
(1
)
(4
)
remeasurements and other
(7
)
total non-operating income (expense)
(12
)
(4
)
income before income taxes
provision for income taxes
income before cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
net income
$
$
$
basic earnings per share:
prior to cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
$
1.15
$
0.46
$
0.81
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
0.06
$
1.15
$
0.46
$
0.87
diluted earnings per share:
prior to cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
$
1.12
$
0.45
$
0.78
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
0.06
$
1.12
$
0.45
$
0.84
weighted average shares used in computation of earnings per share:
basic
diluted
(1)includes stock-based compensation as follows:
fulfillment
$
$
$
marketing
technology and content
general and administrative
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  consolidated balance sheets  (in millions, except per share data)
december31,
a s s e t s
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
2,539
$
1,022
marketable securities
inventories
1,200
accounts receivable, net and other
deferred tax assets
total current assets
5,164
3,373
fixed assets, net
deferred tax assets
goodwill
other assets
total assets
$
6,485
$
4,363
l i a b i l i t i e sa n ds t o c k h o l d e r se q u i t y
current liabilities:
accounts payable
$
2,795
$
1,816
accrued expenses and other
total current liabilities
3,714
2,532
long-term debt
1,282
1,247
other long-term liabilities
commitments and contingencies
stockholders equity:
preferred stock, $0.01 par value:
authorized shares500
issued and outstanding sharesnone
common stock, $0.01 par value:
authorized shares5,000
issued shares431 and 422
outstanding shares416 and 414
treasury stock, at cost
(500
)
(252
)
additional paid-in capital
3,063
2,517
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
(1
)
accumulated deficit
(1,375
)
(1,837
)
total stockholders equity
1,197
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
6,485
$
4,363
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  consolidated statements of stockholders equity  (in millions)
common stock
treasurystock
additionalpaid-incapital
accumulatedothercomprehensiveincome (loss)
accumulateddeficit
totalstockholdersequity
shares
amount
balance at january1, 2005
$
$
2,123
$
$
(2,386
)
$
(227
)
net income
foreign currency translation losses, net
(15
)
(15
)
change in unrealized gains on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
(14
)
(14
)
amortization of unrealized loss on terminated euro currency swap, net of tax
comprehensive income
exercise of common stock options, net and vesting of restricted stock
change in accounting principle
(26
)
(26
)
excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
stock-based compensation and issuance of employee benefit plan stock
balance at december31, 2005
2,263
(2,027
)
net income
foreign currency translation losses, net of tax
(13
)
(13
)
change in unrealized losses on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
amortization of unrealized loss on terminated euro currency swap, net of tax
comprehensive income
exercise of common stock options
repurchase of common stock
(8
)
(252
)
(252
)
excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
stock-based compensation and issuance of employee benefit plan stock
balance at december31, 2006
(252
)
2,517
(1
)
(1,837
)
net income
foreign currency translation losses, net of tax
(3
)
(3
)
change in unrealized losses on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
amortization of unrealized loss on terminated euro currency swap, net of tax
comprehensive income
change in accounting principle
(14
)
(12
)
unrecognized excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
exercise of common stock options and conversion of debt
repurchase of common stock
(6
)
(248
)
(248
)
excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
stock-based compensation and issuance of employee benefit plan stock
balance at december31, 2007
$
(500
)
$
3,063
$
$
(1,375
)
$
1,197
see accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements  note 1description of business and accounting policies  description of business  amazon.com, a fortune 500 company, opened its virtual doors on the world wide web in july 1995 and
today offers earths biggest selection. we seek to be earths most customer-centric company. amazon.com serves three primary customer sets: consumer customers, seller customers and developer customers. we serve consumer customers through
our retail websites, which include www.amazon.com, www.amazon.ca, www.amazon.de, www.amazon.fr, www.amazon.co.jp, www.amazon.co.uk, www.shopbop.com, www.endless.com, and the joyo amazon websites at www.joyo.cn and
www.amazon.cn. we serve seller customers by offering programs and services that enable them to sell products on our websites and operate their e-commerce businesses under their own brand name and website address. we serve developers by
offering a suite of web services that provide developer customers with direct access to amazon.coms robust technology platform in order to enable them to build innovative applications on their own. in addition, we generate revenue through
co-branded credit card agreements and other marketing and promotional services, such as online advertising.  we have organized our
operations into two principal segments: north america and international. see note 13segment information.  principles
of consolidation  the consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the company, its wholly-owned subsidiaries, and those
entities (relating primarily to the joyo amazon websites) in which we have a variable interest. intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.  use of estimates  the preparation of financial statements in conformity with gaap requires estimates
and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. estimates are used for, but not
limited to, valuation of investments, receivables valuation, sales returns, incentive discount offers, inventory valuation, depreciable lives of fixed assets, internally-developed software, valuation of acquired intangibles, income taxes,
stock-based compensation, and contingencies. actual results could differ materially from those estimates.  earnings per share
basic earnings per share is calculated using our weighted-average outstanding common shares. diluted earnings per share is calculated
using our weighted-average outstanding common shares including the dilutive effect of stock awards as determined under the treasury stock method.  our convertible debt instruments are excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share as their effect under the if-converted method is antidilutive. see note 4long-term debt.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
the following table shows the calculation of diluted shares (in millions):
yearendeddecember31,
shares used in computation of basic earnings per share
total dilutive effect of outstanding stock awards (1)
shares used in computation of diluted earnings per share
(1)
calculated using the treasury stock method that assumes proceeds available to reduce the dilutive affect of outstanding stock awards, which include the exercise price of stock
options, the unrecognized deferred compensation of stock awards, and assumed tax proceeds from excess stock-based compensation deductions.  treasury stock  we account for treasury stock under the cost method and include treasury stock as a
component of stockholders equity.  business acquisitions  we acquired certain companies during 2007 for an aggregate cash purchase price of $33 million, including cash payments of $24 million and future cash
payments of $9 million. we also made principal payments of $13 million on acquired debt in connection with one of these acquisitions. additional cash consideration for these acquisitions is contingent upon continued employment. this amount is
expensed as compensation over the employment period and not included in the purchase price. acquired intangibles totaled $18 million and have estimated useful lives of between two and ten years. the excess of purchase price over the fair value of
the net assets acquired was $21 million and is classified as goodwill on our consolidated balance sheets.  we acquired certain
companies during 2006 for an aggregate cash purchase price of $50 million, including cash paid of $30 million and $19 million in 2006 and 2007, and additional cash payments of $1 million due in 2008. acquired intangibles totaled $17 million and have
estimated useful lives of between one and ten years. the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired was $33 million and is classified as goodwill on our consolidated balance sheets.  in 2005, we acquired certain companies for an aggregate cash purchase price of $29 million. acquired intangibles totaled $10 million and have estimated
useful lives of between one and three years. the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired was $19 million and is classified as goodwill on our consolidated balance sheets.  the results of operations of each of the businesses acquired in 2007, 2006, and 2005 have been included in our consolidated results from each transaction
closing date forward. the effect of these acquisitions on consolidated net sales and operating income during 2007, 2006, and 2005 was not significant.  cash and cash equivalents  we classify all highly liquid instruments, including money market funds
that comply with rule 2a-7 of the investment company act of 1940, with a remaining maturity of three months or less at the time of purchase as cash equivalents.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
inventories  inventories, consisting of products available for sale, are accounted for using the fifo method, and are valued at the lower of cost or market value. this valuation requires us to make judgments, based on
currently-available information, about the likely method of disposition, such as through sales to individual customers, returns to product vendors, or liquidations, and expected recoverable values of each disposition category. based on this
evaluation, we adjust the carrying amount of our inventories to lower of cost or market value.  we provide fulfillment-related services in
connection with certain of our marketplace sellers and amazon enterprise solutions programs. in those arrangements, as well as all other product sales by other sellers, the marketplace seller maintains ownership of the related products.
accounts receivable, net and other current assets  included in accounts receivable, net and other current assets are customer and vendor receivables, as well as prepaid expenses of $23 million and $17million at december31, 2007 and 2006,
representing advance payments for insurance, licenses, and other miscellaneous expenses.  allowance for doubtful accounts
we estimate losses on receivables based on known troubled accounts, if any, and historical experience of losses incurred. the allowance
for doubtful accounts receivable was $64 million and $40 million at december31, 2007 and 2006.  internal-use software and website
development  costs incurred to develop software for internal use are required to be capitalized and amortized over the estimated useful
life of the software in accordance with statement of position (sop) 98-1, accounting for the costs of computer software developed or obtained for internal use. costs related to design or maintenance of internal-use software are expensed as
incurred. for the years ended 2007, 2006, and 2005, we capitalized $129 million (including $21 million of stock-based compensation), $123 million (including $16 million of stock-based compensation), and $90 million (including $11 million of
stock-based compensation) of costs associated with internal-use software and website development. amortization of previously capitalized amounts was $116 million, $86 million, and $50 million for 2007, 2006, and 2005.  depreciation of fixed assets  fixed
assets include assets such as furniture and fixtures, heavy equipment, technology infrastructure, internal-use software and website development. depreciation is recorded on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets
(generally two years or less for assets such as internal-use software, two or three years for our technology infrastructure, five years for furniture and fixtures, and ten years for heavy equipment). depreciation expense is generally classified
within the corresponding operating expense categories on our consolidated statements of operations, and certain assets are amortized as cost of sales.  leases and asset retirement obligations  we account for our lease agreements pursuant to statement of
financial accounting standards (sfas) no.13, accounting for leases, which categorizes leases at their inception as either operating or capital leases depending on certain defined criteria. on certain of our lease agreements, we may
receive rent holidays and other incentives. we recognize lease costs on a straight-line basis without regard to deferred payment terms, such as
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
rent holidays that defer the commencement date of required payments. additionally, incentives we receive are treated as a reduction of our costs over the
term of the agreement. leasehold improvements are capitalized at cost and amortized over the lesser of their expected useful life or the life of the lease, without assuming renewal features, if any, are exercised. we account for build-to-suit lease
arrangements in accordance with emerging issues task force (eitf) 97-10, the effect of lessee involvement in asset construction, to the extent we are involved in the construction of structural improvements prior to commencement of a lease.
in accordance with sfas no.143, accounting for asset retirement obligations, we establish assets and liabilities for the
present value of estimated future costs to return certain of our leased facilities to their original condition. such assets are depreciated over the lease period into operating expense, and the recorded liabilities are accreted to the future value
of the estimated restoration costs.  goodwill  we evaluate goodwill for impairment, at a minimum, on an annual basis and whenever events and changes in circumstances suggest that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. impairment of goodwill is tested at the
reporting unit level by comparing the reporting units carrying amount, including goodwill, to the fair value of the reporting unit. the fair values of the reporting units are estimated using discounted projected cash flows. if the carrying
amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill is considered impaired and a second step is performed to measure the amount of impairment loss, if any. we conduct our annual impairment test as of october1 of each year, and have
determined there to be no impairment in 2007 or 2006. there were no events or circumstances from the date of our assessment through december31, 2007 that would impact this assessment.  at december31, 2007 and december31, 2006, approximately 55% and 60% of our acquired goodwill was assigned to our international segment, the
majority of which relates to our acquisition of joyo.com limited.  other assets  included in other assets on our consolidated balance sheets are amounts primarily related to marketable securities restricted for longer than
one year; intellectual property rights; certain equity investments; and intangible assets, net of amortization. at december31, 2007 and 2006, the cost basis and fair value of marketable securities restricted for longer than one year was $197
million and $86 million, primarily attributable to collateralization of bank guarantees and debt related to our international operations. at december31, 2007, intellectual property rights were $28 million; at december31, 2006, these
amounts were not significant. at december31, 2007, and 2006, equity investments were $17 million and $19 million.  other intangibles,
net, included within other assets, were $26 million and $21 million at december31, 2007 and 2006. accumulated amortization was $29 million and $16 million at december31, 2007 and 2006, which excludes the accumulated
amortization of fully-amortized intangibles. amortization expense was $13 million, $10 million, and $5 million in 2007, 2006, and 2005. amortization expense of intangible assets over the next five years is as follows: $8 million in 2008; $4 million
in 2009; $3 million in 2010; $2 million in 2011; $2 million in 2012. the weighted-average amortization period is five years based on useful life assumptions between one and ten years.  investments  the initial carrying
cost of our investments is the price we paid. investments are accounted for using the equity method of accounting if the investment gives us the ability to exercise significant influence, but not control, over an investee. we classify our
investments in equity-method investees on our consolidated balance
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
sheets as other assets and our share of the investees earnings or losses as remeasurements and other on our consolidated
statements of operations. losses from equity-method investees were not significant for any period presented.  all other equity investments
consist of investments for which we do not have the ability to exercise significant influence. under the cost method of accounting, investments in private companies are carried at cost and are adjusted only for other-than-temporary declines in fair
value, distributions of earnings, and additional investments. for public companies that have readily determinable fair values, we classify our equity investments as available-for-sale and, accordingly, record these investments at their fair values
with unrealized gains and losses, net of tax, included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), a separate component of stockholders equity.  we generally invest our excess cash in investment grade short to intermediate term fixed income securities and aaa-rated money market mutual funds. such investments are included in cash and cash
equivalents, or marketable securities on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). the
weighted average method is used to determine the cost of euro-denominated securities sold, and the specific identification method is used to determine the cost of all other securities.  we periodically evaluate whether declines in fair values of our investments below their cost are other-than-temporary. this evaluation consists of
several qualitative and quantitative factors regarding the severity and duration of the unrealized loss as well as our ability and intent to hold the investment until a forecasted recovery occurs. factors considered include quoted market prices, if
available; recent financial results and operating trends; other publicly available information; implied values from any recent purchase/sales offers of investee securities; or other conditions that may affect the value of our investments. at
december31, 2007, gross unrealized losses on our marketable securities were $3 million and were determined to be temporary based on our assessment of the qualitative and quantitative factors discussed above.  long-lived assets  long-lived assets,
other than goodwill, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable. conditions that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant
decline in the observable market value of an asset, a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used, or any other significant adverse change that would indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets may not
be recoverable.  for long-lived assets used in operations, impairment losses are only recorded if the assets carrying amount is not
recoverable through its undiscounted, probability-weighted future cash flows. we measure the impairment loss based on the difference between the carrying amount and estimated fair value.  long-lived assets are considered held for sale when certain criteria are met, including: management has committed to a plan to sell the asset, the asset
is available for sale in its immediate condition, and the sale is probable within one year of the reporting date. assets held for sale are reported at the lower of cost or fair value less costs to sell. assets held for sale were not significant at
december31, 2007 or 2006.  accrued expenses and other  included in accrued expenses and other at december31, 2007 and 2006 were liabilities of $240 million and $183 million for unredeemed
gift certificates. we recognize revenue from a gift certificate when a customer
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
redeems it. if a gift certificate is not redeemed, we recognize revenue when it expires or, for a certificate without an expiration date, when the likelihood
of its redemption becomes remote, generally two years from date of issuance.  unearned revenue  unearned revenue is recorded when payments are received in advance of performing our service obligations and is recognized over the service period.
current unearned revenue is included in accrued expenses and other and non-current unearned revenue is included in other long-term liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. current unearned revenue was $91 million and
$78 million at december31, 2007 and 2006.  income taxes  income tax expense includes u.s. and international income taxes. we do not provide for u.s. taxes on our undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries,
totaling $126 million at december31, 2007, since we intend to invest such undistributed earnings indefinitely outside of the u.s. if such amounts were repatriated, determination of the amount of u.s. income taxes that would be incurred is not
practicable due to the complexities associated with this calculation.  deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary
differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases and are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. at december31, 2007, our deferred tax assets, net of
deferred tax liabilities and valuation allowance, were $385 million, which includes $148 million relating to net operating loss carryforwards (nols) that were primarily attributed to stock-based compensation. the majority of our nols
begin to expire in 2019 and thereafter.  sfas no.109, accounting for income taxes, requires that deferred tax assets be
evaluated for future realization and reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe a portion will not be realized. we consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our
recent cumulative earnings experience and expectations of future taxable income by taxing jurisdiction, the carry-forward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes, and other relevant factors. in accordance with sfas no.109, we
allocate our valuation allowance to current and long-term deferred tax assets on a pro-rata basis.  effective january1, 2007, we
adopted the provisions of fasb interpretation (fin) no.48, accounting for uncertainty in income taxesan interpretation of fasb statement no.109. fin 48 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax
positions (tax contingencies) accounted for in accordance with sfas no.109. the first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the
position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. the second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount which is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate
settlement.we consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately forecast actual outcomes.  adopting fin 48 increased long-term assets by $10 million, long-term liabilities by $21 million, accumulated deficit by $14 million and additional
paid-in capital by $2 million. these amounts include the associated federal benefit related to unrecognized tax benefits, and interest and penalties which collectively are not material. as of january1, 2007, we had $110 million of tax
contingencies.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
revenue  we recognize revenue from product sales or services rendered when the following four revenue recognition criteria are met: persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or services have been
rendered, the selling price is fixed or determinable, and collectibility is reasonably assured. additionally, revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables are divided into separate units of accounting if the deliverables in the arrangement meet
the following criteria: the delivered item has value to the customer on a standalone basis; there is objective and reliable evidence of the fair value of undelivered items; and delivery of any undelivered item is probable.  we evaluate the criteria outlined in eitf issue no.99-19, reporting revenue gross as a principal versus net as an agent, in determining
whether it is appropriate to record the gross amount of product sales and related costs or the net amount earned as commissions. generally, when we are primarily obligated in a transaction, are subject to inventory risk, have latitude in
establishing prices and selecting suppliers, or have several but not all of these indicators, revenue is recorded gross. if we are not primarily obligated and amounts earned are determined using a fixed percentage, a fixed-payment schedule, or a
combination of the two, we generally record the net amounts as commissions earned.  product sales and shipping revenues, net of promotional
discounts, rebates, and return allowances, are recorded when the products are shipped and title passes to customers. retail sales to customers are made pursuant to a sales contract that provides for transfer of both title and risk of loss upon our
delivery to the carrier. return allowances, which reduce product revenue, are estimated using historical experience. revenue from product sales and services rendered is recorded net of sales taxes. amounts received in advance for subscription
services, including amounts received for amazon prime and other membership programs, are deferred and recognized as revenue over the subscription term. for our products with multiple elements, where a standalone value for each element cannot be
established, we recognize the revenue and related cost over the estimated economic life of the product.  we periodically provide incentive
offers to our customers to encourage purchases. such offers include current discount offers, such as percentage discounts off current purchases, inducement offers, such as offers for future discounts subject to a minimum current purchase, and other
similar offers. current discount offers, when accepted by our customers, are treated as a reduction to the purchase price of the related transaction, while inducement offers, when accepted by our customers, are treated as a reduction to purchase
price based on estimated future redemption rates. redemption rates are estimated using our historical experience for similar inducement offers. current discount offers and inducement offers are presented as a net amount in net sales.
commissions and per-unit fees received from sellers and similar amounts earned through amazon enterprise solutions are recognized when the
item is sold by seller and our collectibility is reasonably assured. we record an allowance for estimated refunds on such commissions using historical experience.  shipping activities  outbound shipping charges to customers are included in net sales and
were $740 million, $567 million, and $511 million for 2007, 2006, and 2005. outbound shipping-related costs are included in cost of sales and totaled $1.2 billion, $884 million, and $750 million for 2007, 2006, and 2005. the net cost to
us of shipping activities was $434 million, $317 million, and $239 million for 2007, 2006 and 2005.  cost of sales  cost of sales consists of the purchase price of consumer products and content sold by us, inbound and outbound shipping charges, packaging supplies, and
costs incurred in operating and staffing our fulfillment and
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
customer service centers on behalf of other businesses. shipping charges to receive products from our suppliers are included in our inventory, and recognized
as cost of sales upon sale of products to our customers. payment processing and related transaction costs, including those associated with seller transactions, are classified in fulfillment on our consolidated statements of
operations.  vendor agreements  we have agreements to receive cash consideration from certain of our vendors, including rebates and cooperative marketing reimbursements. we generally presume amounts received from our vendors are a reduction of the prices we pay for their
products and, therefore, we reflect such amounts as either a reduction of cost of sales on our consolidated statements of operations, or, if the product inventory is still on hand, as a reduction of the carrying value of inventory.
vendor rebates are typically dependent upon reaching minimum purchase thresholds. we evaluate the likelihood of reaching purchase thresholds using past experience and current year forecasts. when volume rebates can be reasonably estimated, we record
a portion of the rebate as we make progress towards the purchase threshold.  when we receive direct reimbursements for costs incurred by us
in advertising the vendors product or service, the amount we receive is recorded as an offset to marketing on our consolidated statements of operations.  fulfillment  fulfillment costs represent those costs incurred in operating and staffing our
fulfillment and customer service centers, including costs attributable to buying, receiving, inspecting, and warehousing inventories; picking, packaging, and preparing customer orders for shipment; payment processing and related transaction costs,
including costs associated with our guarantee for certain seller transactions; and responding to inquiries from customers. fulfillment costs also include amounts paid to third parties that assist us in fulfillment and customer service operations.
certain of our fulfillment-related costs that are incurred on behalf of other businesses, such as target corporation, are classified as cost of sales rather than fulfillment.  marketing  marketing costs consist
primarily of online advertising, including through our associates program, sponsored search, portal advertising, e-mail campaigns, and other initiatives. we pay commissions to participants in our associates program when their customer referrals
result in product sales and classify such costs as marketing on our consolidated statements of operations.  we also participate
in cooperative advertising arrangements with certain of our vendors, and other third parties. to the extent co-operative marketing reimbursements decline in future periods, we may incur additional expenses to continue certain promotions or elect to
reduce or discontinue them.  marketing expenses also consist of public relations expenditures; payroll and related expenses for personnel
engaged in marketing, business development, and selling activities; and to a lesser extent, traditional advertising such as newspaper inserts.  advertising and other promotional costs, which consist primarily of online advertising, are expensed as incurred, and were $306 million, $226 million, and $168 million in 2007, 2006, and 2005. prepaid advertising costs were not significant
at december31, 2007 and 2006.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
technology and content  technology and content expenses consist principally of payroll and related expenses for employees involved in, application development, category
expansion, editorial content, buying, merchandising selection, and systems support, as well as costs associated with the compute, storage and telecommunications infrastructure.  technology and content costs are expensed as incurred, except for certain costs relating to the development of internal-use software and website
development, including software used to upgrade and enhance our websites and processes supporting our business, which are capitalized and amortized over two years.  general and administrative  general and administrative expenses consist of payroll and related
expenses for employees involved in general corporate functions, including accounting, finance, tax, legal, and human relations, among others; costs associated with use by these functions of facilities and equipment, such as depreciation expense and
rent; professional fees and litigation costs; and other general corporate costs.  stock-based compensation  as of january1, 2005, we adopted sfas no.123(r), which requires measurement of compensation cost for all stock-based awards at fair value on
date of grant and recognition of compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. the fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock units is determined based on the number of shares granted and the quoted price of our common
stock. such value is recognized as expense over the service period, net of estimated forfeitures, using the accelerated method. the estimation of stock awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results or updated
estimates differ from our current estimates, such amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. we consider many factors when estimating expected forfeitures, including types of awards, employee class, and
historical experience. actual results and future estimates may differ substantially from our current estimates.  foreign currency
we have the following internationally-focused websites: www.amazon.co.uk, www.amazon.de, www.amazon.fr, www.amazon.co.jp,
www.amazon.ca, and services for the joyo amazon websites at www.joyo.cn and www.amazon.cn. net sales generated from internationally-focused websites, as well as most of the related expenses directly incurred from those operations,
are denominated in the functional currencies of the resident countries. additionally, the functional currency of our subsidiaries that either operate or support these international websites is the same as the local currency of the united kingdom,
germany, france, japan, canada, and china. assets and liabilities of these subsidiaries are translated into u.s. dollars at period-end exchange rates, and revenues and expenses are translated at average rates prevailing throughout the period.
translation adjustments are included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), a separate component of stockholders equity, and in the foreign currency effect on cash and cash equivalents, on our consolidated
statements of cash flows. transaction gains and losses arising from transactions denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the entity involved are included in other income (expense), net on our consolidated
statements of operations. see note 10other income (expense), net.  gains and losses arising from intercompany foreign
currency transactions are included in net income. in connection with the remeasurement of intercompany balances, we recorded gains of $32 million and $50 million in 2007 and 2006, and a loss of $47 million in 2005.  recent accounting pronouncements  in
september 2006, the financial accounting standards board (fasb) issued sfasno.157, fair value measurements, which defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
accounting principles and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. sfas no.157 is effective for fiscal years beginning after
november15, 2007, and interim periods within those fiscal years. we do not expect the adoption of sfas no.157 to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. the fasb may delay a portion of this standard.
in february 2007, the fasb issued sfasno.159, the fair value option for financial assets and financial liabilities. sfas
no.159 permits companies to choose to measure many financial instruments and certain other items at fair value. sfas no.159 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after november15, 2007. we do not
expect the adoption of sfas no. 159 to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.  in december 2007, the fasb issued
sfas no.141 (r), business combinations, and sfas no.160, noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial statements. sfas no.141 (r)requires an acquirer to measure the identifiable assets acquired, the
liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree at their fair values on the acquisition date, with goodwill being the excess value over the net identifiable assets acquired. sfas no.160 clarifies that a noncontrolling
interest in a subsidiary should be reported as equity in the consolidated financial statements. the calculation of earnings per share will continue to be based on income amounts attributable to the parent. sfas no.141 (r)and sfas
no.160 are effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after december15, 2008. early adoption is prohibited. we have not yet determined the effect on our consolidated financial statements, if any, upon adoption
of sfas no.141 (r)or sfas no.160.  note 2cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities  we measure our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities at fair value based on the quoted prices in active markets. the following tables
summarize, by major security type, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities (in millions):
december31, 2007
cost oramortizedcost
grossunrealizedgains
grossunrealizedlosses (1)
estimatedfairvalue
cash
$
$
$
$
money market funds
1,408
1,408
corporate debt securities
(1
)
u.s. government and agency securities
(1
)
asset-backed securities
(1
)
foreign government and agency securities
(1
)
equity securities
other securities
total cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities (2)
$
3,103
$
$
(4
)
$
3,112
(1)
the fair value of investments with loss positions was $515 million. we evaluated the nature of these investments, which are primarily u.s. treasury notes, the duration of the
impairments (substantially all less than twelve months), and concluded that such amounts were not other-than-temporary.
(2)
includes investments in foreign currencies of $1.2 billion, principally euros, british pounds, and japanese yen.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
december31, 2006
cost oramortizedcost
grossunrealizedgains
grossunrealizedlosses (1)
estimatedfairvalue
cash
$
$
$
$
money market funds
bank of certificates of deposits
corporate debt securities
(1
)
u.s. government and agency securities
(2
)
asset-backed securities
(1
)
foreign government and agency securities
(1
)
equity securities
other securities
total cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities (2)
$
2,020
$
$
(5
)
$
2,019
(1)
the fair value of investments with loss positions was $978 million. we evaluated the nature of these investments, which are primarily u.s. treasury notes, the duration of the
impairments (all less than twelve months), and the amount of the impairments relative to the underlying portfolio and concluded that such amounts were not other-than-temporary.
(2)
includes investments in foreign currencies of $623 million, principally euros, british pounds, and japanese yen.  the following table summarizes contractual maturities of our cash equivalent and marketable fixed-income securities as of december31, 2007 (in
millions):
amortizedcost
estimatedfairvalue
due within one year
$
1,818
$
1,818
due after one year through five years
$
2,284
$
2,287
gross gains of $2 million, $18 million, and $7 million and gross losses of $3 million, $16 million
and $12 million were realized on sales of available-for-sale marketable securities, including euro-denominated securities, for 2007, 2006, and 2005.  we are required to pledge a portion of our cash equivalents or marketable securities as collateral for standby letters of credit that guarantee certain of our contractual obligations, a line of credit, and real estate
lease agreements. see note 6commitments and contingencies.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
note 3fixed assets  fixed assets, at cost, consisted of the following (in millions):
december31,
gross fixed assets:
fulfillment and customer service
$
$
technology infrastructure
internal-use software, content, and website development
construction in progress (1)
other corporate assets
gross fixed assets
1,023
accumulated depreciation:
fulfillment and customer service
technology infrastructure
internal-use software, content, and website development
other corporate assets
total accumulated depreciation
total fixed assets, net
$
$
(1)
we capitalize construction in progress and record a corresponding long-term liability for certain lease agreements related to our seattle, washington corporate office space subject
to leases scheduled to begin in 2010 and 2011. see note 5other long-term liabilities and note 6commitments and contingencies for further discussion.  depreciation expense on fixed assets was $258 million, $200 million, and $113 million, which includes amortization of fixed assets acquired under capital
lease obligations of $40 million, $26 million and $4 million for 2007, 2006, and 2005. gross assets remaining under capital leases were $150 million and $77 million at december31, 2007 and 2006. accumulated depreciation associated with capital
leases was $64 million and $28 million at december31, 2007 and 2006.  note 4long-term debt  our long-term debt is summarized as follows:
december31,
(in millions)
4.75% convertible subordinated notes due february 2009
$
$
6.875% peacs due february 2010
other long-term debt
1,299
1,263
less current portion of long-term debt
(17
)
(16
)
$
1,282
$
1,247
4.75% convertible subordinated notes  in february1999, we completed an offering of $1.25 billion of 4.75% convertible subordinated notes. the 4.75% convertible subordinated notes are
convertible into our common stock at the holders option at a
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
conversion price of $78.0275 per share. total common stock issuable, as of december31, 2007, upon conversion of our outstanding 4.75% convertible
subordinated notes was 11.5million shares, which is excluded from our calculation of earnings per share as its effect is currently anti-dilutive. interest on the 4.75% convertible subordinated notes is payable semi-annually in arrears in
february and august of each year. the 4.75% convertible subordinated notes are unsecured and are subordinated to any existing and future senior indebtedness as defined in the indenture governing the 4.75% convertible subordinated notes. we have the
right to redeem the 4.75% convertible subordinated notes, in whole or in part, by paying the principal plus a redemption premium, plus any accrued and unpaid interest. the redemption premium was 0.950% of the principal at december31, 2007, and
decreased to 0.475% on february1, 2008 and will decrease to zero at maturity in february 2009.  upon the occurrence of a
fundamental change prior to the maturity of the 4.75% convertible subordinated notes, each holder thereof has the right to require us to redeem all or any part of such holders 4.75% convertible subordinated notes at a price equal
to 100% of the principal amount of the notes being redeemed, together with accrued interest. as defined in the indenture, a fundamental change is the occurrence of certain types of transactions in which our stockholders do not receive
publicly-traded securities.  the indenture governing the 4.75% convertible subordinated notes contains certain affirmative covenants for
us, including making principal and interest payments when due, maintaining our corporate existence and properties, and paying taxes and other claims in a timely manner. we were in compliance with these covenants through december31, 2007.
based upon quoted market prices, the fair value of our 4.75% convertible subordinated notes as of december31, 2007 and 2006 was $1.1
billion and $883 million.  6.875% peacs  in february 2000, we completed an offering of 690million of our 6.875% peacs. the 6.875% peacs are convertible, at the holders option, into our common stock at a conversion price of
84.883per share ($123.84, based on the exchange rates as of december31, 2007). total common stock issuable, as of december31, 2007, upon conversion of our outstanding 6.875% peacs was 2.8million shares, which is
excluded from our calculation of earnings per share as its effect is currently anti-dilutive. the u.s.dollar equivalent principal, interest, and conversion price fluctuate based on the euro/u.s. dollar exchange ratio. interest on the 6.875%
peacs is payable annually in arrears in february of each year. the 6.875% peacs are unsecured and are subordinated to any existing and future senior indebtedness. the 6.875% peacs rank equally with our outstanding 4.75% convertible subordinated
notes. we have the right to redeem the 6.875% peacs, in whole or in part, by paying the principal, plus any accrued and unpaid interest. no premium payment is required for early redemption.  upon the occurrence of a fundamental change prior to the maturity of the 6.875% peacs, each holder thereof has the right to require us to
redeem all or any part of such holders 6.875% peacs at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes being redeemed, together with accrued interest. as defined in the indenture, a fundamental change is the occurrence
of certain types of transactions in which our stockholders do not receive publicly-traded securities.  the indenture governing the 6.875%
peacs contains certain affirmative covenants for us, including making principal and interest payments when due, maintaining our corporate existence and properties, and paying taxes and other claims in a timely manner. we were in compliance with
these covenants through december31, 2007.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
in 2006 and 2005, we redeemed principal amounts of 250 millionand 200million
($300 million and $265 million based on the euro to u.s.dollar exchange rate on the date of redemption) of our outstanding 6.875% peacs. as a result of these redemptions, in 2006 and 2005 we recorded a charge classified in remeasurements
and other, of approximately $6 million and $4 million related to the redemption, consisting of $3 million and $2million in unamortized deferred issuance charges and $3 million and $2 million relating to unrealized losses on our
terminated currency swap that previously hedged a portion of our 6.875% peacs.  based upon quoted market prices, the fair value of the
6.875% peacs was $358 million and $320 million (outstanding principal of 240million) as of december31, 2007 and 2006.  debt repurchase authorization  in february 2008 our board of directors authorized a debt repurchase program, replacing our
previous debt repurchase authorization in its entirety, pursuant to which we may from time to time repurchase (through open market repurchases or private transactions), redeem, or otherwise retire up to an aggregate of all of our outstanding 4.75%
convertible subordinated notes and 6.875% peacs. the outstanding principal of our 4.75% convertible subordinated notes as of this authorization was $899 million, and the outstanding principal amount of our 6.875% peacs was 240 million.
note 5other long-term liabilities  our other long-term liabilities are summarized as follows:
december31,
(in millions)
tax contingencies
$
$
long-term capital lease obligations
construction liability
other
$
$
tax contingencies  as of december31, 2007 and 2006, we have provided tax reserves for tax contingencies of approximately $98 million and $75 million for u.s. and
foreign income taxes, which primarily relate to restructuring of certain foreign operations and intercompany pricing between our subsidiaries. see note 12income taxes for discussion of tax contingencies.  capital leases  certain of our
equipment fixed assets, primarily related to technology, have been acquired under capital leases. long-term capital lease obligations were as follows:
december31,2007
(inmillions)
gross capital lease obligations
$
less imputed interest
(13
)
present value of net minimum lease payments
less current portion
(26
)
total long-term capital lease obligations
$
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
construction liability related to seattle campus  we capitalize construction in progress and record a corresponding long-term liability for certain lease agreements related to our seattle, washington
corporate office space subject to leases scheduled to begin in 2010 and 2011.  in accordance with eitf no.97-10, for build-to-suit
lease arrangements where we are involved in the construction of structural improvements prior to the commencement of the lease or take some level of construction risk, we are considered the owner of the assets during the construction period under
generally accepted accounting principles. accordingly, as the landlord incurs the construction project costs, the assets and corresponding financial obligation are recorded in fixed assets, net and other long-term liabilities
on our consolidated balance sheet. once the construction is completed, if the lease meets certain sale-leaseback criteria in accordance with sfas no.98, accounting for leases, we will remove the asset and related financial
obligation from the balance sheet and treat the building lease as an operating lease. if upon completion of construction, the project does not meet the sale-leaseback criteria, the leased property will be treated as a capital lease for
financial reporting purposes.  the remainder of our other long-term liabilities primarily include deferred tax liabilities, unearned
revenue, asset retirement obligations, and deferred rental liabilities.  note 6commitments and contingencies  commitments  we lease office and
fulfillment center facilities and fixed assets under non-cancelable operating and capital leases. rental expense under operating lease agreements was $141 million, $132 million, and $84 million for 2007, 2006, and 2005.  in december 2007, we entered into a series of leases and other agreements for the lease of corporate office space to be developed in seattle, washington
with initial terms of up to 16 years commencing on completion of development in 2010 and 2011 and options to extend for two five year periods. under the agreements we will occupy approximately 800,000 square feet of office space. we also have the
right to occupy up to an additional approximately 800,000 square feet subject to a termination fee, estimated to be up to approximately $40 million, if the company elects not to occupy the additional space. in addition, we have options to lease up
to an additional approximately 500,000 square feet at rates based on fair market values at the time the options are exercised, subject to certain conditions. in addition, if interest rates exceed a certain threshold, we have the option to provide
financing for some of the buildings.  the following summarizes our principal contractual commitments, excluding open orders for inventory
purchases that support normal operations, as of december31, 2007:
year ended december31,
thereafter
total
(in millions)
operating and capital commitments:
debt principal (1)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,299
debt interest (1)
capital leases, including interest
operating leases
other commitments (2)(3)
total commitments
$
$
1,178
$
$
$
$
$
3,075
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
(1)
under our 6.875% peacs, the principal payment due in 2010 and the annual interest payments fluctuate based on the euro/u.s. dollar exchange ratio. at december31, 2007, the
euro to u.s.dollar exchange rate was 1.459. due to changes in the euro/u.s. dollar exchange ratio, our remaining principal debt obligation under this instrument since issuance in february 2000 has increased by $114 million as of
december31, 2007. the principal and interest commitments at december31, 2007 reflect the partial redemptions of the 6.875% peacs and 4.75% convertible subordinated notes.
(2)
includes the estimated timing and amounts of payments for rent, operating expenses, and tenant improvements associated with approximately 800,000 square feet of corporate office
space in seattle, washington. we also have the right to occupy up to an additional approximately 800,000 square feet subject to a termination fee, estimated to be up to approximately $40 million, if we do not elect to occupy this additional space.
the amount of space available and our financial and other obligations under the lease agreements are affected by various factors, including government approvals and permits, interest rates, development costs and other expenses and our exercise of
certain rights under the lease agreements.
(3)
includes commitments to acquire intellectual property and unrecognized tax benefits under fin 48, but excludes $105 million of such unrecognized tax benefits for which we cannot
make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period of payment. see item8 of part ii, financial statements and supplementary datanote 12income taxes.  in january 2008 we closed or entered into agreements, subject to regulatory approvals and other conditions, to acquire or invest in certain companies.
these acquisitions and investments result in aggregate cash payments of approximately $400 million, net of cash acquired.  pledged
securities  we are required to pledge or otherwise restrict a portion of our cash and marketable securities as collateral for standby
letters of credit, guarantees, debt, and real estate leases. we classify cash and marketable securities with use restrictions of twelve months or longer as non-current other assets on our consolidated balance sheets. the balance of
pledged securities at december31, 2007 consisted of $14 million in cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, and $197 million in other assets. the amount required to be pledged for certain real
estate lease agreements changes over the life of our leases based on our credit rating and changes in our market capitalization (common shares outstanding multiplied by the closing price of our common stock). information about collateral required to
be pledged under these agreements is as follows:
standbyandtradeletters of creditand guarantees
debt(1)
realestateleases(2)
total
(in millions)
balance at december31, 2006
$
$
$
$
net change in collateral pledged
(7
)
balance at december31, 2007
$
$
$
$
(1)
represents collateral for certain debt related to our international operations.
(2)
at december31, 2007, our market capitalization was $38.6 billion. the required amount of collateral to be pledged will increase by $5 million if our market capitalization is
equal to or below $18 billion and by an additional $6 million if our market capitalization is equal to or below $13 billion.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
legal proceedings  the company is involved from time to time in claims, proceedings and litigation, including the following:  in october 2002, gary gerlinger, individually and on behalf of all other similarly situated consumers in the united states who, during the period from
august1, 2001 to the present, purchased books online from either amazon.com or borders.com, instituted an action against us and borders in the united states district court for the northern district of california. the complaint alleges that the
agreement pursuant to which an affiliate of amazon.com operates borders.com as a co-branded site violates federal anti-trust laws, california statutory law, and the common law of unjust enrichment. the complaint seeks injunctive relief, damages,
including treble damages or statutory damages where applicable, attorneys fees, costs, and disbursements, disgorgement of all sums obtained by allegedly wrongful acts, interest, and declaratory relief. in november 2005, the court dismissed all
of the plaintiffs claims with prejudice. the plaintiff is appealing that dismissal. we dispute the allegations of wrongdoing in this complaint, and we will continue to defend ourselves vigorously in this matter.  beginning in march 2003, we were served with complaints filed in several different states, including illinois, by a private litigant, beeler,
schad& diamond, p.c., purportedly on behalf of the state governments under various state false claims acts. the complaints allege that we (along with other companies with which we have commercial agreements) wrongfully failed to collect
and remit sales and use taxes for sales of personal property to customers in those states and knowingly created records and statements falsely stating we were not required to collect or remit such taxes. in december 2006, we learned that one
additional complaint was filed in the state of illinois by a different private litigant, matthew t. hurst, alleging similar violations of the illinois state law. all of the complaints seek injunctive relief, unpaid taxes, interest, attorneys
fees, civil penalties of up to $10,000 per violation, and treble or punitive damages under the various state false claims acts. it is possible that we have been or will be named in similar cases in other states as well. we dispute the allegations of
wrongdoing in these complaints and intend to vigorously defend ourselves in these matters.  in may 2004, toysrus.com llc filed a complaint
against us for breach of contract in the superior court of new jersey. the complaint alleged that we breached our commercial agreement with toysrus.com llc by selling, and by permitting other third parties to sell, products that toysrus.com llc
alleged it has an exclusive right to sell on our website. we disputed the allegations in the complaint and brought counterclaims alleging breach of contract and seeking damages and declaratory relief. the trial of both parties claims concluded
in november 2005. in march 2006, the court entered a judgment in favor of toysrus.com llc, terminating the contract but declining to award damages to either party. we are pursuing an appeal of the lower courts rulings terminating the contract,
declining to award us damages, and denying our motion to compel toysrus.com to pay certain fees incurred during the wind-down period.  in
december 2005, registrar systems llc filed a complaint against us and target corporation for patent infringement in the united states district court for the district of colorado. the complaint alleges that our website technology, including the
method by which amazon.com enables customers to use amazon.com account information on websites that amazon.com operates for third parties, such as target.com, infringes two patents obtained by registrar systems purporting to cover methods and
apparatuses for a world wide web registration information processing system (u.s. patent nos.5,790,785 and 6,823,327) and seeks injunctive relief, monetary damages in an amount no less than a reasonable royalty, prejudgment
interest, costs, and attorneys fees. we dispute the allegations of wrongdoing in this complaint and intend to vigorously defend ourselves in this matter. in september 2006, the court entered an order staying the lawsuit pending the outcome of
the patent and trademark offices re-examination of the patents in suit.  in august 2006, cordance corporation filed a complaint
against us for patent infringement in the united states district court for the district of delaware. the complaint alleges that our website technology, including
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
our 1-click ordering system, infringes a patent obtained by cordance purporting to cover an object-based online transaction infrastructure (u.s.
patent no.6,757,710) and seeks injunctive relief, monetary damages in an amount no less than a reasonable royalty, treble damages for alleged willful infringement, prejudgment interest, costs, and attorneys fees. in response, we asserted
a declaratory judgment counterclaim in the same action alleging that a service that cordance has advertised its intent to launch infringes a patent owned by us entitled networked personal contact manager (u.s. patent no.6,269,369).
we dispute cordances allegations of wrongdoing and intend to vigorously defend ourselves in this matter.  in april 2007, sbj holdings
1, llc filed a complaint against us in the united states district court for the eastern district of texas. the complaint alleges that our website technology infringes a patent obtained by sbjholdings 1 purporting to cover a method,
memory, product, and code for displaying pre-customized content associated with visitor data (u.s. patent no.6,330,592) and seeks injunctive relief, monetary damages, treble damages for alleged willful infringement, prejudgment and
post-judgment interest, costs and attorneys fees. we dispute the allegations of wrongdoing and intend to vigorously defend ourselves in the matter.  in august 2007, polaris ip, llc filed a complaint against us and others in the united states district court for the eastern district of texas. the complaint alleges that our website technology infringes a patent
obtained by polaris purporting to cover an automatic message interpretation and routing system (u.s. patent no.6,411,947) and seeks injunctive relief, monetary damages, prejudgment and post-judgment interest, costs and
attorneys fees. in november 2007, we entered into a settlement of the litigation that included, among other things, a non-exclusive license to the patent in suit.  depending on the amount and the timing, an unfavorable resolution of some or all of these matters could materially affect our business, results of operations, financial position, or cash flows.  see also note 12income taxes.  inventory suppliers  during 2007, no vendor accounted for 10% or more of our inventory purchases. we do not have long-term
contracts or arrangements with most of our vendors to guarantee the availability of merchandise, particular payment terms, or the extension of credit limits.  note 7stockholders equity  preferred stock  we have authorized 500million shares of $0.01 par value preferred stock. no preferred stock was outstanding for any period presented.  stock repurchase activity  in august
2006, our board of directors authorized a 24-month program to repurchase up to $500 million of our common stock, pursuant to which we repurchased $252 million and $248 million of our common stock in 2006 and 2007, respectively. in april 2007, our
board authorized a new 24-month program to repurchase up to $500 million of our common stock, which was replaced in february 2008 by a 24-month program to repurchase up to $1 billion of our common stock.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
stock award plans  employees vest in restricted stock unit awards and stock options over the corresponding service term, generally between two and five years. outstanding
stock options generally have a term of 10 years from the date of grant. stock options outstanding have a weighted average exercise life of 3.5 years, with a weighted average exercise price of $17.46.  stock award activity  we granted
stock awards, which consist primarily of restricted stock units, representing 7.6million, 9.1million, and 6.0million shares of common stock during 2007, 2006, and 2005 with a per share weighted average fair value of $47.04, $36.48,
and $36.50.  common shares underlying outstanding stock awards were as follows:
yearendeddecember31,
(in millions)
restricted stock units
16.3
14.5
stock options
1.9
7.4
total outstanding stock awards
18.2
21.9
common shares outstanding (which includes restricted stock), plus shares underlying outstanding
stock options and restricted stock units totaled 435million, 436million, and 438million at december31, 2007, 2006 and 2005. these totals include all stock-based awards outstanding, without regard for estimated forfeitures,
consisting of vested and unvested awards and in-the-money and out-of-the-money stock options. common shares outstanding decreased in both 2007 and 2006 due to repurchases of common stock, offset by exercises of stock options, vesting of restricted
stock units, and matching contributions under our 401(k) savings plan.  the following summarizes our restricted stock unit activity (in
millions):
numberofunits
outstanding at january1, 2005
6.4
units granted
6.0
units vested
(1.2
)
units cancelled
(1.3
)
outstanding at december31, 2005
9.9
units granted
9.1
units vested
(1.7
)
units cancelled
(2.8
)
outstanding at december31, 2006
14.5
units granted
7.6
units vested
(3.3
)
units cancelled
(2.5
)
outstanding at december31, 2007
16.3
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
scheduled vesting for outstanding restricted stock units at december31, 2007 is as follows (in
millions):
year ended december31,
thereafter
total
scheduled vestingrestricted stock units
5.6
5.8
2.9
1.4
0.4
0.2
16.3
as matching contributions under our 401(k) savings plan, we granted 0.09million and
0.15million shares of common stock for years ended 2007 and 2006. shares granted as matching contributions under our 401(k) plan are included in outstanding common stock when issued.  as of december31, 2007, there was $252 million of net unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested stock-based compensation arrangements.
this compensation is recognized on an accelerated basis resulting in approximately half of the compensation expected to be expensed in the next twelve months, and has a weighted average recognition period of 1.2 years.  during 2007 and 2006, the fair value of restricted stock units vested was $224million and $68 million.  common stock available for future issuance  at december31, 2007, common stock available for future issuance is as follows (in millions):
december31,2007
stock awards
129.3
shares issuable upon conversion of 4.75% convertible subordinated notes
11.5
shares issuable upon conversion of 6.875% peacs
2.8
total common stock reserved for future issuance
143.6
note 8other comprehensive income (loss)  the changes in the components of other comprehensive income (loss) were as follows:
yearendeddecember31,
(in millions)
net income
$
$
$
net activity on available-for-sale securities:
unrealized gains (losses) arising during the year, net of tax
(14
)
reclassification adjustment for net realized gains/losses included in net income, net of tax
net change in unrealized gains/losses on available-for-sale securities
(14
)
foreign currency translation adjustment, net of tax
(3
)
(13
)
(15
)
amortization of net unrealized losses on terminated euro currency swap, net of tax
other comprehensive income (loss)
(7
)
(26
)
comprehensive income
$
$
$
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
accumulated balances within other comprehensive income (loss) were as follows:
december31,
(in millions)
net unrealized gains (losses) on foreign currency translation, net of tax
$
(1
)
$
net unrealized gains (losses) on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
(1
)
net unrealized losses on terminated euro currency swap, net of tax
(1
)
(2
)
total accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
$
$
(1
)
note 9other operating expense, net  other operating expense, net, was $9 million and $10 million in 2007 and 2006, primarily attributable to amortization of other intangibles. other
operating expense, net, was $47 million in 2005, primarily attributable to our settlement of a patent lawsuit for $40 million, as well as amortization of other intangibles of $5 million.  note 10other income (expense), net  other income (expense), net, was $(1) million, $(4)
million, and $2 million, in 2007, 2006 and 2005, and consisted primarily of gains and losses on sales of marketable securities, foreign-currency transaction gains and losses, and other miscellaneous losses.  foreign-currency transaction gains and losses primarily relate to the interest payable on our 6.875% peacs, as well as foreign-currency gains and losses
on cross-currency investments. since interest payments on our 6.875% peacs are settled in euros, the balance of interest payable is subject to gains or losses resulting from changes in exchange rates between the u.s.dollar and euro between
reporting dates and payment.  note 11remeasurements and other  remeasurements and other consisted of the following:
yearendeddecember31,
(in millions)
foreign-currency gain (loss) on remeasurement of 6.875% peacs
$
(33
)
$
(37
)
$
loss on redemption of long-term debt
(6
)
(6
)
foreign-currency gain (loss) on intercompany balances
(47
)
other
(6
)
total remeasurements and other
$
(7
)
$
$
note 12income taxes  in 2007, 2006 and 2005 we recorded net tax provisions of $184 million, $187 million, and $95 million. a majority of this provision is non-cash. we have current tax benefits and net operating losses relating to excess
stock-based compensation that are being utilized to reduce our taxable income. as such, cash taxes paid were $24 million, $15 million, and $12 million for 2007, 2006, and 2005.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
the components of the provision for income taxes, net were as follows:
yearendeddecember31,
(in millions)
current taxes:
u.s. and state
$
$
$
international
current taxes
deferred taxes
(99
)
provision for income taxes, net
$
$
$
u.s. and international components of income before income taxes were as follows:
yearendeddecember31,
(in millions)
u.s.
$
$
$
international
(19
)
(173
)
income before income taxes
$
$
$
the items accounting for differences between income taxes computed at the federal statutory rate
and the provision recorded for income taxes are as follows:
yearendeddecember31,
federal statutory rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
effect of:
valuation allowance
(1.2
)
(2.6
)
(31.1
)
impact of international operations restructuring
(12.3
)
16.0
15.1
other, net
6.4
1.2
3.3
total
27.9
%
49.6
%
22.3
%
the effective tax rate in 2007 was lower than the 35% u.s. federal statutory rate primarily due to
earnings of our subsidiaries outside of the u.s. in jurisdictions where our effective tax rate is lower than in the u.s. the effective tax rate in 2006 was higher than the 35% u.s. federal statutory rate resulting from establishment of our european
headquarters in luxembourg. associated with the establishment of our european headquarters, we transferred certain of our operating assets in 2005 and 2006 from the u.s. to international locations. these transfers resulted in taxable income and
exposure to additional taxable income assertions by taxing jurisdictions.  included in the 2005 provision and reducing the impact of the
international restructure was a tax benefit of $90 million, resulting from certain of our deferred tax assets becoming more likely than not realizable. this tax benefit represented $0.22 and $0.21 of basic and diluted earnings per share.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
the significant components of deferred income tax expense attributable to income from operations for
2007, 2006, and 2005 were as follows:
yearendeddecember31,
(in millions)
deferred tax expense (benefit) exclusive of the effect of the items listed below
$
(91
)
$
$
decrease in valuation allowance
(8
)
(10
)
(90
)
tax benefit of net operating and capital loss carryforwards
(28
)
total deferred tax expense (benefit)
$
(99
)
$
$
deferred income tax assets and liabilities were as follows:
december31,
(in millions)
deferred tax assets:
net operating lossesstock-based compensation (1)
$
$
net operating lossesother
assets held for investment
revenue items
expense items, including stock-based compensation
net tax credits (2)
deferred tax assets under fin 48
total gross deferred tax assets
less valuation allowance (3)
(195
)
(216
)
deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowance
deferred tax liabilities:
expense items
(24
)
(13
)
deferred tax liabilities under fin 48
(3
)
deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowance and deferred tax liabilities
$
$
(1)
presented net of fully reserved nol deferred tax asset of $219 million and $381 million at december31, 2007 and 2006. the total gross deferred tax assets relating to our
excess stock-based compensation nols at december31, 2007 and 2006 were $339 million and $501 million (relating to approximately $1.1 billion and $1.6 billion of nols).
(2)
presented net of fully reserved deferred tax assets associated with tax credits of $95 million and $67 million at december31, 2007 and 2006. total tax credits available to be
claimed in future years are approximately $129 million and $101 million as of december31, 2007 and 2006.
(3)
relates primarily to deferred tax assets that would only be realizable upon the generation of future capital gains and net income in certain taxing jurisdictions.
we have not fully utilized nols which were generated in the years 1996 through 2003, so that the statute of limitations for
these years remains open for purposes of adjusting the amounts of the losses carried forward from those years. the majority of our nols begin to expire in 2019 and thereafter.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
tax contingencies  we are subject to income taxes in the u.s. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. significant judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and
determining our provision for income taxes. during the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. we establish reserves for tax-related uncertainties based on
estimates of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. these reserves are established when we believe that certain positions might be challenged despite our belief that our tax return positions are fully supportable. we adjust
these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the outcome of tax audit. the provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate. accruals for tax
contingencies are provided for in accordance with the requirements of fin 48.  the reconciliation of our tax contingencies is as follows
(in millions):
gross tax contingenciesjanuary1, 2007
$
gross increases to tax positions in prior periods
gross decreases to tax positions in prior periods
(3
)
gross increases to current period tax positions
audit settlements paid during 2007
(5
)
gross tax contingenciesdecember31, 2007 (1)
$
(1)
as of december31, 2007, we had $112 million of tax contingencies of which $118 million, if fully recognized, would affect our effective tax rate and increase additional
paid-in capital by $6 million to reflect the tax benefits of excess stock-based compensation deductions.  as of
december31, 2007, changes to our tax contingencies that are reasonably possible in the next 12 months are not material. our policy is to include interest and penalties related to our tax contingencies in income tax expense. as of
december31, 2007, we had accrued interest and penalties related to tax contingencies of $9 million, net of federal income tax benefits, on our balance sheet. interest and penalties recognized for the year ended december31, 2007 was $1
million, net of federal income tax benefits.  we are under examination, or may be subject to examination, by the internal revenue service
(irs) for calendar years 2004 through 2006. additionally, any net operating losses that were generated in prior years and utilized in these years may also be subject to examination by the irs. we are under examination, or may be subject
to examination, in the following major jurisdictions for the years specified: kentucky for 2003 through 2006, france for 2005 through 2006, germany for 2004 through 2006, luxembourg for 2003 through 2006, and the united kingdom for 1999 through
2006. in addition, in february 2007, japanese tax authorities assessed income tax, including penalties and interest, of approximately $93 million against one of our u.s. subsidiaries for the years 2003 through 2005. we believe that these claims are
without merit and are disputing the assessment. further proceedings on the assessment will be stayed during negotiations between u.s. and japanese authorities over the double taxation issues the assessment raises, and we have provided bank
guarantees to suspend enforcement of the assessment. we also may be subject to income tax examination by japanese tax authorities for 2006.  note
13segment information  we have organized our operations into two principal segments: north america and international. we present
our segment information along the same lines that our chief executive reviews our operating results in assessing performance and allocating resources.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
we allocate to segment results the operating expenses fulfillment, marketing,
technology and content, and general and administrative, but exclude from our allocations the portions of these expense lines attributable to stock-based compensation. additionally, we do not allocate the line item other
operating expense, net to our segment operating results. a significant majority of our costs for technology and content are incurred in the united states and most of these costs are allocated to our north america segment. there are
no internal revenue transactions between our reporting segments.  north america  the north america segment consists of amounts earned from retail sales of consumer products (including from sellers) and subscriptions through north
america-focused websites such as www.amazon.com, www.amazon.ca, www.shopbop.com, and www.endless.com; from our amazon prime membership program; and from non-retail activities such as north america-focused amazon enterprise solutions,
amazon web services and marketing, and promotional services. this segment includes export sales from www.amazon.com and www.amazon.ca.  international  the international segment consists of amounts earned from retail sales of consumer
products (including from sellers) and subscriptions through internationally focused websites such as www.amazon.co.uk, www.amazon.de, www.amazon.co.jp, www.amazon.fr, and our joyo amazon websites at www.joyo.cn and
www.amazon.cn; from our amazon prime membership program; and from non-retail activities such as internationally focused amazon enterprise solutions, amazon web services and marketing and promotional services. this segment includes export
sales from these internationally based sites (including export sales from these sites to customers in the u.s. and canada), but excludes export sales from www.amazon.com and www.amazon.ca.
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
information on reportable segments and reconciliation to consolidated net income was as follows:
year ended december31,
(in millions)
north america
net sales
$
8,095
$
5,869
$
4,711
cost of sales
6,064
4,344
3,444
gross profit
2,031
1,525
1,267
direct segment operating expenses
1,631
1,295
segment operating income
$
$
$
international
net sales
$
6,740
$
4,842
$
3,779
cost of sales
5,418
3,911
3,007
gross profit
1,322
direct segment operating expenses
segment operating income
$
$
$
consolidated
net sales
$
14,835
$
10,711
$
8,490
cost of sales
11,482
8,255
6,451
gross profit
3,353
2,456
2,039
direct segment operating expenses
2,504
1,956
1,473
segment operating income
stock-based compensation
(185
)
(101
)
(87
)
other operating expense, net
(9
)
(10
)
(47
)
income from operations
total non-operating income (expense), net
(12
)
(4
)
provision for income taxes
(184
)
(187
)
(95
)
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
net income
$
$
$
net sales shipped to customers outside of the u.s. represented approximately half of net sales for
2007, 2006, and 2005. net sales from www.amazon.co.uk, www.amazon.de, and www.amazon.co.jp each represented 10% or more of consolidated net sales in 2007, 2006 and 2005. net fixed assets held in locations outside the u.s. were
$139 million, $108 million, and $68 million at december31, 2007, 2006, and 2005.  total assets, by segment, reconciled to
consolidated amounts were (in millions):
december31,
north america
$
4,227
$
2,801
international
2,258
1,562
consolidated
$
6,485
$
4,363
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
depreciation expense, by segment, was as follows (in millions):
yearended december31,
north america
$
$
$
international
consolidated
$
$
$
note 14fair values of financial instruments  the carrying amount and estimated fair values of our financial instruments were as follows (in millions):
december31,
carryingamount
fairvalue
carryingamount
fairvalue
cash and cash equivalents
$
2,539
$
2,539
$
1,022
$
1,022
marketable securities (1)
other equity investments (2)
long-term debt (3)
1,282
1,466
1,247
1,234
(1)
the fair value of marketable securities is determined from publicly quoted prices. see note 2cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities.
(2)
the fair value of other equity investments is determined from publicly quoted prices, plus the carrying amount of privately-held investments for which market values are not readily
determinable. we evaluate other equity investments for impairment in accordance with our stated policy. see note 1description of business and accounting policies.
(3)
the fair value of our long-term debt is determined based on quoted prices. see note 4long-term debt.  note 15quarterly results (unaudited)  the
following tables contain selected unaudited statement of operations information for each quarter of 2007 and 2006. the following information reflects all normal recurring adjustments necessary for a fair presentation of the information for the
periods presented. the operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period. our business is affected by seasonality, which historically has resulted in higher sales volume during our fourth quarter,
which ends december31.  unaudited quarterly results were as follows (in millions, except per share data):
year ended december31, 2007 (1)
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
net sales
$
5,673
$
3,262
$
2,886
$
3,015
gross profit
1,170
income before income taxes
provision for income taxes
net income
basic earnings per share
$
0.50
$
0.19
$
0.19
$
0.27
diluted earnings per share
$
0.48
$
0.19
$
0.19
$
0.26
shares used in computation of earnings per share:
basic
diluted
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  notes to consolidated financial statements(continued)
year ended december31, 2006 (1)
fourthquarter
thirdquarter
secondquarter
firstquarter
net sales
$
3,986
$
2,307
$
2,139
$
2,279
gross profit
income before income taxes
provision for income taxes
net income
basic earnings per share
$
0.24
$
0.05
$
0.05
$
0.12
diluted earnings per share
$
0.23
$
0.05
$
0.05
$
0.12
shares used in computation of earnings per share:
basic
diluted
(1)
the sum of quarterly amounts, including per share amounts, may not equal amounts reported for year-to-date periods. this is due to the effects of rounding and changes in the number
of weighted-average shares outstanding for each period.
table of contents
item9.changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure   none.
item9a.controls and procedures  evaluation of disclosure
controls and procedures  we carried out an evaluation required by the 1934 act, under the supervision and with the participation of our
principal executive officer and principal financial officer, of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures, as defined in rule 13a-15(e) of the 1934 act, as of december31, 2007. based on this
evaluation, our principal executive officer and principal financial officer concluded that, as of december31, 2007, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed
by us in the reports that we file or submit under the 1934 act is recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the secs rules and forms and to provide reasonable assurance that such information is
accumulated and communicated to our management, including our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosures.  managements report on internal control over financial reporting  management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as defined in rule 13a-15(f) of the 1934
act. management has assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2007 based on criteria established in internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission. as a result of this assessment, management concluded that, as of december31, 2007, our internal control over financial reporting was effective in providing reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.  changes in internal control over financial reporting  there were no changes in our internal control
over financial reporting during the quarter ended december31, 2007 that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.  limitations on controls  management
does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our internal control over financial reporting will prevent or detect all error and fraud. any control system, no matter how well designed and operated, is based upon certain assumptions
and can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that its objectives will be met. further, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that misstatements due to error or fraud will not occur or that all control issues and
instances of fraud, if any, within the company have been detected.
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm  the board of directors and stockholders  amazon.com, inc.  we have audited amazon.com, inc.s internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2007, based on criteria established in internal
controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (the coso criteria). amazon.com, inc.s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the accompanying managements report on internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.  we conducted our audit in accordance
with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.  a companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
(1)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors
of the company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  in our opinion, amazon.com, inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2007,
based on the coso criteria.  we have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board
(united states), the consolidated balance sheets of amazon.com, inc. as of december31, 2007 and 2006, and the related consolidated statements of operations, stockholders equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period
ended december31, 2007 of amazon.com, inc. and our report dated february8, 2008 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.  /s/ernst & young llp  seattle, washington
february 8, 2008
table of contents
item9b.other information   none.  part iii
item10.directors and executive officers of the registrant   information regarding our executive officers required by item10 of part iii is set forth in item1 of part i businessexecutive officers and directors. information required by item10 of part iii regarding
our directors and any material changes to the process by which security holders may recommend nominees to the board of directors is included in our proxy statement relating to our 2008 annual meeting of shareholders, and is incorporated herein by
reference. information relating to our code of business conduct and ethics and to compliance with section16(a) of the 1934 act is set forth in our proxy statement relating to our 2008 annual meeting of shareholders and is incorporated herein
by reference. to the extent permissible under nasdaq rules, we intend to disclose amendments to our code of business conduct and ethics, as well as waivers of the provisions thereof, on our investor relations website under the heading
corporate governance at www.amazon.com/ir website.
item11.executive compensation   information required by
item11 of part iii is included in our proxy statement relating to our 2008 annual meeting of shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference.
item12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related shareholder matters   information required by item12 of part iii is included in our proxy statement relating to our 2008 annual meeting of shareholders and is
incorporated herein by reference.
item13.certain relationships and related transactions   information required by item13 of part iii is included in our proxy statement relating to our 2008 annual meeting of shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.principal accountant fees and services   information
required by item14 of part iii is included in our proxy statement relating our 2008 annual meeting of shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference.  part iv
item15.exhibits, financial statement schedules   (a) list
of documents filed as a part of this report:   (1) index to consolidated financial statements:   report of ernst& young llp, independent registered public accounting firm  consolidated statements of cash flows for each of the three years ended december31, 2007  consolidated statements of operations for each of the three years ended december31, 2007
table of contents
consolidated balance sheets as of december31, 2007 and 2006  consolidated statements of stockholders equity for each of the three years ended december31, 2007  notes to consolidated financial statements  report of ernst& young llp, independent registered public accounting firm  (2) index to
financial statement schedules:   schedule iivaluation and qualifying accounts  all other schedules have been omitted because the required information is included in the consolidated financial statements or the notes
thereto, or is not applicable or required.  (3) index to exhibits
exhibitnumber
description
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of the company (incorporated by reference to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 2000).
3.2
restated bylaws of the company (incorporated by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k, dated february 8, 2008).
4.1
indenture, dated as of february 3, 1999, between amazon.com, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee, including the form of 43/4% convertible subordinated notes due 2009 attached as exhibit a thereto (incorporated by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february 3,
1999).
4.2
registration rights agreement, dated february 3, 1999, by and among amazon.com, inc. and the initial purchasers (incorporated by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k dated
february 3, 1999).
4.3
indenture, dated as of february 16, 2000, between amazon.com, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february
16, 2000).
4.4
form of 67/8% convertible subordinated notes due 2010 (incorporated
by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february 28, 2000).
10.1
1997 stock incentive plan (incorporated by reference to appendix b to the companys proxy statement on schedule 14a, filed with the securities and exchange commission on march 29, 2000).
10.2
1999 non-officer employee stock option plan (incorporated by reference to the companys registration statement on form s-8 (registration no. 333-74419) filed march 15,
1999).
10.3
offer letter of employment to thomas j. szkutak, dated august 26, 2002 (incorporated by reference to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2002).
10.4
offer letter of employment to h. brian valentine, dated june 23, 2006.
10.5
offer letter of employment to marc a. onetto, dated november 27, 2006.
10.6
offer letter of employment to sebastian j. gunningham, dated january 29, 2007.
10.7
form of indemnification agreement between the company and each of its directors (incorporated by reference to the companys registration statement on form s-1 (registration no. 333-23795)
filed march 24, 1997).
table of contents
exhibitnumber
description
10.8
form of restricted stock unit agreement for officers and employees (incorporated by reference to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december31,
2002).
10.9
form of restricted stock unit agreement for directors (incorporated by reference to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2002).
10.10
form of restricted stock agreement (incorporated by reference to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2001).
12.1
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
21.1
list of significant subsidiaries.
23.1
consent of ernst & young llp, independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
certification of jeffrey p. bezos, chairman and chief executive officer of amazon.com, inc., pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) under the securities exchange act of 1934.
31.2
certification of thomas j. szkutak, senior vice president and chief financial officer of amazon.com, inc., pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) under the securities exchange act of 1934.
32.1
certification of jeffrey p. bezos, chairman and chief executive officer of amazon.com, inc., pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350.
32.2
certification of thomas j. szkutak, senior vice president and chief financial officer of amazon.com, inc., pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350.
executive compensation plan or agreement
table of contents
signatures  pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934,
the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, as of february8, 2008.
amazon.com, inc.
by:
/s/jeffrey p. bezos
jeffrey p. bezos
president, chief executive officer
and chairman of the board
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated as of february8, 2008.
signature
title
/s/jeffrey p. bezos jeffrey p. bezos
chairman of the board, president and chiefexecutive officer (principal executive officer)
/s/thomas j. szkutak
thomas j. szkutak
senior vice president and chief financial officer(principal financial officer)
/s/shelley reynolds shelley reynolds
vice president. worldwide controller(principal accounting officer)
/s/tom a. alberg tom a. alberg
director
/s/john seely
brown john seely brown
director
/s/l. john doerr l. john doerr
director
/s/william b. gordon
william b. gordon
director
/s/myrtle s. potter myrtle s. potter
director
/s/thomas o. ryder thomas o. ryder
director
/s/patricia q.
stonesifer patricia q. stonesifer
director
table of contents
amazon.com, inc.  schedule iivaluation and qualifying accounts  accounts receivable and other current assetsreserves
balanceatbeginningofperiod
chargedtocostsandexpense
amountswrittenoff
balanceatend ofperiod
(in millions)
december31, 2007
$
$
$
(37
)
$
december31, 2006
(42
)
december31, 2005
(28
)
table of contents
exhibit index
exhibit number
description
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of the company (incorporated by reference to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 2000).
3.2
restated bylaws of the company (incorporated by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february 8, 2008).
4.1
indenture, dated as of february 3, 1999, between amazon.com, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee, including the form of 43/4% convertible subordinated notes due 2009 attached as exhibit a thereto (incorporated by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february 3,
1999).
4.2
registration rights agreement, dated february 3, 1999, by and among amazon.com, inc. and the initial purchasers (incorporated by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k dated
february 3, 1999).
4.3
indenture, dated as of february 16, 2000, between amazon.com, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february
16, 2000).
4.4
form of 67/8% convertible subordinated notes due 2010 (incorporated
by reference to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february 28, 2000).
10.1
1997 stock incentive plan (incorporated by reference to appendix b to the companys proxy statement on schedule 14a, filed with the securities and exchange commission on march 29, 2000).
10.2
1999 non-officer employee stock option plan (incorporated by reference to the companys registration statement on form s-8 (registration no. 333-74419) filed march 15,
1999).
10.3
offer letter of employment to thomas j. szkutak, dated august 26, 2002 (incorporated by reference to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2002).
10.4
offer letter of employment to h. brian valentine, dated june 23, 2006.
10.5
offer letter of employment to marc a. onetto, dated november 27, 2006.
10.6
offer letter of employment to sebastian j. gunningham, dated january 29, 2007.
10.7
form of indemnification agreement between the company and each of its directors (incorporated by reference to the companys registration statement on form s-1 (registration no. 333-23795)
filed march 24, 1997).
10.8
form of restricted stock unit agreement for officers and employees (incorporated by reference to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2002).
10.9
form of restricted stock unit agreement for directors (incorporated by reference to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2002).
10.10
form of restricted stock agreement (incorporated by reference to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2001).
12.1
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
21.1
list of significant subsidiaries.
23.1
consent of ernst & young llp, independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
certification of jeffrey p. bezos, chairman and chief executive officer of amazon.com, inc., pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) under the securities exchange act of 1934.
table of contents
exhibit number
description
31.2
certification of thomas j. szkutak, senior vice president and chief financial officer of amazon.com, inc., pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) under the securities exchange act of 1934.
32.1
certification of jeffrey p. bezos, chairman and chief executive officer of amazon.com, inc., pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350.
32.2
certification of thomas j. szkutak, senior vice president and chief financial officer of amazon.com, inc., pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350.
executive compensation plan or agreement
