10-k
d722626d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended june30, 2014
or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from
to   commission file number
0-14278
microsoft corporation
washington
91-1144442
(state of incorporation)
(i.r.s. id)
one microsoft way, redmond, washington 98052-6399
(425) 882-8080
www.microsoft.com/investor
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:  common stock, $0.00000625 par value per share
nasdaq
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:
none  indicate by check mark
if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act.yesxno
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the exchange
act.yesno x  indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such
shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.yesxno  indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its
corporate website, if any, every interactive data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t (232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to submit and post such
files).yesxno   indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k (229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.x  indicate by check mark whether the
registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller reporting
company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.
largeacceleratedfiler
x
acceleratedfiler
non-accelerated filer
(do not check if a
smaller reporting company)
smallerreportingcompany
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesno x  as of december31, 2013, the aggregate market value of the registrants common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant was $284,539,953,282 based on the closing sale price as reported on the nasdaq
national market system. as of july22, 2014, there were 8,239,848,789 shares of common stock outstanding.  documents incorporated
by reference  portions of the definitive proxy statement to be delivered to shareholders in connection with the annual meeting of
shareholders to be held on december3, 2014 are incorporated by reference into part iii.
table of contents
microsoft corporation
form 10-k  for the fiscal
year ended june30, 2014  index
page
parti
item1.
business
executive officers of the registrant
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
mine safety disclosures
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters, and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
report of management on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
item9b.
other information
partiii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
table of contents
part i  item 1
note about forward-looking statements
this report includes estimates, projections, statements relating to our business plans, objectives, and expected operating results that are
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995, section27a of the securities act of 1933 and section21e of the securities exchange act of 1934. forward-looking statements
may appear throughout this report, including the following sections: business, managements discussion and analysis, and risk factors. these forward-looking statements generally are identified by the words
believe, project, expect, anticipate, estimate, intend, strategy, future, opportunity, plan, may, should,
will, would, will be, will continue, will likely result, and similar expressions. forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are subject to risks and
uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially. we describe risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially in risk factors (part i, item1a of this form 10-k),
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk (part ii, item7a), and managements discussion and analysis (part ii, item7). we undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any
forward-looking statements, whether because of new information, future events, or otherwise.  part i
item1. business  general  microsoft was founded in 1975. our mission is to enable people and organizations
throughout the world to do more and achieve more by creating technology that transforms the way people learn, work, play, and communicate. we develop and market software, services, and devices that deliver new opportunities, greater convenience, and
enhanced value to peoples lives. we do business worldwide and have offices in more than 100 countries.  we generate revenue by
developing, licensing, and supporting a wide range of software products and services, by designing, manufacturing, and selling devices, and by delivering relevant online advertising to a global customer audience. in addition to selling individual
products and services, we offer suites of products and services.  our products include operating systems for computing devices, servers,
phones, and other intelligent devices; server applications for distributed computing environments; productivity applications; business solution applications; desktop and server management tools; software development tools; video games; and online
advertising. we also design and sell hardware including pcs, tablets, gaming and entertainment consoles, phones, other intelligent devices, and related accessories.  we offer cloud-based solutions that provide customers with software, services, and content over the internet by way of shared computing resources located in centralized data centers. examples of cloud-based
computing services we offer include bing, microsoft azure, microsoft dynamics crm online, microsoft office 365, onedrive, skype, xbox live, and yammer. cloud revenue is earned primarily from usage fees, advertising, and subscriptions. we also
provide consulting and product and solution support services, and we train and certify computer system integrators and developers.  we
conduct research and develop advanced technologies for future software, devices, and services. we believe that we will continue to grow and meet our customers needs as the productivity and platform company for the mobile-first and cloud-first
world. we will continue to create new opportunities for partners, increase customer satisfaction, and improve our service excellence, business efficacy, and internal processes.  operating segments  during the first quarter of fiscal year 2014, we changed our
organizational structure as part of our transformation to a devices and services company. as a result, information that our chief operating decision maker regularly reviews for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance changed.
therefore, beginning in fiscal year 2014, we reported our financial performance based on our new segments: devices and consumer (d&c) licensing, d&c hardware, d&c other, commercial licensing, and commercial other.
table of contents
part i  item 1
on april25, 2014, we completed the transaction to acquire substantially all of nokia
corporations (nokia) devices and services business (nds). we report the financial performance of nds in our new phone hardware segment. prior to the acquisition of nds, financial results associated with our joint
strategic initiatives with nokia were reflected in our d&c licensing segment. the contractual relationship with nokia related to those initiatives terminated in conjunction with the acquisition. with the creation of the new phone hardware
segment, the d&c hardware segment was renamed computing and gaming hardware in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014.  our segments
provide management with a comprehensive financial view of our key businesses. the segments enable the alignment of strategies and objectives across the development, sales, marketing, and services organizations, and they provide a framework for
timely and rational allocation of development, sales, marketing, and services resources within businesses. additional information on our operating segments and geographic and product information is contained in note 21  segment information and
geographic data of the notes to financial statements.  devices and consumer
our d&c segments develop, manufacture, market, and support products and services designed to increase personal productivity, help people
simplify tasks and make more informed decisions online, entertain and connect people, and help advertisers connect with audiences. our d&c segments are made up of d&c licensing, computing and gaming hardware, phone hardware, and d&c
other.  d&c licensing  the
principal products and services provided by the d&c licensing segment are: windows, including original equipment manufacturer (oem) licensing (windows oem) and other non-volume licensing and academic volume licensing of
the windows operating system and related software; non-volume licensing of microsoft office, comprising the core office product set, for consumers (office consumer); windows phone operating system, including related patent licensing; and
certain other patent licensing revenue.  the windows operating system is designed to empower individuals, companies, and organizations
to simplify everyday tasks through seamless operations across the users hardware and software.  windows revenue growth is impacted
significantly by the number of windows operating system licenses purchased by oems, which they pre-install on the devices they sell. in addition to computing device market volume, windows revenue is impacted by:
the mix of computing devices based on form factor and screen size;
differences in device market demand between developed markets and emerging markets;
attachment of windows to devices shipped;
customer mix between consumer, small and medium sized businesses, and large enterprises;
changes in inventory levels in the oem channel;
pricing changes and promotions, pricing variation that occurs when the mix of devices manufactured shifts from local and regional system builders to large,
multinational oems, and different pricing of windows versions licensed;
piracy; and
sales of packaged software.
the versions of office included in our d&c licensing segment are designed to increase personal productivity through a range of programs,
services, and software solutions. growth depends on our ability to add value to the core product set and to continue to expand our product offerings in other areas such as content management and collaboration. office consumer revenue is impacted by
sales to customers that buy office with their new devices and by product launches, as well as the transition to office 365 consumer, our subscription-based cloud service that provides access to office plus other productivity services. office 365
consumer revenue is included in our d&c other segment.
table of contents
part i  item 1
the windows phone operating system is designed to bring users closer to the people, applications,
and content they need. as noted above, prior to our acquisition of nds, microsoft and nokia jointly created new mobile products and services and extended established products and services to new markets through a strategic alliance. windows phone
revenue associated with this contractual relationship was reflected in d&c licensing. windows phone revenue also includes revenue from licensing mobile-related patents.  competition  the windows operating system faces competition from various software products and
from alternative platforms and devices, mainly from apple and google. we believe windows competes effectively by giving customers choice, value, flexibility, security, an easy-to-use interface, compatibility with a broad range of hardware and
software applications, including those that enable productivity, and the largest support network for any operating system.  competitors
to the versions of office included in d&c licensing include global application vendors such as apple and google, numerous web-based competitors, and local application developers in asia and europe. apple distributes versions of its pre-installed
application software, such as email, note taking, and calendar products, through its pcs, tablets, and phones. google provides a hosted messaging and productivity suite and distributes its productivity services through the android and chrome
operating systems. web-based offerings competing with individual applications can also position themselves as alternatives to our products. we believe our products compete effectively based on our strategy of providing powerful, flexible, secure,
and easy to use solutions that work across a variety of devices.  windows phone operating system faces competition from ios, android,
and blackberry operating systems. windows phone competes based on differentiated user interface, personalized applications, compatibility with windows pcs and tablets, and other unique capabilities.
computing and gaming hardware  the
principal products and services provided by the computing and gaming hardware segment are: xbox gaming and entertainment consoles and accessories, second-party and third-party video game royalties, and xbox live subscriptions (xbox
platform); surface devices and accessories; and microsoft pc accessories.  the xbox platform is designed to provide a unique
variety of entertainment choices through the use of our devices, peripherals, content, and online services. we released xbox 360 and xbox one in november 2005 and november2013, respectively.
surface devices are designed to help organizations, students, and consumers to be more productive, offering accessories and compatibility with
peripherals. surface devices were first released in october 2012. our latest surface device, the surface pro 3, was released in june 2014.
competition  our xbox platform competes
with console platforms from sony and nintendo, both of which have a large, established base of customers. the lifecycle for gaming and entertainment consoles averages five to ten years. nintendo released their latest generation console in november
2012. sony released their latest generation console in november 2013.  we believe the success of gaming and entertainment consoles is
determined by the availability of games for the console, providing exclusive game content that gamers seek, the computational power and reliability of the console, and the ability to create new experiences via online services, downloadable content,
and peripherals. in addition to sony and nintendo, we compete with other providers of entertainment services through online marketplaces.we believe the xbox platform is effectively positioned against competitive products and services based on
significant innovation in hardware architecture, user interface, developer tools, online gaming and entertainment services, and continued strong exclusive content from our own game franchises as well as other digital content offerings.
table of contents
part i  item 1
surface devices face competition from computer, tablet, and other hardware manufacturers, many of
which are also current or potential partners and customers.  phone hardware
the principal products and services provided by the new phone hardware segment are lumia smartphones and other non-lumia phones, which we began
manufacturing and selling with the acquisition of nds on april25, 2014.  competition
our phones face competition primarily from samsung and apple, as well as many other mobile device manufacturers. we believe our phones will compete
by being tailored for virtually every demographic and geography worldwide, offering unique industrial design and imaging technologies at high and low ranges of price points, and by incorporating microsofts digital work and digital life
experiences.  d&c other  the
principal products and services provided by the d&c other segment are: resale, including the windows store, xbox live transactions, and the windows phone store; search advertising; display advertising; office 365 consumer, comprising office 365
home and office 365 personal; studios, comprising first-party video games; and our retail stores.  windows store and windows phone store
are online application marketplaces that are designed to benefit our developers and partner ecosystems by providing access to a large customer base and benefit users by providing centralized access to certified applications. xbox live transactions
consist of online entertainment content, such as games, music, movies, and tv shows, accessible on xbox consoles and other devices.
search and display advertising includes bing, bing ads, msn, windows services, and xbox ads. we are the exclusive algorithmic and paid search
platform for yahoo! websites worldwide. we have completed the yahoo! worldwide algorithmic transition and the paid search transition in the u.s. and planned international markets.
office 365 consumer is designed to increase personal productivity through a range of microsoft office programs and services delivered across
multiple platforms via the cloud.  studios designs and markets games for xbox consoles, windows-enabled devices, and online. growth
depends on our ability to attract new users and increase engagement by developing a deep library of content which consumers seek.  competition
we face competition for our resale products and services from various online marketplaces, including those operated by amazon,
apple, and google.  our search and display advertising business competes with google and a wide array of websites, social platforms like
facebook, and portals like yahoo! that provide content and online offerings to end users. our success depends on our ability to attract new users, understand intent, and match intent with relevant content and advertiser offerings. we believe we can
attract new users by continuing to offer new and compelling products and services. we differentiate our offerings by providing a broad selection of content that helps users make faster, informed decisions, and take action more quickly by providing
relevant search results, expanded search services, and deeply-integrated social recommendations.  competitors to office 365 consumer are
the same as those discussed above for office consumer.
table of contents
part i  item 1
competitors to studios are the same as those discussed above for our xbox gaming and entertainment
business, as well as game studios like electronic arts and activision blizzard.  commercial
our commercial segments develop, market, and support software and services designed to increase individual, team, and organization productivity and
efficiency, and to simplify everyday tasks through seamless operations across the users hardware and software. commercial is made up of the commercial licensing and commercial other segments.
commercial licensing  the principal
products and services provided by the commercial licensing segment are: server products, including windows server, microsoft sql server, visual studio, system center, and related client access licenses (cal); windows embedded; volume
licensing of the windows operating system, excluding academic (windows commercial); microsoft office for business, including office, exchange, sharepoint, lync, and related cal (office commercial); skype; and microsoft
dynamics business solutions, excluding dynamics crm online.  our server products are designed to make information technology
professionals and developers and their systems more productive and efficient. server software is integrated server infrastructure and middleware designed to support software applications built on the windows server operating system. this includes
the server platform, database, business intelligence, storage, management and operations, virtualization, service-oriented architecture platform, security, and identity software. we also license standalone and software development lifecycle tools
for software architects, developers, testers, and project managers. revenue comes from product revenue, including purchases through volume licensing programs, licenses sold to oems, and retail packaged product. cal provide access rights to certain
server and office products, including windows server, microsoft sql server, exchange, sharepoint, and lync. cal revenue is reported along with the associated server or office product.
windows embedded extends the power of windows and the cloud to intelligent systems, including the internet of things, by delivering specialized
operating systems, tools, and services.  windows commercial revenue is mainly affected by the demand from commercial customers for
volume licensing and software assurance, often reflecting the number of information workers in a licensed enterprise, and is therefore relatively independent of the number of pcs sold in a given year.
the versions of office in commercial licensing are designed to increase personal, team and organizational productivity through a range of programs,
services, and software solutions. office commercial revenue is mainly affected by a combination of the demand from commercial customers for volume licensing and software assurance and the number of information workers in a licensed enterprise, and
is therefore relatively independent of the number of pcs sold in a given year.  skype is designed to connect friends, family, clients,
and colleagues through a variety of devices. revenue is largely driven by the sale of minutes, subscriptions, and advertising.
microsoft dynamics products provide business solutions for financial management, customer relationship management, supply chain management, and
analytics applications for small and mid-size businesses, large organizations, and divisions of global enterprises. revenue is largely driven by the number of information workers licensed.  competition  our server operating system products face competition from a wide variety of
server operating systems and applications offered by companies with a range of market approaches. vertically integrated computer manufacturers such as hewlett-packard, ibm, and oracle offer their own versions of the unix operating system
preinstalled on
table of contents
part i  item 1
server hardware. nearly all computer manufacturers offer server hardware for the linux operating system and many contribute to linux operating system development. the competitive position of
linux has also benefited from the large number of compatible applications now produced by many commercial and non-commercial software developers. a number of companies, such as red hat, supply versions of linux.
we compete to provide enterprise-wide computing solutions and point solutions with numerous commercial software vendors that offer solutions and
middleware technology platforms, software applications for connectivity (both internet and intranet), security, hosting, database, and e-business servers. ibm and oracle lead a group of companies focused on the java platform enterprise edition that
compete with our enterprise-wide computing solutions. commercial competitors for our server applications for pc-based distributed client/server environments include ca technologies, ibm, and oracle. our web application platform software competes
with open source software such as apache, linux, mysql, and php. in middleware, we compete against java middleware such as geronimo, wildfly, and spring framework.  our system management solutions compete with server management and server virtualization platform providers, such as bmc, ca technologies, hewlett-packard, ibm, and vmware. our database, business intelligence, and
data warehousing solutions offerings compete with products from ibm, oracle, sap, and other companies. our products for software developers compete against offerings from adobe, ibm, oracle, other companies, and open-source projects, including
eclipse (sponsored by ca technologies, ibm, oracle, and sap), php, and ruby on rails, among others.  our embedded systems compete in a
highly fragmented environment in which key competitors include ibm, intel, and versions of embeddable linux from commercial linux vendors such as metrowerks and montavista software.
we believe our server products provide customers with advantages in performance, total costs of ownership, and productivity by delivering superior
applications, development tools, compatibility with a broad base of hardware and software applications, security, and manageability.
competitors to windows commercial are the same as those discussed above for windows in the d&c licensing segment.
office commercial revenue growth depends on our ability to add value to the core product set and to continue to expand our product offerings in
other areas such as content management, enterprise search, collaboration, unified communications, and business intelligence. competitors to office commercial includes software application vendors such as adobe systems, apple, cisco systems, google,
ibm, oracle, sap, and numerous web-based competitors as well as local application developers in asia and europe. cisco systems is using its position in enterprise communications equipment to grow its unified communications business. google provides
a hosted messaging and productivity suite. web-based offerings competing with individual applications can also position themselves as alternatives to our products. we believe our products compete effectively based on our strategy of providing
powerful, flexible, secure, easy to use solutions that work well with technologies our customers already have and are available on a device or via the cloud.  skype competes with a variety of instant messaging, voice, and video communication providers, ranging from start-ups to established enterprises.
our microsoft dynamics products compete with vendors such as oracle and sap in the market for large organizations and divisions of global
enterprises. in the market focused on providing solutions for small and mid-sized businesses, our microsoft dynamics products compete with vendors such as infor, the sage group, and netsuite.salesforce.coms cloud crm offerings compete
directly with microsoft dynamics crm on-premises offerings.  commercial other
the principal products and services provided by the commercial other segment are: enterprise services, including premier product support services
and microsoft consulting services; commercial cloud, comprising office 365 commercial, other microsoft office online offerings, dynamics crm online, and microsoft azure.
table of contents
part i  item 1
enterprise services, including premier product support services and microsoft consulting services
assist customers in developing, deploying, and managing microsoft server and desktop solutions and provide training and certification to developers and information technology professionals on various microsoft products.
office 365 commercial is an online services offering that includes microsoft office, exchange, sharepoint, and lync, and is available across a
variety of devices and platforms.  dynamics crm online is designed to provide customer relationship management and supply chain
management for small and mid-size businesses, large organizations, and divisions of global enterprises. revenue is largely driven by the number of information workers licensed.
microsoft azure is a scalable operating system with computing, storage, database, and management, along with comprehensive cloud solutions, from
which customers can build, deploy, and manage enterprise workloads and web applications. these services also include a platform that helps developers build and connect applications and services in the cloud. our goal is to enable customers to devote
more resources to development and use of applications that benefit their businesses, rather than managing on-premises hardware and software.
competition  the enterprise services
business competes with a wide range of companies that provide strategy and business planning, application development, and infrastructure services, including multinational consulting firms and small niche businesses focused on specific technologies.
competitors to office 365 commercial are the same as those discussed above for office commercial.
microsoft dynamics crms online offerings primarily compete with salesforce.coms on-demand crm offerings.
microsoft azure faces diverse competition from companies such as amazon, google, ibm, oracle, salesforce.com, vmware, and other open source
offerings.  operations  we have operations centers that support all operations in their regions, including customer contract and order processing, credit and collections, information processing, and vendor management and logistics. the
regional center in ireland supports the european, middle eastern, and african region; the center in singapore supports the japan, india, greater china, and asia-pacific region; and the centers in fargo, north dakota, fort lauderdale, florida, puerto
rico, redmond, washington, and reno, nevada support latin america and north america. in addition to the operations centers, we also operate data centers throughout the americas, europe, and asia regions.
to serve the needs of customers around the world and to improve the quality and usability of products in international markets, we localize many of
our products to reflect local languages and conventions. localizing a product may require modifying the user interface, altering dialog boxes, and translating text.  our xbox consoles and games, surface devices, and microsoft pc accessories are manufactured by third party contract manufacturers. we generally have the ability to use other manufacturers if the current vendor
becomes unavailable or unable to meet our requirements.  with the acquisition of nds, we now operate manufacturing facilities for the
production and customization of phones in brazil, china, hungary, mexico, and vietnam.  all our devices may include key components that
are available from only one or limited sources. disruption of component supply from these suppliers could potentially lead to a disruption of production of certain devices.
table of contents
part i  item 1
research and development
during fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, research and development expense was $11.4 billion, $10.4 billion, and $9.8billion, respectively.
these amounts represented 13% of revenue in each of those years. we plan to continue to make significant investments in a broad range of research and development efforts.  product and service development and intellectual property  we develop most of our products and
services internally through four primary engineering groups.
applications and services engineering group, focuses on broad applications and services core technologies in productivity, communication, search, and
other information categories.
cloud and enterprise engineering group, focuses on development of microsofts back-end technologies like datacenter, database, and our specific
technologies for enterprise it scenarios and development tools. this group also engineers datacenter development, construction, and operation.
devices engineering group, focuses on all hardware development and supply chain, including xbox consoles, surface devices, lumia smartphones, other
non-lumia phones, perceptive pixel products, and accessories.
operating systems engineering group, focuses on microsofts operating systems for consoles, mobile devices, pcs, and back-end systems. studios and
universal store, the core cloud services for marketplaces, membership, and commerce platform, are also in this group.
internal development allows us to maintain competitive advantages that come from product differentiation and closer technical control over our
products and services. it also gives us the freedom to decide which modifications and enhancements are most important and when they should be implemented. we strive to obtain information as early as possible about changing usage patterns and
hardware advances that may affect software design. before releasing new software platforms, we provide application vendors with a range of resources and guidelines for development, training, and testing. generally, we also create product
documentation internally.  we protect our intellectual property investments in a variety of ways. we work actively in the u.s. and
internationally to ensure the enforcement of copyright, trademark, trade secret, and other protections that apply to our software and hardware products, services, business plans, and branding. we are a leader among technology companies in pursuing
patents and currently have a portfolio of over 55,000 u.s. and international patents issued and over 40,000 pending. while we employ much of our internally developed intellectual property exclusively in microsoft products and services, we also
engage in outbound and inbound licensing of specific patented technologies that are incorporated into licensees or microsofts products. from time to time, we enter into broader cross-license agreements with other technology companies
covering entire groups of patents. we also purchase or license technology that we incorporate into our products or services. at times, we make select intellectual property broadly available at no or low cost to achieve a strategic objective, such as
promoting industry standards, advancing interoperability, or attracting and enabling our external development community. in conjunction with the nds acquisition, we received an initial 10-year non-exclusive license to certain nokia patents. we also
agreed to license nokias mapping services and granted nokia reciprocal rights to use our patents for their mapping and location services.  while it may be necessary in the future to seek or renew licenses relating to various aspects of our products and business methods, we believe, based upon past experience and industry practice, such licenses
generally could be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. we believe our continuing research and product development are not materially dependent on any single license or other agreement with a third party relating to the development of our
products.  investing in the future  microsofts success is based on our ability to create new and compelling products, services, and experiences for our users, to initiate and embrace disruptive technology trends, to enter new geographic and
product markets, and to drive broad adoption of our products and services. we invest in a range of emerging technology trends and
table of contents
part i  item 1
breakthroughs that we believe offer significant opportunities to deliver value to our customers and growth for the company. we maintain our long-term commitment to research and development across
a wide spectrum of technologies, tools, and platforms spanning communication and collaboration, information access and organization, entertainment, business and e-commerce, advertising, and devices.
while our main research and development facilities are located in redmond, washington, we also operate research and development facilities in other
parts of the u.s. and around the world, including canada, china, denmark, estonia, finland, india, ireland, israel, norway, sweden, taiwan, and the united kingdom. this global approach helps us remain competitive in local markets and enables us to
continue to attract top talent from across the world. we generally fund research at the corporate level to ensure that we are looking beyond immediate product considerations to opportunities further in the future. we also fund research and
development activities at the business segment level. much of our business segment level research and development is coordinated with other segments and leveraged across the company.
in addition to our main research and development operations, we also operate microsoft research. microsoft research is one of the worlds
largest computer science research organizations, and works in close collaboration with top universities around the world to advance the state-of-the-art in computer science, providing us a unique perspective on future technology trends and
contributing to our product and service innovation.  based on our assessment of key technology trends and our broad focus on long-term
research and development, we see significant opportunities to drive future growth in productivity, platforms, cloud computing, search, communications, and smart connected devices.
distribution, sales, and marketing  we market and distribute our products and services primarily through the following channels: oems; distributors and resellers; online; and microsoft retail stores.
oems  we distribute software through oems
that pre-install our software on new pcs, tablets, servers, smartphones, and other intelligent devices that they sell to end customers. the largest component of the oem business is the windows operating system pre-installed on computing devices.
oems also sell hardware pre-installed with other microsoft products, including server and embedded operating systems and applications such as our microsoft office suite. in addition to these products, we also market our services through oems and
service bundles such as windows with bing or windows with office 365 subscription.  there are two broad categories of oems. the largest
oems, many of which operate globally, are referred to as direct oems, as our relationship with them is managed through a direct agreement between microsoft and the oem. we have distribution agreements covering one or more of our products
with virtually all of the multinational oems, including acer, asus, dell, fujitsu, htc, hewlett-packard, lg, lenovo, samsung, sony, toshiba, and with many regional and local oems. the second broad category of oems consists of lower-volume pc
manufacturers (also called system builders), which source their microsoft software for pre-installation and local redistribution primarily through the microsoft distributor channel rather than through a direct agreement or relationship
with microsoft.  distributors and resellers  many organizations that license our products and services through enterprise agreements transact directly with us, with sales support from solution integrators, independent software vendors, web agencies, and
developers that advise organizations on licensing our products and services (enterprise agreement direct advisors, or edas). organizations also license our products and services indirectly, primarily through license solutions
partners (lsps), distributors, value-added resellers (vars), oems, system builder channels, and retailers. although each type of
table of contents
part i  item 1
reselling partner reaches organizations of all sizes, lsps are primarily engaged with large organizations, distributors resell primarily to vars, and vars typically reach small-sized and
medium-sized organizations. edas typically are also authorized as lsps and operate as resellers for our other licensing programs, such as the select plus and open licensing programs discussed under licensing options below. some of our
distributors include ingram micro and tech data, and some of our largest resellers include cdw, dell, insight enterprises, and software house international.  our microsoft dynamics software offerings are also licensed to enterprises through a global network of channel partners providing vertical solutions and specialized services. we distribute our retail packaged
products primarily through independent non-exclusive distributors, authorized replicators, resellers, and retail outlets. individual consumers obtain these products primarily through retail outlets, such as wal-mart, dixons, and microsoft retail
stores. we distribute our hardware products, including surface, xbox, phones, and pc accessories, through third-party retailers and microsoft retail stores. our phones are also distributed through global wireless communications carriers. we have a
network of field sales representatives and field support personnel that solicits orders from distributors and resellers, and provides product training and sales support.  online  although on-premises software will continue to be an important part of our business,
increasingly we are delivering additional value to customers through cloud-based services. we provide online content and services to consumers through bing, msn portals and channels, office 365, windows phone store, xbox live, outlook.com, skype,
and windows store. we also provide commercial cloud-based services such as microsoft dynamics crm online, microsoft azure, and office 365 consisting of online versions of microsoft office, exchange, sharepoint, lync, and yammer. other services
delivered online include our online advertising platform with offerings for advertisers and publishers, as well as microsoft developer network subscription content and updates, periodic product updates, and online technical and practice readiness
resources to support our partners in developing and selling our products and solutions. as we increasingly deliver online services, we sell many of these cloud-based services through our enterprise agreements and have also enabled new sales programs
to reach small and medium-sized businesses.these new programs include direct sales, direct sales supported by a large network of partner advisors, and resell of services through operator channels, such as telephone, cell, and cable providers.
we also sell our products through our microsoft retail stores and online marketplaces.
licensing options  we
license software to organizations under agreements that allow the customer to acquire multiple licenses of products and services. our agreements for organizations to acquire multiple licenses of products and services are designed to provide them
with a means of doing so without having to acquire separate licenses through retail channels. in delivering organizational licensing agreements to the market, we use different programs designed to provide flexibility for organizations of various
sizes. while these programs may differ in various parts of the world, generally they include those discussed below.  customer licensing programs
open licensing  designed
primarily for small-to-medium organizations, open programs allows customers to acquire perpetual or subscription licenses and, at the customers election, rights to future versions of software products over a specified time period (two or three
years depending on the open programs used). the offering that conveys rights to future versions of certain software products over the contract period is called software assurance. software assurance also provides support, tools, and training to help
customers deploy and use software efficiently. open programs has several variations to fit customers diverse way of purchasing. under the open program, customers can acquire licenses only or licenses with software assurance. they can also
renew software assurance upon the expiration of existing volume licensing agreements. office 365 is also available for purchase through the open program.
table of contents
part i  item 1
select plus licensing  designed primarily for medium-to-large organizations, the select plus program allows customers to acquire perpetual licenses and, at the customers election, software assurance over a specified time period
(generally three years or less). similar to open programs, the select plus program allows customers to acquire licenses only, acquire licenses with software assurance, or renew software assurance upon the expiration of existing volume licensing
agreements. a subset of online services are also available for purchase through the select plus program, and subscriptions are generally structured with terms between one and three years.  enterprise agreement licensing  designed primarily for medium- and large-sized organizations
that want to acquire licenses to online services and/or software products, along with software assurance, for all or substantial parts of their enterprise. enterprises can elect to acquire perpetual licenses or, under the enterprise subscription
program, can acquire non-perpetual, subscription agreements for a specified time period (generally three years). online services are also available for purchase through the enterprise agreement and subscriptions are generally structured with three
year terms.  customer licensing programs  online services only  microsoft online subscription agreement is designed to enable small and medium-sized businesses to easily purchase microsoft online services (excluding azure). the program allows customers to acquire monthly or
annual subscriptions for cloud-based services.  microsoft azure agreement is designed to enable small and medium-sized businesses to
purchase microsoft azure subscription plans on a pay-as-you-go basis.  partner programs
the microsoft services provider license agreement is a program targeted at service providers and independent software vendors allowing these
partners to provide software services and hosted applications to their end customers. agreements are generally structured with a three-year term, and partners are billed monthly based upon consumption.
microsoft online services reseller agreement is a program enabling partners to package microsoft online services with the partners services.
independent software vendor royalty program is a program that enables partners to use microsoft software in their own software
programs.  customers  our customers include individual consumers, small- and medium-sized organizations, enterprises, governmental institutions, educational institutions, internet service providers, application developers, and oems.
consumers and small and medium-sized organizations obtain our products primarily through distributors, resellers, and oems. no sales to an individual customer accounted for more than 10% of fiscal year 2014, 2013, or 2012 revenue. our practice is to
ship our products promptly upon receipt of purchase orders from customers; consequently, backlog is not significant.
table of contents
part i  item 1
executive officers of the registrant
our executive officers as of july25, 2014 were as follows:
name
age
position with the company
satyanadella
chief executive officer
lisae.brummel
executive vice president, human resources
christopherc.capossela
executive vice president, chief marketing officer
amy e. hood
executive vice president, chief financial officer
bradford l. smith
executive vice president, general counsel; secretary
b. kevin turner
chief operating officer
mr.nadella was appointed chief executive officer in february 2014. he served as executive vice president,
cloud and enterprise since july 2013. from 2011 to 2013, mr.nadella served as president, server and tools. from 2009 to 2011, he was senior vice president, online services division. from 2008 to 2009, he was senior vice president, search,
portal, and advertising. since joining microsoft in 1992, mr.nadellas roles have also included vice president of microsoft business division.  ms.brummel was appointed executive vice president, human resources in july 2013, after serving as chief people officer since 2011 and senior vice president, human resources beginning in 2005.prior to
that she had been corporate vice president, human resources since may 2005. from 2000 to 2005, she had been corporate vice president of the homeand retail division.since joining microsoft in 1989, ms.brummel has held a number of
management positions at microsoft, including general manager of consumer productivity business, product unit manager of the kids business, and product unit manager of desktop and decision reference products.
mr.capossela was appointed executive vice president, chief marketing officer in march 2014.prior to that he served as the worldwide
leader of the consumer channels group, responsible for sales and marketing activities with oems, operators, and retail partners.in his more than 20 years at microsoft, mr.capossela has held a variety of marketing leadership roles in the
microsoft office division.he was responsible for marketing productivity solutions including microsoft office, office 365, sharepoint, exchange, lync, project, and visio.  ms.hood was appointed executive vice president and chief financial officer in july 2013, subsequent to her appointment as chief financial officer in may 2013. beginning in 2010, ms.hood was chief
financial officer of the microsoft business division. from 2006 through 2009, ms.hood was general manager, microsoft business division strategy.since joining microsoft in 2002, ms.hood has also held finance-related positions in the
server and tools business and the corporate finance organization.  mr.smith was appointed executive vice president, general
counsel, and secretary in 2011. prior to that he served as senior vice president, general counsel, and secretary since november 2001. mr.smith was also named chief compliance officer in 2002. he had been deputy general counsel for worldwide
sales and previously was responsible for managing the european law and corporate affairs group, based in paris. mr.smith joined microsoft in 1993.  mr.turner was appointed chief operating officer in september 2005. before joining microsoft, he was executive vice president of wal-mart stores, inc. and president and chief executive officer of the
sams club division. from 2001 to 2002, he served as executive vice president and chief information officer of wal-marts information systems division. from 2000 to 2001, he served as its senior vice president and chief information officer
of the information systems division. mr.turner also serves on the board of directors of nordstrom, inc.
table of contents
part i  item 1, 1a
employees  as of june30, 2014, we employed approximately 128,000 people on a full-time basis, 62,000 in the u.s. and 66,000 internationally, including approximately 25,000 employees transferred as part of the nds
acquisition in april 2014. of the total employed people, 44,000 were in product research and development, 30,000 in sales and marketing, 23,000 in product support and consulting services, 20,000 in manufacturing and distribution, and 11,000 in
general and administration. in july 2014, we announced a restructuring plan which will eliminate up to 18,000 positions in fiscal year 2015, including 12,500 professional and factory positions related to the acquisition of nds. as a result of the
nds acquisition, we have certain employees that are subject to collective bargaining agreements.  available information
our internet address is www.microsoft.com. at our investor relations website, www.microsoft.com/investor, we make available free of
charge a variety of information for investors. our goal is to maintain the investor relations website as a portal through which investors can easily find or navigate to pertinent information about us, including:
our annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k, and any amendments to those reports, as soon as reasonably
practicable after we electronically file that material with or furnish it to the securities and exchange commission (sec);
information on our business strategies, financial results, and key performance indicators;
announcements of investor conferences, speeches, and events at which our executives talk about our product, service, and competitive strategies. archives of
these events are also available;
press releases on quarterly earnings, product and service announcements, legal developments, and international news;
corporate governance information including our articles of incorporation, bylaws, governance guidelines, committee charters, codes of conduct and ethics,
global corporate citizenship initiatives, and other governance-related policies;
other news and announcements that we may post from time to time that investors might find useful or interesting; and
opportunities to sign up for email alerts and rss feeds to have information pushed in real time.
the information found on our website is not part of this or any other report we file with, or furnish to, the sec. in addition to these channels,
we use social media to communicate to the public. it is possible that the information we post on social media could be deemed to be material to investors. we encourage investors, the media, and others interested in microsoft to review the
information we post on the social media channels listed on our investor relations website.
item1a.risk factors  our operations and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described below, that could adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash
flows, and the trading price of our common stock.  we face intense competition across all markets for our products and services, which may lead to
lower revenue or operating margins.  competition in the technology sector
our competitors range in size from diversified global companies with significant research and development resources to small, specialized firms
whose narrower product lines may let them be more effective in deploying technical, marketing, and financial resources. barriers to entry in our businesses are low and software products can
table of contents
part i  item 1a
be distributed broadly and quickly at relatively low cost. many of the areas in which we compete evolve rapidly with changing and disruptive technologies, shifting user needs, and frequent
introductions of new products and services. our ability to remain competitive depends on our success in making innovative products, devices, and services that appeal to businesses and consumers.
competition among platforms, ecosystems, and devices  an important element of our business model has been to create platform-based ecosystems on which many participants can build diverse solutions. a well-established ecosystem creates beneficial network effects among
users, application developers, and the platform provider that can accelerate growth. establishing significant scale in the marketplace is necessary to achieve and maintain attractive margins. the strategic importance of developing and maintaining a
vibrant ecosystem increased with the launch of the windows 8 operating system, surface, windows phone, xbox one, and associated cloud-based services. we face significant competition from firms that provide competing platforms, applications, and
services.
a competing vertically-integrated model, in which a single firm controls the software and hardware elements of a product and related services, has succeeded
with some consumer products such as personal computers, tablets, phones, gaming consoles, and digital music players. competitors pursuing this model also earn revenue from services integrated with the hardware and software platform. we also offer
some vertically-integrated hardware and software products and services; however, our competitors in smartphones and tablets have established significantly larger user bases. competing with the vertically integrated model will increase our cost of
revenue and reduce our operating margins.
we derive substantial revenue from licenses of windows operating systems on personal computers. we face significant competition from competing platforms
developed for new devices and form factors such as smartphones and tablet computers. these devices compete on multiple bases including price and the perceived utility of the device and its platform. users are increasingly turning to these devices to
perform functions that in the past were performed by personal computers. even if many users view these devices as complementary to a personal computer, the prevalence of these devices may make it more difficult to attract application developers to
our platforms. competing operating systems licensed at low or no cost may decrease pc operating system margins. in addition, surface competes with products made by our oem partners, which may affect their commitment to our platform.
the success of the windows phone platform is an important element of our goal to enhance personal productivity in a mobile-first and cloud-first world. the
marketplace among mobile phone platforms is highly competitive. we may face issues in selecting, engaging or securing support from operators and retailers for windows phones due to, for instance, inadequate sales training or incentives, or
insufficient marketing support for the windows phone platform.
competing platforms have application marketplaces (sometimes referred to as stores) with scale and significant installed bases on mobile devices.
the variety and utility of applications available on a platform is important to device purchasing decisions. users incur costs to move data and buy new applications when switching platforms. to compete, we must successfullyenlist developers to
write applications for our marketplace and ensure that these applications have high quality, customer appeal, and value. efforts to compete with these application marketplaces may increase our cost of revenue and lower our operating margins.
business model competition  companies compete with us based on a growing variety of business models.
even as we transition to a mobile-first and cloud-first strategy, the license-based proprietary software model generates most of our software revenue. we bear
the costs of converting original ideas into software products through investments in research and development, offsetting these costs with the revenue received from licensing our products. many of our competitors also develop and sell software to
businesses and consumers under this model.
table of contents
part i  item 1a
other competitors develop and offer free applications, online services and content, and make money by selling third-party advertising. advertising revenue
funds development of products and services these competitors provide to users at no or little cost, competing directly with our revenue-generating products.
some companies compete with us using an open source business model by modifying and then distributing open source software at nominal cost to end-users and
earning revenue on advertising or complementary services and products. these firms do not bear the full costs of research and development for the software. some open source software vendors develop software that mimics the features and functionality
of our products.  the competitive pressures described above may cause decreased sales volumes, price reductions,
and/or increased operating costs, such as for research and development, marketing, and sales incentives. this may lead to lower revenue, gross margins, and operating income.  our increasing focus on services presents execution and competitive risks.a growing part of our business involves cloud-based services available across the spectrum of computing
devices. in july 2014, our leadership announced its strategic vision to compete and grow as a productivity and platform company for the mobile-first and cloud-first world. at the same time, our competitors are rapidly developing and deploying
cloud-based services for consumers and business customers. pricing and delivery models are evolving. devices and form factors influence how users access services in the cloud and sometimes the users choice of which suite of cloud-based
services to use. we are devoting significant resources to develop and deploy our cloud-based strategies. the windows ecosystem must continue to evolve with this changing environment. we are embracing cultural and organizational changes to drive
accountability and eliminate obstacles to innovation. besides software development costs, we are incurring costs to build and maintain infrastructure to support cloud computing services. these costs will reduce the operating margins we have
previously achieved. whether we succeed in cloud-based services depends on our execution in several areas, including:
continuing to bring to market compelling cloud-based experiences that generate increasing traffic and market share;
maintaining the utility, compatibility, and performance of our cloud-based services on the growing array of computing devices, including pcs, smartphones,
tablets, and television-related devices, including gaming consoles;
continuing to enhance the attractiveness of our cloud platforms to third-party developers;
ensuring our cloud-based services meet the reliability expectations of our customers and maintain the security of their data; and
making our suite of cloud-based services platform agnostic, available on a wide range of devices and ecosystems, including those of our competitors.
it is uncertain whether our strategies will attract the users or generate the revenue required to succeed. if we are
not effective in executing organizational changes to increase efficiency and accelerate innovation, or if we fail to generate sufficient usage of our new products and services, we may not grow revenues in line with the infrastructure and development
investments described above. this may negatively impact gross margins and operating income.  we make significant investments in new
products and services that may not be profitable.we will continue to make significant investments in research, development, and marketing for existing products, services, and technologies, including the windows operating
system, the microsoft office system, bing, windows phone, windows server, the windows store, the microsoft azure services platform, office 365, other cloud-based services offerings, and the xbox entertainment platform. we also invest in the
development and acquisition of a variety of hardware for productivity, communication and entertainment including pcs, tablets, phones, and gaming devices. investments in new technology are speculative. commercial success depends on many factors,
including innovativeness, developer support, and effective distribution and marketing. if customers do not perceive our latest offerings as providing significant new functionality or other value, they may reduce their purchases of new software and
hardware products or upgrades, unfavorably affecting revenue. we may not achieve significant revenue from new product, service, and
table of contents
part i  item 1a
distribution channel investments for several years, if at all. new products and services may not be profitable, and even if they are profitable, operating margins for some new products and
businesses will not be as high as the margins we have experienced historically.  developing new technologies is complex and
time-consuming. it can require long development and testing periods. significant delays in new releases or significant problems in creating new products or services could adversely affect our revenue.
acquisitions, joint ventures, and strategic alliances may have an adverse effect on our business.we expect to
continue making acquisitions or entering into joint ventures and strategic alliances as part of our long-term business strategy. these transactions involve significant challenges and risks including that the transaction does not advance our business
strategy, that we get no satisfactory return on our investment, that we have difficulty integrating new employees, business systems, and technology, or that the transaction distracts management from our other businesses. the success of these
transactions will depend in part on our ability to leverage them enhance our existing products and services or develop compelling new ones. it may take longer than expected to realize the full benefits from these transactions, such as increased
revenue, enhanced efficiencies, or increased market share, or the benefits may ultimately be smaller than we expected. these events could adversely affect our operating results or financial condition.
in april 2014, we acquired from nokia substantially all of its nds business to accelerate our growth in phones and support the entire windows
ecosystem. we may not realize all of the anticipated financial and other benefits from this transaction including operating efficiencies and cost savings. we may not be successful in developing a vibrant and competitive ecosystem for windows-based
phones that combines differentiated hardware, software, services, and third-party applications. we may not achieve mobile phone market share targets. we may see lower than expected growth rates for the phone markets. the mix of premium and
lower-cost devices we sell may put downward pressure on prices or margins. we may not be effective in executing the restructuring we announced in july 2014 or otherwise integrating the nds business with microsofts ongoing operations, including
matching manufacturing capacity to demand. existing microsoft smart device original equipment manufacturers may respond negatively to the changes in our business or the new competitive environment.
if our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets become impaired we may be required to record a significant charge to
earnings.we acquire other companies and intangible assets and may not realize all the economic benefit from those acquisitions, which could cause an impairment of goodwill or intangibles. we review our amortizable
intangible assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. we test goodwill for impairment at least annually. factors that may be a change in circumstances, indicating that the
carrying value of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets may not be recoverable, include a decline in our stock price and market capitalization, reduced future cash flow estimates, and slower growth rates in industry segments in which we
participate. we may be required to record a significant charge in our consolidated financial statements during the period in which any impairment of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets is determined, negatively affecting our results of
operations. for example, in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2012, we recorded a $6.2 billion charge for the impairment of goodwill in our previous online services division business (devices and consumer other under our current segment structure).
the valuation of acquired assets and liabilities, including goodwill, resulting from the acquisition of nds, is reflective of the
enterprise value based on the long-term financial forecast for the business.in this highly competitive and volatile market, we may not realize our forecasts. as a result, we may be required to record a significant charge to earnings in our
consolidated financial statements due to an impairment of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets.  we may not be able to
adequately protect our intellectual property rights.protecting our global intellectual property rights and combating unlicensed copying and use of our software and other intellectual property is difficult. while piracy
adversely affects u.s. revenue, the impact on revenue from outside the u.s. is more significant, particularly in countries where laws are less protective of intellectual property rights. our revenue in these markets may grow slower than the
underlying device market. similarly, the absence of harmonized patent laws makes it more difficult to ensure consistent respect for patent rights. throughout the world, we educate consumers about the
table of contents
part i  item 1a
benefits of licensing genuine products and obtaining indemnification benefits for intellectual property risks, and we educate lawmakers about the advantages of a business climate where
intellectual property rights are protected. reductions in the legal protection for software intellectual property rights could adversely affect revenue.  third parties may claim we infringe their intellectual property rights.from time to time, others claim we infringe their intellectual property rights. the number of these claims may
grow because of constant technological change in the markets in which we compete, the extensive patent coverage of existing technologies, the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, and our offering of first-party devices, such as surface and lumia
phones. to resolve these claims we may enter into royalty and licensing agreements on terms that are less favorable than currently available, stop selling or redesign affected products or services, or pay damages to satisfy indemnification
commitments with our customers. these outcomes may cause operating margins to decline. besides money damages, in some jurisdictions plaintiffs can seek injunctive relief that may limit or prevent importing, marketing, and selling our products or
services that have infringing technologies. in some countries, such as germany, an injunction can be issued before the parties have fully litigated the validity of the underlying patents. we have paid significant amounts to settle claims related to
the use of technology and intellectual property rights and to procure intellectual property rights as part of our strategy to manage this risk, and may continue to do so.  we may not be able to protect our source code from copying if there is an unauthorized disclosure of source code.source code, the detailed program commands for our operating systems
and other software programs, is critical to our business. although we license portions of our application and operating system source code to several licensees, we take significant measures to protect the secrecy of large portions of our source
code. if a significant portion of our source code leaks, we might lose future trade secret protection for that source code. it may become easier for third parties to compete with our products by copying functionality, which could adversely affect
our revenue and operating margins. unauthorized disclosure of source code also could increase the security risks described in the next paragraph.
cyber-attacks and security vulnerabilities could lead to reduced revenue, increased costs, liability claims, or harm to our competitive position.
security of microsofts information technology  threats to information technology (it) security can take a variety of forms. individual and groups of hackers, and sophisticated organizations including state-sponsored organizations, may take steps
that pose threats to our customers and our it.they may develop and deploy malicious software to attack our products and services and gain access to our networks and datacenters, or act in a coordinated manner to launch distributed denial of
service or other coordinated attacks. cyber threats are constantly evolving, thereby increasing the difficulty of detecting and successfully defending against them. cyber threats can have cascading impacts that unfold with increasing speed across
our internal networks and systems and those of our partners and customers. breaches of our network or data security could disrupt the security of our internal systems and business applications, impair our ability to provide services to our customers
and protect the privacy of their data, result in product development delays, compromise confidential or technical business information harming our competitive position, result in theft or misuse of our intellectual property or other assets, require
us to allocate more resources to improved technologies, or otherwise adversely affect our business.  in addition, our internal it
environment continues to evolve. often we are early adopters of new devices and technologies. we embrace new ways of sharing data and communicating internally and with partners and customers using methods such as social networking and other
consumer-oriented technologies. our business policies and internal security controls may not keep pace with the speed of these changes as new threats emerge.  security of our product, services, devices and customers data  security threats are a
particular challenge to companies like us whose business is technology products and services. threats to our own it infrastructure can also affect our customers. customers using our cloud-based services rely on the security of our infrastructure to
ensure the reliability of our services and the protection of their data. hackers
table of contents
part i  item 1a
tend to focus their efforts on the most popular operating systems, programs, and services, including many of ours, and we expect that to continue. the security of our products and services is
important in our customers purchasing decisions.  to defend against security threats, both to our internal it systems and those of
our customers, we must continuously engineer more secure products and services, enhance security and reliability features, improve the deployment of software updates to address security vulnerabilities, develop mitigation technologies that help to
secure customers from attacks even when software updates are not deployed, maintain the digital security infrastructure that protects the integrity of our network, products and services, and provide customers security tools such as firewalls and
anti-virus software.  the cost of these steps could reduce our operating margins. if we fail to do these things well, actual or
perceived security vulnerabilities in our products and services could harm our reputation and lead customers to reduce or delay future purchases of products or subscriptions to services, or to use competing products or services. customers may also
spend more on protecting their existing computer systems from attack, which could delay adoption of additional products or services. customers may fail to update their systems, continue to run software or operating systems we no longer support, or
may fail timely to install security patches. any of these actions by customers could adversely affect our revenue. actual or perceived vulnerabilities may lead to claims against us. although our license agreements typically contain provisions that
eliminate or limit our exposure to liability, there is no assurance these provisions will withstand legal challenges. legislative or regulatory action in these areas may increase the costs to develop, implement or secure our products and services.
disclosure of personal data could cause liability and harm our reputation.as we continue to grow the
number and scale of our cloud-based offerings, we store and process increasingly large amounts of personally identifiable information of our customers. the continued occurrence of high-profile data breaches provides evidence of an external
environment increasingly hostile to information security. despite our efforts to improve the security controls across our business groups and geographies, it is possible our security controls over personal data, our training of employees and vendors
on data security, and other practices we follow may not prevent the improper disclosure of customer data we or our vendors store and manage. improper disclosure could harm our reputation, lead to legal exposure to customers, or subject us to
liability under laws that protect personal data, resulting in increased costs or loss of revenue. our software products and services also enable our customers to store and process personal data on-premises or, increasingly, in a cloud-based
environment we host. like all providers of communications services, government authorities can sometimes require us to produce customer data in response to valid legal orders. in the u.s. and elsewhere, we advocate for transparency concerning these
requests and appropriate limitations on government authority to compel disclosure. despite our efforts to protect customer data, perceptions that the privacy of personal information is not satisfactorily protected could inhibit sales of our products
or services, and could limit adoption of our cloud-based solutions by consumers, businesses, and government entities. additional security measures we may take to address customer concerns, or constraints on our flexibility to determine where and how
to operate datacenters in response to customer expectations or governmental rules or actions, may cause higher operating expenses.
we may have outages, data losses, and disruptions of our online services if we fail to maintain an adequate operations
infrastructure.our increasing user traffic, growth in services and the complexity of our products and services demand more computing power. we spend substantial amounts to build, purchase or lease datacenters and
equipment and to upgrade our technology and network infrastructure to handle more traffic on our websites and in our datacenters. these demands continue to increase as we introduce new products and services and support the growth of existing
services such as bing, exchange online, office 365, sharepoint online, onedrive, skype, xbox live, microsoft azure, outlook.com, microsoft office web apps, windows stores and microsoft account services. we are rapidly growing our business of
providing a platform and back-end hosting for services provided by third-parties to their end users. maintaining, securing and expanding this infrastructure is expensive and complex. inefficiencies or operational failures, including temporary or
permanent loss of customer data, could diminish the quality of our products, services, and user experience resulting in contractual liability, claims by customers and other third parties, damage to our reputation and loss of current and potential
users, subscribers, and advertisers, each of which may harm our operating results and financial condition.
table of contents
part i  item 1a
government litigation and regulatory activity relating to competition rules may limit how we
design and market our products.as a leading global software and device maker, we are closely scrutinized by government agencies under u.s. and foreign competition laws. an increasing number of governments are regulating
competition law activities and this includes increased scrutiny in potentially large markets such as china. some jurisdictions also allow competitors or consumers to assert claims of anti-competitive conduct. u.s. federal and state antitrust
authorities have previously brought enforcement actions and continue to scrutinize our business.  the european commission closely
scrutinizes the design of high-volume microsoft products and the terms on which we make certain technologies used in these products, such as file formats, programming interfaces, and protocols, available to other companies. in 2004, the commission
ordered us to create new versions of windows that do not include certain multimedia technologies and to provide our competitors with specifications for how to implement certain proprietary windows communications protocols in their own products. in
2009, the commission accepted a set of commitments offered by microsoft to address the commissions concerns relating to competition in web browsing software, including an undertaking to address commission concerns relating to interoperability.
these obligations may limit our ability to innovate in windows or other products in the future, diminish the developer appeal of the windows platform, and increase our product development costs. the availability of licenses related to protocols and
file formats may enable competitors to develop software products that better mimic the functionality of our products, which could hamper sales of ourproducts.  our portfolio of first-party devices continues to grow; at the same time our oem partners offer a large variety of devices on our platforms. as a result, increasingly we both cooperate and compete with our oem
partners, creating a risk that we fail to do so in compliance with competition rules. regulatory scrutiny in this area may increase. certain foreign governments, particularly in china and other countries in asia, have advanced arguments under their
competition laws that exert downward pressure on royalties for our intellectual property. because these jurisdictions only recently implemented competition laws, their enforcement activities are unpredictable.
government regulatory actions and court decisions such as these may hinder our ability to provide the benefits of our software to consumers and
businesses, reducing the attractiveness of our products and the revenue that come from them. new competition law actions could be initiated. the outcome of such actions, or steps taken to avoid them, could adversely affect us in a variety of ways,
including:
we may have to choose between withdrawing products from certain geographies to avoid fines or designing and developing alternative versions of those products
to comply with government rulings, which may entail a delay in a product release and removing functionality that customers want or on which developers rely.
we may be required to make available licenses to our proprietary technologies on terms that do not reflect their fair market value or do not protect our
associated intellectual property.
the rulings described above may be precedent in other competition law proceedings.
we are subject to a variety of ongoing commitments because of court or administrative orders, consent decrees or other voluntary actions we have taken. if we
fail to comply with these commitments we may incur litigation costs and be subject to substantial fines or other remedial actions.  our international operations subject us to potential liability under anti-corruption, trade protection, and other laws and regulations.the foreign corrupt practices act and other
anti-corruption laws and regulations (anti-corruption laws) prohibit corrupt payments by our employees, vendors, or agents. from time to time, we receive inquiries from authorities in the u.s. and elsewhere about our business activities
outside the u.s. and our compliance with anti-corruption laws. while we devote substantial resources to our global compliance programs and have implemented policies, training, and internal controls designed to reduce the risk of corrupt payments,
our employees, vendors, or agents may violate our policies. our failure to comply with anti-corruption laws could result in significant fines and penalties, criminal sanctions against us, our officers or our employees, prohibitions on the conduct of
our business, and damage to our reputation. operations outside the u.s. may be affected by changes in trade protection laws, policies and measures, and other regulatory requirements affecting trade and investment. we may be subject to legal
liability and reputational damage if we sell goods or services in violation of u.s. trade sanctions on countries such as iran, north korea, cuba, sudan, and syria.
table of contents
part i  item 1a
other regulatory areas that may apply to our products and online services offerings include user
privacy, telecommunications, data protection, and online content. for example, regulators may take the position that our offerings such as skype are covered by laws regulating telecommunications services. applying these laws and regulations to our
business is often unclear, subject to change over time, and sometimes may conflict from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. additionally, these laws and governments approach to their enforcement, and our products and services, are continuing to
evolve. some governments are expressing increasing concern about government surveillance practices around the world and this may lead to increased regulation requiring local hosting obligations or the use of domestic hosting providers. compliance
with these types of regulation may involve significant costs or require changes in products or business practices that result in reduced revenue. noncompliance could result in the imposition of penalties or orders we stop the alleged noncompliant
activity.  our business depends on our ability to attract and retain talented employees.our business is
based on successfully attracting and retaining talented employees. the market for highly skilled workers and leaders in our industry is extremely competitive. we are limited in our ability to recruit internationally by restrictive domestic
immigration laws. if we are less successful in our recruiting efforts, or if we cannot retain key employees, including key employees of the nds business acquired in april2014, our ability to develop and deliver successful products and services
may be adversely affected. effective succession planning is also important to our long-term success. failure to ensure effective transfer of knowledge and smooth transitions involving key employees could hinder our strategic planning and execution.
we have claims and lawsuits against us that may result in adverse outcomes.we are subject to a variety
of claims and lawsuits. adverse outcomes in some or all of these claims may result in significant monetary damages or injunctive relief that could adversely affect our ability to conduct our business. the litigation and other claims are subject to
inherent uncertainties and managements view of these matters may change in the future. a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements could occur for the period in which the effect of an unfavorable final outcome becomes
probable and reasonably estimable.  we may have additional tax liabilities.we are subject to income taxes
in the u.s. and many foreign jurisdictions. significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes. in the ordinary course of our business, there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax
determination is uncertain. we regularly are under audit by tax authorities. economicand politicalpressures to increase tax revenues in various jurisdictions may make resolving tax disputes more difficult. although we believe our tax
estimates are reasonable, the final determination of tax audits and any related litigation could be materially different from our historical income tax provisions and accruals. the results of an audit or litigation could have a material effect on
our consolidated financial statements in the period or periods for which that determination is made.  we earn a significant amount of
our operating income from outside the u.s., and any repatriation of funds currently held in foreign jurisdictions to the u.s. may result in higher effective tax rates for the company. in addition, there have been proposals from congress to change
u.s. tax laws that would significantly impact how u.s. multinational corporations are taxed on foreign earnings. although we cannot predict whether or in what form any proposed legislation may pass, if enacted it could have a material adverse impact
on our tax expense and cash flows.  our hardware and software products may experience quality or supply
problems.our vertically-integrated hardware products such as xbox consoles, surface devices, lumia smartphones, and other devices we design and market are highly complex and can have defects in design, manufacture, or
associated software. we could incur significant expenses, lost revenue, and reputational harm if we fail to detect or address such issues through design, testing, or warranty repairs. we get some device components from sole suppliers. our
competitors use some of the same suppliers and their demand for hardware components can affect the capacity available to us. if a component from a sole-source supplier is delayed or becomes unavailable, whether because of supplier capacity
constraint or industry shortages, we may not obtain timely replacement supplies, resulting in reduced sales. component shortages, excess or obsolete inventory, or price reductions resulting in inventory adjustments may increase our cost of revenue.
xbox consoles and surface devices and lumia phones are assembled in asia and other geographies that may be subject to disruptions in the supply chain, resulting in shortages that would affect our revenue and operating margins. these same risks would
apply to any other vertically-integrated hardware and software products we may offer.
table of contents
part i  item 1a
our software products also may experience quality or reliability problems. the highly
sophisticated software products we develop may contain bugs and other defects that interfere with their intended operation. any defects we do not detect and fix in pre-release testing could cause reduced sales and revenue, damage to our reputation,
repair or remediation costs, delays in the release of new products or versions, or legal liability. although our license agreements typically contain provisions that eliminate or limit our exposure to liability, there is no assurance these
provisions will withstand legal challenge.  our global business exposes us to operational and economic
risks.we operate in over 100 countries and a significant part of our revenue comes from international sales. the global nature of our business creates operational and economic risks. emerging markets are a significant
focus of our international growth strategy. the developing nature of these markets presents several risks, including deterioration of social, political, labor, or economic conditions in a country or region, and difficulties in staffing and managing
foreign operations. although we hedge a portion of our international currency exposure, significant fluctuations in exchange rates between the u.s. dollar and foreign currencies may adversely affect our revenue. competitive or regulatory pressure to
make our pricing structure uniform might require that we reduce the sales price of our software in the u.s. and other countries.
catastrophic events or geo-political conditions may disrupt our business.a disruption or failure of our systems or
operations because of a major earthquake, weather event, cyber-attack, terrorist attack, or other catastrophic event could cause delays in completing sales, providing services, or performing other critical functions. our corporate headquarters, a
significant portion of our research and development activities, and certain other essential business operations are in the seattle, washington area, and we have other business operations in the silicon valley area of california, both of which are
near major earthquake faults. a catastrophic event that results in the destruction or disruption of any of our critical business or it systems could harm our ability to conduct normal business operations. providing our customers with more services
and solutions in the cloud puts a premium on the resilience of our systems and strength of our business continuity management plans, and magnifies the potential impact of prolonged service outages on our operating results.
abrupt political change, terrorist activity, and armed conflict pose a risk of general economic disruption in affected countries, which may
increase our operating costs. these conditions also may add uncertainty to the timing and budget for technology investment decisions by our customers, and may cause supply chain disruptions for hardware manufacturers, either of which may adversely
affect our revenue. the long-term effects of climate change on the global economy or the it industry in particular are unclear. environmental regulations or changes in the supply, demand or available sources of energy may affect the availability or
cost of goods and services, including natural resources, necessary to run our business. changes in weather where we operate may increase the costs of powering and cooling computer hardware we use to develop software and provide cloud-based services.
adverse economic or market conditions may harm our business.worsening economic conditions, including
inflation, recession, or other changes in economic conditions, may cause lower it spending and adversely affect our revenue. if demand for pcs, servers, and other computing devices declines, or consumer or business spending for those products
declines, our revenue will be adversely affected. substantial revenue comes from our u.s. government contracts. an extended federal government shutdown resulting from failing to pass budget appropriations, adopt continuing funding resolutions or
raise the debt ceiling, and other budgetary decisions limiting or delaying federal government spending, could reduce government it spending on our products and services and adversely affect our revenues. our product distribution system also relies
on an extensive partner and retail network. oems building devices that run our software have also been a significant means of distribution. the impact of economic conditions on our partners, such as the bankruptcy of a major distributor, oem, or
retailer, could cause sales channel disruption. challenging economic conditions also may impair the ability of our customers to pay for products and services they have purchased. as a result, allowances for doubtful accounts and write-offs of
accounts receivable may increase. we maintain an investment portfolio of various holdings, types, and maturities. these investments are subject to general credit, liquidity, market, and interest rate risks, which may be exacerbated by unusual events
that affect global financial markets. a significant part of our investment portfolio comprises u.s. government securities. if global credit and equity markets decline for long periods, or if there is a downgrade of the u.s. government credit rating
due to an actual or threatened default on government debt, our investment portfolio may be adversely affected and we could determine that more of our investments have experienced an other-than-temporary decline in fair value, requiring impairment
charges that could adversely affect our financial results.
table of contents
part i  item 1b, 2, 3, 4
item1b.unresolved staff comments
we have received no written comments regarding our periodic or current reports from the staff of the sec that were issued 180 days or more
preceding the end of our fiscal year 2014 that remain unresolved.  item2. properties
our corporate offices consist of approximately 15million square feet of office space located in king county, washington: 10million
square feet of owned space situated on approximately 500 acres of land we own at our corporate campus in redmond, washington and approximately five million square feet of space we lease. we own approximately threemillion additional square feet
of office and data center space domestically (outside of the puget sound corporate campus) and lease many sites domestically totaling approximately fivemillion square feet of office and data center space.
we occupy many sites internationally, totaling approximately five million square feet that is owned and approximately twelvemillion square
feet that is leased. international facilities that we own include: our development center in hyderabad, india; our european operations center in dublin, ireland; a research and development campus in beijing, china; and our facilities in salo,
finland and reading, uk. the largest leased office spaces include the following locations: beijing and shanghai, china; tokyo, japan; unterschleissheim, germany; paris, france; dublin, ireland; espoo, tampere, and oulu, finland, bangalore, india;
reading, uk; vedbaek, denmark; and mississauga, canada. in addition to the above locations, we have a disk duplication and digital distribution facility in humacao, puerto rico, a facility in singapore for our asia pacific operations center and
regional headquarters, and various product development facilities, both domestically and internationally, as described in the research and development section of item1 of this form 10-k.
our facilities are fully used for current operations of all segments, and suitable additional spaces are available to accommodate expansion needs.
we have a development agreement with the city of redmond under which we may currently develop approximately 1.6million square feet of additional facilities at our corporate campus in redmond, washington.
we operate manufacturing facilities in brazil, china, hungary, mexico, and vietnam for the production of phones.
item3.legal proceedings  see note 17  contingencies of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k) for information regarding legal proceedings in which we are involved.
item4.mine safety disclosures  not applicable.
table of contents
part ii  item 5, 6
part ii  item5.market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters, and issuer purchases of equity securities
market and stockholders  our
common stock is traded on the nasdaq stock market under the symbol msft. on july22, 2014, there were 113,923 registered holders of record of our common stock. the high and low common stock sales prices per share were as follows:
quarter ended
september30
december31
march31
june30
fiscalyear
fiscal year 2014
high
$36.43
$38.98
$41.50
$42.29
$42.29
low
$30.84
$32.80
$34.63
$38.51
$30.84
fiscal year 2013
high
$31.61
$30.25
$28.66
$35.78
$35.78
low
$28.54
$26.26
$26.28
$28.11
$26.26
dividends and share repurchases  see note 18  stockholders equity of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k) for information regarding dividends and share repurchases by quarter. following are our
monthly stock repurchases for the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014, all of which were made as part of publicly announced plans or programs:
period
totalnumber ofshares purchased
average pricepaid pershare
totalnumberof sharespurchasedas partofpublicly
announcedplans
orprograms
approximatedollarvalueof
shares thatmayyetbe purchasedundertheplans orprograms
(inmillions)
april1, 2014 april30,2014
756,720
$
41.37
756,720
$36,177
may1,2014 may31,2014
27,395,976
$
39.63
27,395,976
$35,092
june1, 2014june30, 2014
$
0.00
$35,092
28,152,696
28,152,696
the repurchases were made using cash resources and occurred in the open market.
item6.selected financial data  financial highlights
(in millions, except per share data)
year ended june30,
(a)
revenue
$
86,833
$
77,849
$
73,723
$
69,943
$
62,484
operating income
$
27,759
$
26,764
(c)
$
21,763
(d)
$
27,161
$
24,098
net income
$
22,074
(b)
$
21,863
(c)
$
16,978
(d)
$
23,150
$
18,760
diluted earnings per share
$
2.63
(b)
$
2.58
(c)
$
2.00
(d)
$
2.69
$
2.10
cash dividends declared per share
$
1.12
$
0.92
$
0.80
$
0.64
$
0.52
cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments
$
85,709
$
77,022
$
63,040
$
52,772
$
36,788
total assets
$
172,384
$
142,431
$
121,271
$
108,704
$
86,113
long-term obligations
$
36,975
$
26,070
$
22,220
$
22,847
$
13,791
stockholders equity
$
89,784
$
78,944
$
66,363
$
57,083
$
46,175
table of contents
part ii  item 6, 7
(a)
on april25, 2014, we acquired substantially all of nokias devices and services business (nds). nds has been included in our
consolidated results of operations starting on the acquisition date.
(b)
includes a tax provision adjustment recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014 related to adjustments to prior years liabilities for
intercompany transfer pricing which decreased net income by $458 million and diluted earnings per share by $0.05.
(c)
includes a charge related to a fine imposed by the european commission in march 2013 which decreased operating income and net income by $733 million
(561 million) and diluted earnings per share by $0.09. also includes a charge for surface rt inventory adjustments recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2013, which decreased operating income by $900 million, net income by $596
million, and diluted earnings per share by $0.07.
(d)
includes a goodwill impairment charge related to our previous online services division business segment (related to devices and consumer other under our
current segment structure) which decreased operating income and net income by $6.2 billion and diluted earnings per share by $0.73.  item7.managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
the following managements discussion and analysis (md&a) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations
and financial condition of microsoft corporation. md&a is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to financial statements.
overview  microsoft is a
technology leader focused on being the productivity and platform company for the mobile-first and cloud-first world. we strive to reinvent productivity to empower people and organizations to do more and achieve more. we create technology that
transforms the way people work, play, and communicate across a wide range of computing devices.  we generate revenue by developing,
licensing, and supporting a wide range of software products, by offering an array of services, including cloud-based services to consumers and businesses, by designing, manufacturing, and selling devices that integrate with our cloud-based services,
and by delivering relevant online advertising to a global audience. our most significant expenses are related to compensating employees, designing, manufacturing, marketing, and selling our products and services, datacenter costs in support of our
cloud-based services, and income taxes.  industry trends  our industry is dynamic and highly competitive, with frequent changes in both technologies and business models. each industry shift is an opportunity to conceive new products, new technologies, or new ideas that
can further transform the industry and our business. at microsoft, we push the boundaries of what is possible through a broad range of research and development activities that seek to identify and address the changing demands of customers, industry
trends, and competitive forces.  key opportunities and investments  we see significant opportunities for growth by investing research and development resources in the following areas:
digital work and life experiences
our cloud operating system
our devices operating system and hardware
table of contents
part ii  item 7
with investments in these areas, we work to fulfill the evolving needs of our customers in a
mobile-first and cloud-first world. we view mobility broadly  not just by devices, but by experiences. today, people move just as quickly into new contexts as to new locations. mobility goes beyond devices users carry with them as they move
from place to place, to encompass the rich collection of data, applications, and services that accompany them as they move from setting to setting in their lives. many of our customers are dual users, employing technology for work or
school and also deeply in their personal lives.  digital work and life experiences
we believe we can significantly enhance the digital lives of our customers using our broad portfolio of communication, productivity, and
information services. we work to deliver digital work and life experiences that are reinvented for the mobile-first and cloud-first world. productivity will be the first and foremost objective, to enable people to meet and collaborate more easily,
and to effectively express ideas in new ways. we will design applications as dual use with the intelligence to partition data between work and life while respecting each persons privacy choices. the foundation for these efforts will rest on
advancing our leading productivity, collaboration, and business process tools including skype, onedrive, onenote, outlook, word, excel, powerpoint, bing, and dynamics.  we see opportunity in combining these services in new ways that are more contextual and personal, while ensuring people, rather than their devices, remain at the center of the digital experience. we will offer our
services across ecosystems and devices outside our own. as people move from device to device, so will their content and the richness of their services. we will engineer applications so users can find, try, and buy them in friction-free ways.
cloud operating system  today,
businesses face important opportunities and challenges. enterprises are asked to deploy technology that advances business strategy. they decide what solutions will make employees more productive, collaborative, and satisfied, or connect with
customers in new and compelling ways. they work to unlock business insights from a world of data. they rely on our technology to manage employee corporate identity, and to manage and secure corporate information accessed and stored across a growing
number of devices. to achieve these objectives increasingly businesses look to leverage the benefits of the cloud. helping businesses move to the cloud is one of our largest opportunities, and we believe we work from a position of strength.
the shift to the cloud is driven by three important economies of scale: larger datacenters can deploy computational resources at
significantly lower cost per unit than smaller ones; larger datacenters can coordinate and aggregate diverse customer, geographic, and application demand patterns improving the utilization of computing, storage, and network resources; and
multi-tenancy lowers application maintenance labor costs for large public clouds. the cloud creates the opportunity for businesses to focus on innovation while leaving non-differentiating activities to reliable and cost-effective providers.
with azure, we are one of very few cloud vendors that run at a scale that meets the needs of businesses of all sizes and complexities.
we believe the combination of azure and windows server makes us the only company with a public, private, and hybrid cloud platform that can power modern business. we are working to enhance the return on it investment by enabling enterprises to
combine their existing datacenters and our public cloud into a single cohesive infrastructure. businesses can deploy applications in their own datacenter, a partners datacenter, or in our datacenters with common security, management, and
administration across all environments, with the flexibility and scale they desire.  our cloud will also enable richer employee
experiences. we enable organizations to securely adopt software-as-a-service applications (both our own and third-party) and integrate them with their existing security and management infrastructure. we will continue to innovate with higher level
services including identity and directory services, rich data storage and analytics services, machine learning services, media services, web, and mobile backend services, and developer productivity services. to foster a rich developer ecosystem, our
digital work
table of contents
part ii  item 7
and life experiences will also be extensible, enabling customers and partners to further customize and enhance our solutions, achieving even more value. our strategy requires continuing
investment in datacenters and other infrastructure to support our devices and services, and will bring continued competition with google, amazon, and other well-established and emerging competitors.
device operating system and hardware  with
our windows device operating system and first-party hardware, we strive to set the standard for productivity experiences. we aim to deliver the richest and most consistent user experience for digital work and life scenarios on screens of all sizes
from phones, tablets, and laptops to tvs and large, multi-touch displays. we are investing to make windows the most secure, manageable, and capable operating system for the needs of a modern workforce. we are working to create a broad
developer opportunity by enabling universal windows applications to run across all device targets. we are developing new input/output methods like speech, pen, and gesture to power more personal computing experiences.
we work with an ecosystem of partners to deliver a broad spectrum of windows devices. we also build first-party hardware to set the standard for
productivity experiences and stimulate more demand for the entire windows ecosystem, as we do with surface, and with the acquisition of substantially all nokia corporations (nokia) devices and services business (nds) on
april25, 2014, phones. as consumer services and hardware advance, we expect they will continue to better complement one another, connecting the devices people use daily to unique communications, productivity, and entertainment services from
microsoft and our partners and developers. we anticipate many new mobile device categories and we anticipate experiences to emerge that span a variety of devices of all screen sizes. we will invest to be on the forefront of this innovation focusing
on dual users and their needs across work and life. with the acquisition of nds, we expect our effective tax rate to increase as our business mix changes.  our future opportunity  there are several distinct areas of technology that we aim to drive
forward. our goal is to lead the industry in these areas over the long term, which we expect will translate to sustained growth. we are investing significant resources in:
delivering new high-value digital work and digital life experiences to improve how people learn, work, play, and interact with one another.
establishing our windows platform across the pc, tablet, phone, server, other devices, and the cloud to drive a thriving ecosystem of developers, unify the
cross-device user experience, and increase agility when bringing new advances to market.
building and running cloud-based services in ways that unleash new experiences and opportunities for businesses and individuals.
developing new devices that have increasingly natural ways to use them, including touch, gesture, and speech.
applying machine learning to make technology more intuitive and able to act on our behalf, instead of at our command.
we believe the breadth of our products and services portfolio, our large, global partner and customer base, our growing ecosystem, and our ongoing
investment in innovation position us to be a leader in these areas.  economic conditions, challenges, and risks
the market for software, devices, and cloud-based services is dynamic and highly competitive. our competitors are developing new software and
devices, while also deploying competing cloud-based services for consumers and businesses. the devices and form factors customers prefer evolve rapidly, and influence how users access services in the cloud and in some cases the users choice of
which suite of cloud-based services to use. we must continue to evolve and adapt over an extended time in pace with this changing environment. to support our strategy of
table of contents
part ii  item 7
reinventing productivity to empower every person and every organization to do more and achieve more, we announced a restructuring plan in july 2014. through this restructuring, we strive to
increase agility, streamline engineering processes, move faster and more efficiently, and simplify our organization. even if we achieve these goals, the investments we are making in devices and infrastructure will increase our operating costs and
may decrease our operating margins.  we prioritize our investments among the highest long-term growth opportunities. these investments
require significant resources and are multi-year in nature. the products and services we bring to market may be developed internally, as part of a partnership or alliance, or through acquisition.
our success is highly dependent on our ability to attract and retain qualified employees. we hire a mix of university and industry talent
worldwide. microsoft competes for talented individuals globally by offering an exceptional working environment, broad customer reach, scale in resources, the ability to grow ones career across many different products and businesses, and
competitive compensation and benefits. aggregate demand for our software, services, and devices is correlated to global macroeconomic and geopolitical factors, which remain dynamic. see a discussion of these factors and other risks under risk
factors (part i, item1a of this form 10-k).  unearned revenue  quarterly and annual revenue may be impacted by the deferral of revenue. see the discussions below regarding:
revenue deferred on certain devices bundled with other products and services (bundled offerings); and
revenue deferred on sales of windows 7 with an option to upgrade to windows 8 pro at a discounted price (the windows upgrade offer).
if our customers choose to license cloud-based versions of our products and services rather than licensing
transaction-based products and services, the associated revenue will shift from being recognized at the time of the transaction to being recognized over the subscription period or upon consumption, as applicable.
reportable segments  the segment amounts
included in md&a are presented on a basis consistent with our internal management reporting. segment information appearing in note 21  segment information and geographic data of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of
this form 10-k) is also presented on this basis. all differences between our internal management reporting basis and accounting principles generally accepted in the u.s. (u.s. gaap), along with certain corporate-level and other activity,
are included in corporate and other. operating expenses are not allocated to our segments.  during the first quarter of fiscal year
2014, we changed our organizational structure as part of our transformation to a devices and services company. as a result, information that our chief operating decision maker regularly reviews for purposes of allocating resources and assessing
performance changed. therefore, we have recast certain prior period amounts to conform to the way we internally managed and monitored segment performance during fiscal year 2014. our reportable segments are described below.
on april25, 2014, we acquired substantially all of nds for total consideration of $9.5 billion. this amount was greater than the $7.2 billion
disclosed previously, primarily due to $1.5 billion of cash acquired, foreign currency movements of $330 million, working capital adjustments of $210 million, and other adjustments of $260 million. see note 9  business combinations of the
notes to financial statements for additional details. nds has been included in our consolidated results of operations starting on the acquisition date. we report the financial performance of the acquired business in our new phone hardware segment.
prior to the acquisition of nds, financial results associated with our joint strategic initiatives with nokia were reflected in our d&c licensing segment. the contractual relationship with nokia related to those initiatives terminated in
conjunction with the acquisition. with the creation of the new phone hardware segment, the d&c hardware segment was renamed computing and gaming hardware in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
devices and consumer (d&c)
our d&c segments develop, manufacture, market, and support products and services designed to entertain and connect people, increase personal
productivity, help people simplify tasks and make more informed decisions online, and help advertisers connect with audiences. our d&c segments are:
d&c licensing, comprising: windows, including all oem licensing (windows oem) and other non-volume licensing and academic volume
licensing of the windows operating system and related software; non-volume licensing of microsoft office, comprising the core office product set, for consumers (office consumer); windows phone operating system, including related patent
licensing; and certain other patent licensing revenue;
computing and gaming hardware, comprising: xbox gaming and entertainment consoles and accessories, second-party and third-party video game royalties,
and xbox live subscriptions (xbox platform); surface devices and accessories; and microsoft pc accessories;
phone hardware, comprising: lumia smartphones and other non-lumia phones, beginning with our acquisition of nds; and
d&c other, comprising: resale, including windows store, xbox live transactions, and windows phone store; search advertising; display advertising;
office 365 consumer, comprising office 365 home and office 365 personal; studios, comprising first-party video games; our retail stores; and certain other consumer products and services not included in the categories above.
commercial
our commercial segments develop, market, and support software and services designed to increase individual, team, and organizational productivity
and efficiency, including simplifying everyday tasks through seamless operations across the users hardware and software. our commercial segments are:
commercial licensing, comprising: server products, including windows server, microsoft sql server, visual studio, system center, and related client
access licenses (cals); windows embedded; volume licensing of the windows operating system, excluding academic (windows commercial); microsoft office for business, including office, exchange, sharepoint, lync, and related
cals (office commercial); microsoft dynamics business solutions, excluding dynamics crm online; and skype; and
commercial other, comprising: enterprise services, including premier support services and microsoft consulting services; commercial cloud, comprising
office 365 commercial, other microsoft office online offerings, dynamics crm online, and microsoft azure; and certain other commercial products and online services not included in the categories above.
summary results of operations
(inmillions,exceptpercentagesandpershareamounts)
percentagechange2014versus2013
percentagechange2013versus2012
revenue
$
86,833
$
77,849
$
73,723
12%
6%
gross margin
$
59,899
$
57,600
$
56,193
4%
3%
operating income
$
27,759
$
26,764
$
21,763
4%
23%
diluted earnings per share
$
2.63
$
2.58
$
2.00
2%
29%
fiscal year 2014 compared with fiscal year 2013  revenue increased $9.0 billion or 12%, demonstrating growth across our consumer and commercial businesses, primarily due to higher revenue from server products, xbox platform, commercial cloud, and surface. revenue
also increased due to the acquisition of nds. commercial cloud revenue doubled, reflecting continued subscriber growth from our cloud-based offerings.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
gross margin increased $2.3 billion or 4%, primarily due to higher revenue, offset in part by a
$6.7 billion or 33% increase in cost of revenue. cost of revenue increased mainly due to higher volumes of xbox consoles and surface devices sold, and $575 million higher datacenter expenses, primarily in support of commercial cloud revenue growth.
cost of revenue also increased due to the acquisition of nds.  operating income increased $995 million or 4%, reflecting higher gross
margin, offset in part by increased research and development expenses and sales and marketing expenses. key changes in operating expenses were:
research and development expenses increased $970 million or 9%, due mainly to increased investment in new products and services in our devices engineering
group, including nds expenses, and increased investment in our applications and services engineering group.
sales and marketing expenses increased $535 million or 4%, primarily due to nds expenses and increased investment in sales resources, offset in part by lower
advertising costs.  fiscal year 2013 compared with fiscal year 2012
revenue increased $4.1 billion or 6%, mainly due to growth in revenue from our commercial segments. revenue was also impacted by the timing of
revenue deferrals.  operating income grew $5.0 billion or 23%, primarily due to the $6.2 billion goodwill impairment charge recorded
during the prior year. other key changes in cost of revenue and operating expenses were:
cost of revenue increased $2.7 billion or 16%, reflecting increased product costs associated with surface and windows 8, including an approximately $900
million charge for surface rt inventory adjustments, higher headcount-related expenses, payments made to nokia related to joint strategic initiatives, royalties on xbox live content, and retail stores expenses, offset in part by decreased costs
associated with lower sales of xbox 360 consoles and decreased traffic acquisition costs.
sales and marketing expenses increased $1.4 billion or 10%, reflecting advertising of windows 8 and surface.
research and development expenses increased $600 million or 6%, due mainly to higher headcount-related expenses, largely related to the xbox platform.
general and administrative expenses increased $580 million or 13%, due to higher legal charges, primarily due to the european commission fine of 561million (approximately $733 million) for failure to comply with our 2009 agreement to display a browser choice screen on
windows pcs where internet explorer is the default browser (the eu fine).
table of contents
part ii  item 7
segment results of operations  devices and consumer
(in millions, except percentages)
percentagechange2014versus2013
percentagechange2013versus2012
revenue
licensing
$
18,803
$
19,021
$
19,495
(1)%
(2)%
hardware:
computing and gaming hardware
9,628
6,461
6,740
49%
(4)%
phone hardware
1,985
*
*
total d&c hardware
11,613
6,461
6,740
80%
(4)%
other
7,258
6,618
6,203
10%
7%
total d&c revenue
$
37,674
$
32,100
$
32,438
17%
(1)%
gross margin
licensing
$
17,216
$
17,044
$
17,240
1%
(1)%
hardware:
computing and gaming hardware
2,495
(7)%
(62)%
phone hardware
*
*
total d&c hardware
2,495
(1)%
(62)%
other
1,770
2,046
1,998
(13)%
2%
total d&c gross margin
$
19,933
$
20,046
$
21,733
(1)%
(8)%
*
not meaningful  fiscal year 2014
compared with fiscal year 2013  d&c revenue increased $5.6 billion or 17%, primarily due to higher revenue from xbox platform,
surface, and windows phone. revenue also increased $2.0 billion due to the acquisition of nds. d&c gross margin decreased slightly, reflecting higher cost of revenue, offset in part by higher revenue. cost of revenue increased $5.7 billion or
47%, due mainly to xbox platform and surface. cost of revenue also increased $1.9 billion due to nds.  d&c licensing
d&c licensing revenue decreased $218 million or 1%, due mainly to lower revenue from licenses of windows and office consumer, as well as a
decrease in royalty revenue, offset in part by increased windows phone revenue. retail and non-oem sales of windows declined $304 million or 41%, due mainly to the launch of windows 8 in the prior year. windows oem revenue declined $136 million or
1%, due to continued softness in the consumer pc market, offset in part by a 12% increase in oem pro revenue. office consumer revenue declined $243 million or 8%, reflecting the transition of customers to office 365 consumer as well as continued
softness in the consumer pc market. the declines in windows oem and office consumer revenue were partially offset by benefits realized from ending our support for windows xp in april 2014. windows phone revenue increased $822 million or 48%, due
mainly to the recognition of $382 million revenue under our joint strategic initiatives with nokia, which concluded in conjunction with the acquisition of nds, as well as an increase in phone patent licensing revenue.
d&c licensing gross margin increased $172 million or 1%, primarily due to a $390 million or 20% decrease in cost of revenue. d&c licensing
cost of revenue decreased, due mainly to a $411 million or 23% decline in traffic acquisition costs.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
computing and gaming hardware  computing and gaming hardware revenue increased $3.2 billion or 49%, primarily due to higher revenue from the xbox platform and surface. xbox platform revenue increased $1.7 billion or 34%, due mainly to sales of
xbox one, which was released in november 2013, offset in part by a decrease in sales of xbox 360. we sold 11.7million xbox consoles during fiscal year 2014 compared with 9.8million xbox consoles during fiscal year 2013. surface revenue
increased $1.3 billion or 157%, due mainly to a higher number of devices and accessories sold.  computing and gaming hardware gross
margin decreased slightly, due to a $3.2 billion or 59% increase in cost of revenue, offset in part by higher revenue. xbox platform cost of revenue increased $2.1 billion or 72%, due mainly to higher volumes of consoles sold and higher costs
associated with xbox one. surface cost of revenue increased $970 million or 51%, due mainly to a higher number of devices and accessories sold, offset in part by a charge for surface rt inventory adjustments of approximately $900 million in fiscal
year 2013.  phone hardware
phone hardware revenue was $2.0 billion, reflecting sales of lumia smartphones and other non-lumia phones following the acquisition of nds on
april25, 2014. since the acquisition, we sold 5.8million lumia smartphones and 30.3million non-lumia phones.  phone
hardware gross margin was $54 million, reflecting revenue of $2.0 billion, offset in part by $1.9 billion cost of revenue, including amortization of acquired intangible assets and the impact of decisions to rationalize our device portfolio.
d&c other  d&c other
revenue increased $640 million or 10%, due mainly to higher online advertising revenue and office 365 consumer revenue, offset in part by a $213 million decrease in first-party video games revenue, primarily due to the release of halo 4 in the
second quarter of fiscal year 2013.online advertising revenue increased $497 million or 14%.search advertising revenue increased 39%, due primarily to increased revenue per search resulting from ongoing improvements in advertising
products, higher search volume, and the expiration of north american revenue per search guarantee payments to yahoo! in the prior year, offset in part by a 25% reduction in display advertising revenue. office 365 consumer revenue grew $316
million, primarily reflecting subscriber growth. we ended fiscal year 2014 with over five million subscribers.  d&c other gross
margin decreased $276 million or 13%, due to a $916 million or 20% increase in cost of revenue, offset in part by higher revenue. d&c other cost of revenue grew, due mainly to a $541 million or 24% increase in online advertising cost of revenue,
reflecting support of online infrastructure. cost of revenue also increased $219 million or 15%, due to higher resale transactions costs.  fiscal
year 2013 compared with fiscal year 2012  d&c revenue decreased $338 million or 1%, reflecting lower revenue from d&c
licensing and computing and gaming hardware, offset in part by increased revenue from d&c other. d&c gross margin decreased $1.7 billion or 8%, primarily due to higher cost of revenue and lower revenue. cost of revenue increased $1.3 billion
or 13%, primarily due to computing and gaming hardware.  d&c licensing
d&c licensing revenue decreased $474 million or 2%, due mainly to lower revenue from licenses of consumer and windows oem, offset in part by
increased windows phone revenue. office consumer revenue declined $618 million or 15%, while windows oem revenue declined 10%. these decreases resulted primarily from the impact on revenue of a decline in the x86 pc market, which we estimate
declined approximately 9%. windows phone revenue increased $1.2 billion, including an increase in patent licensing revenue and sales of windows phone licenses.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
in may 2013, we announced that we had surpassed 100million licenses sold for windows 8.
d&c licensing gross margin decreased $196 million or 1%, due to decreased revenue, offset in part by a $278 million or 12% decrease
in cost of revenue. d&c licensing cost of revenue decreased, due mainly to lower traffic acquisition costs, offset in part by a $375 million increase in expenses for payments made to nokia related to joint strategic initiatives.
computing and gaming hardware  computing
and gaming hardware revenue decreased $279 million or 4%, due primarily to lower revenue from the xbox platform, offset in part by surface revenue. xbox platform revenue decreased $1.3 billion or 22%, due mainly to lower volumes of consoles sold,
offset in part by higher xbox live subscription revenue. we shipped 9.8million xbox 360 consoles during fiscal year 2013, compared with 13.0million xbox 360 consoles during fiscal year 2012. surface revenue was $853 million. the general
availability of surface rt and surface pro started october26, 2012 and february9, 2013, respectively.  computing and gaming
hardware gross margin decreased $1.5 billion or 62%, due to a $1.3 billion or 30% increase in cost of revenue and decreased revenue. computing and gaming hardware cost of revenue increased, primarily due to $1.9 billion in product costs associated
with surface, including a charge for surface rt inventory adjustments of approximately $900 million. these costs were offset in part by a $920 million or 24% decrease in xbox platform cost of revenue, due mainly to a decrease in manufacturing and
distribution costs associated with lower volumes of xbox 360 consoles sold.  d&c other
d&c other revenue increased $415 million or 7%, due mainly to higher advertising revenue, which increased $213 million or 7% to $3.5 billion.
search advertising revenue growth was offset in part by a decline in display advertising revenue. search advertising revenue grew primarily due to increased revenue per search, resulting from ongoing improvements in ad products, while display
advertising revenue decreased primarily due to industry-wide market pressure. d&c other revenue also increased $202 million or 7%, due mainly to higher volumes of content resold through our online platforms.
d&c other gross margin increased $48 million or 2%, due to increased revenue offset in part by a $367 million or 9% increase in cost of
revenue. d&c other cost of revenue increased, due mainly to a $327 million or 28% increase in costs associated with higher volumes of resale transactions, primarily a $257 million increase in royalties on xbox live content. increased traffic
acquisition costs were offset in part by lower yahoo! reimbursement costs.  commercial
(in millions, except percentages)
percentagechange2014versus2013
percentagechange2013versus2012
revenue
licensing
$
42,027
$
39,686
$
37,126
6%
7%
other
7,547
5,660
4,644
33%
22%
total commercial revenue
$
49,574
$
45,346
$
41,770
9%
9%
gross margin
licensing
$
38,604
$
36,261
$
34,463
6%
5%
other
1,856
102%
59%
total commercial gross margin
$
40,460
$
37,182
$
35,042
9%
6%
table of contents
part ii  item 7
fiscal year 2014 compared with fiscal year 2013
commercial revenue increased $4.2 billion or 9%, due mainly to growth in revenue from our on-premises licensing businesses and commercial cloud.
collectively, office commercial and office 365 commercial revenue grew 8%. collectively, our server products revenue, including microsoft azure, grew 13%. commercial gross margin increased $3.3 billion or 9%, in line with revenue.
commercial licensing  commercial licensing
revenue increased $2.3 billion or 6%, due primarily to increased revenue from our server products, as well as higher revenue from windows commercial and office commercial.our server products revenue grew $1.7 billion or 11%, driven primarily
by increased sales of microsoft sql server. windows commercial revenue grew $334 million or 10%, due mainly to increased renewal rates and transactional purchases driven by windows xp end of support. office commercial revenue grew $253 million or
1%, and was impacted by customers transitioning to office 365 commercial.  commercial licensing gross margin increased $2.3 billion or
6%, in line with revenue growth.  commercial other  commercial other revenue increased $1.9 billion or 33%, due to higher commercial cloud revenue and enterprise services revenue. commercial cloud revenue grew $1.5 billion or 116%, due mainly to higher revenue from
office 365 commercial. enterprise services revenue grew $380 million or 9%, due mainly to growth in premier support services.
commercial other gross margin increased $935 million or 102%, due to higher revenue, offset in part by a $952 million or 20% increase in cost of
revenue. the increase in cost of revenue was due mainly to higher datacenter expenses, reflecting support of our growing commercial cloud.  fiscal
year 2013 compared with fiscal year 2012  commercial revenue increased $3.6 billion or 9%, due mainly to growth in revenue from our
on-premises licensing businesses and commercial cloud.  commercial gross margin increased $2.1 billion or 6%.
commercial licensing  commercial licensing
revenue increased $2.6 billion or 7%, due to increased revenue from all major commercial offerings. server products revenue increased $1.2 billion or 9%, driven primarily by growth in microsoft sql server, system center, and windows server. office
commercial revenue increased $622 million or 4%, reflecting growth in office revenue from volume licensing agreements with software assurance. windows commercial revenue increased $379 million or 13%, reflecting continued support of our platform.
skype revenue increased, due primarily to including a full year of results in fiscal year 2013.  commercial licensing gross margin
increased $1.8 billion or 5%, due to higher revenue, offset in part by a $762 million or 29% increase in cost of revenue. commercial licensing cost of revenue increased, due to increased costs from all major commercial offerings, including $287
million higher intellectual property licensing costs.  commercial other  commercial other revenue increased $1.0 billion or 22%, due to higher commercial cloud and enterprise services revenue. commercial cloud revenue grew $582 million or 82%, due mainly to higher revenue from office
365 commercial. enterprise services revenue grew $434 million or 11%, due to growth in both premier product support and consulting services.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
commercial other gross margin increased $342 million or 59%, due to higher revenue, offset in part
by a $674 million or 17% increase in cost of revenue. the increase in cost of revenue was due mainly to higher datacenter expenses, reflecting investment in online operations infrastructure, and increased headcount-related expenses, mainly due to
higher enterprise services headcount supporting revenue growth.  corporate and other
(in millions, except percentages)
percentagechange2014versus2013
percentagechange2013versus2012
revenue
$
(415
)
$
$
(485
)
(203)%
183%
gross margin
$
(494
)
$
$
(582
)
(233)%
164%
corporate and other revenue comprises certain revenue deferrals, including those related to product and service
upgrade offers and pre-sales of new products to oems prior to general availability.  fiscal year 2014 compared with fiscal year 2013
corporate and other revenue decreased $818 million, primarily due to the timing of revenue deferrals. during fiscal year 2014, we deferred a net
$349 million of revenue related to bundled offerings. during fiscal year 2013, we recognized $540 million of previously deferred revenue related to the windows upgrade offer. the revenue was recognized upon expiration of the offer.
corporate and other gross margin decreased $866 million, due mainly to decreased revenue.  fiscal year 2013 compared with fiscal year 2012  corporate and other revenue increased $888
million or 183%, primarily due to the timing of revenue deferrals. during fiscal year 2013, we recognized $540 million of revenue that had been deferred in fiscal year 2012 related to the windows upgrade offer. the revenue was recognized upon
expiration of the offer.  corporate and other gross margin increased $954 million or 164%, due mainly to increased revenue.
operating expenses  research and
development
(in millions, except percentages)
percentagechange2014versus2013
percentagechange2013versus2012
research and development
$
11,381
$
10,411
$
9,811
9%
6%
as a percent of revenue
13%
13%
13%
0ppt
0ppt
research and development expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and other
headcount-related expenses associated with product development. research and development expenses also include third-party development and programming costs, localization costs incurred to translate software for international markets, and the
amortization of purchased software code.  fiscal year 2014 compared with fiscal year 2013
research and development expenses increased $970 million or 9%, due mainly to increased investment in new products and services in our devices
engineering group, including $275 million of nds expenses, and increased investment in our applications and services engineering group.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
fiscal year 2013 compared with fiscal year 2012
research and development expenses increased, reflecting a $460 million or 6% increase in headcount-related expenses, largely related to the xbox
platform.  sales and marketing
(in millions, except percentages)
percentagechange2014versus2013
percentagechange2013versus2012
sales and marketing
$
15,811
$
15,276
$
13,857
4%
10%
as a percent of revenue
18%
20%
19%
(2)ppt
1ppt
sales and marketing expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and other
headcount-related expenses associated with sales and marketing personnel and the costs of advertising, promotions, trade shows, seminars, and other programs.  fiscal year 2014 compared with fiscal year 2013  sales and marketing expenses increased $535
million or 4%, primarily due to nds expenses and increased investment in sales resources, offset in part by lower advertising costs. nds sales and marketing expenses were $394 million during fiscal year 2014. average headcount, excluding nds, grew
4%. advertising costs, excluding nds, declined $403 million or 15%, primarily due to windows 8 and surface costs in the prior year.  fiscal year 2013
compared with fiscal year 2012  sales and marketing expenses grew, reflecting an $898 million increase in advertising costs
associated primarily with windows 8 and surface, $181 million higher fees paid to third-party software advisors, and a $145 million or 2% increase in headcount-related expenses.  general and administrative
(in millions, except percentages)
percentagechange2014versus2013
percentagechange2013versus2012
general and administrative
$
4,821
$
5,149
$
4,569
(6)%
13%
as a percent of revenue
6%
7%
6%
(1)ppt
1ppt
general and administrative expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, severance
expense, and other headcount-related expenses associated with finance, legal, facilities, certain human resources and other administrative personnel, certain taxes, and legal and other administrative fees.
fiscal year 2014 compared with fiscal year 2013  general and administrative expenses decreased $328 million or 6%, due mainly to the eu fine in the prior year, offset in part by higher business taxes, higher costs for internal use software capitalized in the
prior year, and nds expenses. nds general and administrative expenses were $77 million during fiscal year 2014.  fiscal year 2013 compared with
fiscal year 2012  general and administrative expenses increased, primarily due to legal charges for the eu fine.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
goodwill impairment  we test goodwill for impairment annually on may1 at the reporting unit level using a discounted cash flow methodology with a peer-based, risk-adjusted weighted average cost of capital. no impairment of
goodwill was identified as of may1, 2014 or may 2013. our goodwill impairment test as of may1, 2012, indicated that the carrying value of our previous online services division reporting unit (in devices and consumer other under our
current segment structure) exceeded its estimated fair value. accordingly, we recorded a non-cash, non-tax deductible goodwill impairment charge of $6.2 billion during the three months ended june30, 2012, reducing the units goodwill from
$6.4 billion to $223 million.  integration and restructuring  integration and restructuring expenses consist of transaction fees and direct acquisition costs, including legal, finance, consulting, and other professional fees. integration and restructuring expenses also
include employee compensation and termination costs associated with certain reorganization activities.  integration and restructuring
expenses were $127 million for fiscal year 2014, reflecting expenses associated with the acquisition and integration of nds.  other
income (expense)  the components of other income (expense) were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
dividends and interest income
$
$
$
interest expense
(597
)
(429
)
(380
)
net recognized gains on investments
net losses on derivatives
(328
)
(196
)
(364
)
net losses on foreign currency remeasurements
(165
)
(74
)
(117
)
other
(169
)
total
$
$
$
we use derivative instruments to: manage risks related to foreign currencies, equity prices, interest rates, and
credit; enhance investment returns; and facilitate portfolio diversification. gains and losses from changes in fair values of derivatives that are not designated as hedges are primarily recognized in other income (expense). other than those
derivatives entered into for investment purposes, such as commodity contracts, the gains (losses) are generally economically offset by unrealized gains (losses) in the underlying available-for-sale securities, which are recorded as a component of
other comprehensive income (oci) until the securities are sold or other-than-temporarily impaired, at which time the amounts are reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (aoci) into other income (expense).
fiscal year 2014 compared with fiscal year 2013  dividends and interest income increased due to higher portfolio balances. interest expense increased due to higher outstanding long-term debt. net recognized gains on investments increased primarily due to higher
gains on sales of equity securities and lower other-than-temporary impairments. other-than-temporary impairments were $106 million in fiscal year 2014, compared with $208 million in fiscal year 2013. net losses on derivatives increased due to higher
losses on foreign exchange contracts, losses on equity derivatives as compared to gains in the prior period, offset in part by gains on commodity and interest rate derivatives as compared to losses in the prior period. for fiscal year 2014, other
reflects recognized losses from certain joint ventures, offset in part by a recognized gain on a divestiture. for fiscal year 2013, other reflects recognized gains on divestitures, including the gain recognized upon the divestiture of our 50% share
in the msnbc joint venture.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
fiscal year 2013 compared with fiscal year 2012
dividends and interest income decreased due to lower yields on our fixed-income investments, offset in part by higher average portfolio investment
balances. net recognized gains on investments decreased primarily due to lower gains on sales of equity and fixed-income securities and a gain recognized on the partial sale of our facebook holding in the prior year, offset in part by lower
other-than-temporary impairments. other-than-temporary impairments were $208 million in fiscal year 2013, compared with $298 million in fiscal year 2012. net losses on derivatives decreased due to gains on equity derivatives in the current fiscal
year as compared with losses in the prior fiscal year, and lower losses on commodity and foreign exchange derivatives as compared to the prior fiscal year, offset in part by losses on interest-rate derivatives in the current fiscal year as compared
to gains in the prior fiscal year. for the current year, other reflects recognized gains on divestitures, including the gain recognized upon the divestiture of our 50% share in the msnbc joint venture.
income taxes  fiscal year 2014 compared
with fiscal year 2013  our effective tax rate for fiscal years 2014 and 2013 was approximately 21% and 19%, respectively. our
effective tax rate was lower than the u.s. federal statutory rate primarily due to earnings taxed at lower rates in foreign jurisdictions resulting from producing and distributing our products and services through our foreign regional operations
centers in ireland, singapore, and puerto rico.  our fiscal year 2014 effective rate increased by 2% from fiscal year 2013 mainly due to
adjustments of $458 million to prior years liabilities for intercompany transfer pricing that increased taxable income in more highly taxed jurisdictions, as well as losses incurred by nds and changes in the geographic mix of our business.
this was offset in part by favorable transfer pricing developments in certain foreign tax jurisdictions, primarily denmark.  changes in
the mix of income before income taxes between the u.s. and foreign countries also impacted our effective tax rates and resulted primarily from changes in the geographic distribution of and changes in consumer demand for our products and services. we
supply our windows pc operating system to customers through our u.s. regional operating center, while we supply the microsoft office system and our server products and tools to customers through our foreign regional operations centers. windows pc
operating system revenue decreased $655 million in fiscal year 2014, while microsoft office system and server products and tools revenue increased $1.3 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively, during this same period. in fiscal years 2014 and 2013,
our u.s. income before income taxes was $7.1 billion and $6.7 billion, respectively, and comprised 26% and 25%, respectively, of our income before income taxes. in fiscal years 2014 and 2013, the foreign income before income taxes was $20.7 billion
and $20.4 billion, respectively, and comprised 74% and 75%, respectively, of our income before income taxes.  tax contingencies and
other tax liabilities were $10.4 billion and $9.4 billion as of june30, 2014 and 2013, respectively, and are included in other long-term liabilities. this increase relates primarily to adjustments to prior years liabilities for
intercompany transfer pricing and adjustments related to our irs audits. while we settled a portion of the i.r.s. audit for tax years 2004 to 2006 during the third quarter of fiscal year 2011, we remain under audit for those years. in february 2012,
the i.r.s. withdrew its 2011 revenue agents report and reopened the audit phase of the examination. as of june30, 2014, the primary unresolved issue relates to transfer pricing which could have a significant impact on our consolidated
financial statements if not resolved favorably. we have not received a proposed assessment for the unresolved issues and do not expect a final resolution of these issues in the next 12 months.based on the information currently available, we do
not anticipate a significant increase or decrease to our tax contingencies for these issues. we also continue to be subject to examination by the i.r.s. for tax years 2007 to 2013.
we are subject to income tax in many jurisdictions outside the u.s. our operations in certain jurisdictions remain subject to examination for tax
years 1996 to 2013, some of which are currently under audit by local tax authorities. the resolutions of these audits are not expected to be material to our consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
fiscal year 2013 compared with fiscal year 2012
our effective tax rate for fiscal years 2013 and 2012 was approximately 19% and 24%, respectively. our effective tax rate was lower than the u.s.
federal statutory rate primarily due to earnings taxed at lower rates in foreign jurisdictions resulting from producing and distributing our products and services through our foreign regional operations centers in ireland, singapore, and puerto
rico.  our fiscal year 2013 effective rate decreased by 5% from fiscal year 2012 mainly due to a nonrecurring $6.2 billion non-tax
deductible goodwill impairment charge that was recorded in fiscal year 2012. the goodwill impairment charge increased our effective tax rate by 10% in fiscal year 2012. in addition, in fiscal years 2013 and 2012, we recognized a reduction of 18% and
21%, respectively, to the effective tax rate due to foreign earnings taxed at lower rates. the decrease in our effective tax rate for fiscal year 2013 was primarily offset by a 1% increase related to the eu fine, which is not tax deductible.
changes in the mix of income before income taxes between the u.s. and foreign countries also impacted our effective tax rates and
resulted primarily from changes in the geographic distribution of and changes in consumer demand for our products and services. we supply our windows pc operating system to customers through our u.s. regional operating center, while we supply the
microsoft office system and our server products and tools to customers through our foreign regional operations centers. windows pc operating system revenue increased $209 million in fiscal year 2013, while microsoft office system and server products
and tools revenue increased $696 million and $1.2 billion, respectively, during this same period. in fiscal years 2013 and 2012, our u.s. income before income taxes was $6.7 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively, and comprised 25% and 7%,
respectively, of our income before income taxes. in fiscal years 2013 and 2012, the foreign income before income taxes was $20.4 billion and $20.7 billion, respectively, and comprised 75% and 93%, respectively, of our income before income taxes. the
primary driver for the increase in the u.s. income before income tax in fiscal year 2013 was the goodwill impairment charge recorded during the prior year.  tax contingencies and other tax liabilities were $9.4 billion and $7.6 billion as of june30, 2013 and 2012, respectively, and are included in other long-term liabilities. this increase relates primarily to
transfer pricing, including transfer pricing developments in certain foreign tax jurisdictions, primarily denmark. while we settled a portion of the i.r.s. audit for tax years 2004 to 2006 during the third quarter of fiscal year 2011, we remain
under audit for those years. in february 2012, the i.r.s. withdrew its 2011 revenue agents report and reopened the audit phase of the examination. as of june30, 2013, the primary unresolved issue relates to transfer pricing which could have a
significant impact on our consolidated financial statements if not resolved favorably. we do not believe it is reasonably possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits will significantly increase or decrease within the next 12 months
because we do not believe the remaining open issues will be resolved within the next 12 months. we also continue to be subject to examination by the i.r.s. for tax years 2007 to 2012.
we are subject to income tax in many jurisdictions outside the u.s. our operations in certain jurisdictions remain subject to examination for tax
years 1996 to 2012, some of which are currently under audit by local tax authorities. the resolutions of these audits are not expected to be material to our consolidated financial statements.
financial condition  cash, cash
equivalents, and investments  cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaled $85.7 billion as of june30, 2014,
compared with $77.0 billion as of june30, 2013. equity and other investments were $14.6 billion as of june30, 2014, compared with $10.8 billion as of june30, 2013. our short-term investments are primarily to facilitate liquidity
and for capital preservation. they consist predominantly of highly liquid investment-grade fixed-income securities, diversified among industries and individual issuers. the investments are predominantly u.s. dollar-denominated securities, but also
include foreign currency-denominated securities in order to diversify risk. our fixed-income investments are exposed to interest rate risk and credit risk. the credit risk and average maturity of our fixed-income portfolio are
table of contents
part ii  item 7
managed to achieve economic returns that correlate to certain fixed-income indices. the settlement risk related to these investments is insignificant given that the short-term investments held
are primarily highly liquid investment-grade fixed-income securities.  of the cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments at
june30, 2014, $77.1 billion was held by our foreign subsidiaries and would be subject to material repatriation tax effects. the amount of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments held by foreign subsidiaries subject to other
restrictions on the free flow of funds (primarily currency and other local regulatory) was $2.6 billion. as of june30, 2014, approximately 84% of the cash equivalents and short-term investments held by our foreign subsidiaries were invested in
u.s. government and agency securities, approximately 5% were invested in corporate notes and bonds of u.s. companies, and approximately 1% were invested in u.s. mortgage-backed securities, all of which are denominated in u.s. dollars.
securities lending  we lend certain
fixed-income and equity securities to increase investment returns. the loaned securities continue to be carried as investments on our balance sheet. cash and/or security interests are received as collateral for the loaned securities with the amount
determined based upon the underlying security lent and the creditworthiness of the borrower. cash received is recorded as an asset with a corresponding liability. our securities lending payable balance was $558 million as of june30, 2014. our
average and maximum securities lending payable balances for the fiscal year were $619 million and $1.3 billion, respectively. intra-year variances in the amount of securities loaned are mainly due to fluctuations in the demand for the securities.
valuation  in general, and
where applicable, we use quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities to determine the fair value of our financial instruments. this pricing methodology applies to our level 1 investments, such as exchange-traded mutual funds,
domestic and international equities, and u.s. government securities. if quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities are not available to determine fair value, then we use quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities or
inputs other than the quoted prices that are observable either directly or indirectly. this pricing methodology applies to our level 2 investments such as corporate notes and bonds, common and preferred stock, foreign government bonds,
mortgage-backed securities, and certificates of deposit. level 3 investments are valued using internally developed models with unobservable inputs. assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis using unobservable inputs are an
immaterial portion of our portfolio.  a majority of our investments are priced by pricing vendors and are generally level 1 or level 2
investments as these vendors either provide a quoted market price in an active market or use observable inputs for their pricing without applying significant adjustments. broker pricing is used mainly when a quoted price is not available, the
investment is not priced by our pricing vendors, or when a broker price is more reflective of fair values in the market in which the investment trades. our broker-priced investments are generally classified as level 2 investments because the broker
prices these investments based on similar assets without applying significant adjustments. in addition, all of our broker-priced investments have a sufficient level of trading volume to demonstrate that the fair values used are appropriate for these
investments. our fair value processes include controls that are designed to ensure appropriate fair values are recorded. these controls include model validation, review of key model inputs, analysis of period-over-period fluctuations, and
independent recalculation of prices where appropriate.  cash flows  fiscal year 2014 compared with fiscal year 2013  cash flows from operations increased $3.4
billion during the current fiscal year to $32.2 billion, due mainly to increases in cash received from customers. cash used in financing increased $246 million to $8.4 billion, due mainly to a $2.0 billion increase in cash used for common stock
repurchases, a $1.4 billion increase in dividends paid, and a $324 million decrease in proceeds from the issuance of common stock, offset in part by a $3.4 billion increase in
table of contents
part ii  item 7
proceeds from issuances of debt, net of repayments. cash used in investing decreased $5.0 billion to $18.8 billion, due mainly to a $10.5 billion decrease in cash used for net investment
purchases, sales, and maturities, offset in part by a $4.4 billion increase in cash used for acquisition of companies and purchases of intangible and other assets, and a $1.2 billion increase in capital expenditures for property and equipment.
fiscal year 2013 compared with fiscal year 2012  cash flows from operations decreased $2.8 billion during the current fiscal year to $28.8 billion, due mainly to changes in working capital, including increases in inventory and other current assets. cash used for
financing decreased $1.3 billion to $8.1 billion, due mainly to a $3.5 billion increase in proceeds from issuances of debt, net of repayments, offset in part by a $1.1 billion increase in dividends paid and a $982 million decrease in proceeds from
the issuance of common stock. cash used in investing decreased $975 million to $23.8 billion, due mainly to an $8.5 billion decrease in cash used for acquisitions of companies and purchases of intangible and other assets, offset in part by a $5.8
billion increase in cash used for net investment purchases, maturities, and sales, and a $2.0 billion increase in cash used for additions to property and equipment.  debt  we issued debt to take advantage of favorable pricing and liquidity in the debt markets,
reflecting our credit rating and the low interest rate environment. the proceeds of these issuances were or will be used for general corporate purposes, which may include, among other things, funding for working capital, capital expenditures,
repurchases of capital stock, acquisitions, and repayment of existing debt.  as of june30, 2014, we had $22.6 billion of issued
and outstanding debt, comprising $2.0 billion of short-term debt and $20.6 billion of long-term debt.  short-term debt
as of june30, 2014, we had $2.0 billion of commercial paper issued and outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.12% and
maturities ranging from 86 days to 91 days. the estimated fair value of this commercial paper approximates its carrying value.  we have
a $5.0 billion credit facility that expires on november14, 2018, which serves as a back-up for our commercial paper program. as of june30, 2014, we were in compliance with the only financial covenant in the credit agreement, which
requires us to maintain a coverage ratio of at least three times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization to interest expense, as defined in the credit agreement. no amounts were drawn against the credit facility during any of
the periods presented.  long-term debt  as of june30, 2014, the total carrying value and estimated fair value of our long-term debt were $20.6 billion and $21.5 billion, respectively. these estimated fair values are based on level2 inputs.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
the components of our long-term debt and the associated interest rates were as follows as of
june30, 2014:
due date
face value
statedinterest rate
effectiveinterest rate
(inmillions)
notes
september25,2015
$
1,750
1.625%
1.795%
february8, 2016
2.500%
2.642%
november15, 2017
0.875%
1.084%
may1, 2018
1.000%
1.106%
december6, 2018(a)
1,250
1.625%
1.824%
june1, 2019
1,000
4.200%
4.379%
october1, 2020
1,000
3.000%
3.137%
february8, 2021
4.000%
4.082%
december6, 2021(b)
2,396
2.125%
2.233%
november15, 2022
2.125%
2.239%
may1, 2023
1,000
2.375%
2.465%
december15, 2023(a)
1,500
3.625%
3.726%
december6, 2028(b)
2,396
3.125%
3.218%
may2,
2033(c)
2.625%
2.690%
june1, 2039
5.200%
5.240%
october1, 2040
1,000
4.500%
4.567%
february8, 2041
1,000
5.300%
5.361%
november15, 2042
3.500%
3.571%
may1, 2043
3.750%
3.829%
december15, 2043(a)
4.875%
4.918%
total
$
20,745
(a)
in december 2013, we issued $3.3 billion of debt securities.
(b)
in december 2013, we issued 3.5 billion of debt securities.
(c)
in april 2013, we issued 550million of debt securities.
the notes in this table are senior unsecured obligations and rank equally with our other senior unsecured debt outstanding. interest on these notes
is paid semi-annually, except for the euro-denominated debt securities on which interest is paid annually. as of june30, 2014, the aggregate unamortized discount for our long-term debt was $100 million.
unearned revenue  unearned revenue at
june30, 2014 was comprised mainly of unearned revenue from volume licensing programs. unearned revenue from volume licensing programs represents customer billings for multi-year licensing arrangements paid for either at inception of the
agreement or annually at the beginning of each coverage period and accounted for as subscriptions with revenue recognized ratably over the coverage period. unearned revenue at june30, 2014 also included payments for: post-delivery support and
consulting services to be performed in the future; xbox live subscriptions and prepaid points; microsoft dynamics business solutions products; office 365 subscriptions; bundled offerings; skype prepaid credits and subscriptions; and other offerings
for which we have been paid in advance and earn the revenue when we provide the service or software, or otherwise meet the revenue recognition criteria.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
the following table outlines the expected future recognition of unearned revenue as of
june30, 2014:
(in millions)
three months ending,
september30, 2014
$
8,667
december31, 2014
7,380
march31, 2015
4,812
june30, 2015
2,291
thereafter
2,008
total
$
25,158
share repurchases  on september16, 2013, our board of directors approved a new share repurchase program authorizing up to $40.0 billion in share repurchases. the share repurchase program became effective on october1,
2013, has no expiration date, and may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice. as of june30, 2014, $35.1 billion remained of the $40.0 billion share repurchase program.
during fiscal year 2014, we repurchased 175million shares of microsoft common stock for $6.4 billion; 128million shares were
repurchased for $4.9 billion under the share repurchase program approved by our board of directors on september16, 2013 and 47million shares were repurchased for $1.5 billion under the share repurchase program that was announced on
september22, 2008 and expired september30, 2013. during fiscal years 2013 and 2012, we repurchased 158million shares for $4.6 billion and 142million shares for $4.0 billion, respectively, under the share repurchase program
announced on september22, 2008. all repurchases were made using cash resources.  dividends
during fiscal years 2014 and 2013, our board of directors declared the following dividends:
declaration date
dividend pershare
recorddate
totalamount
paymentdate
(inmillions)
fiscal year 2014
september16, 2013
$0.28
november21,2013
$2,332
december12,2013
november19, 2013
$0.28
february 20, 2014
$2,322
march 13, 2014
march11, 2014
$0.28
may 15, 2014
$2,309
june 12, 2014
june10, 2014
$0.28
august 21, 2014
$2,307
september11,2014
fiscal year 2013
september18, 2012
$0.23
november15,2012
$1,933
december13,2012
november28, 2012
$0.23
february 21, 2013
$1,925
march 14, 2013
march11, 2013
$0.23
may 16, 2013
$1,921
june 13, 2013
june12, 2013
$0.23
august 15, 2013
$1,916
september12,2013
off-balance sheet arrangements  we provide indemnifications of varying scope and size to certain customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products and certain other matters.
in evaluating estimated losses on these indemnifications, we consider factors such as the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and our ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. these obligations did not have a material
impact on our consolidated financial statements during the periods presented.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
contractual obligations  the following table summarizes the payments due by fiscal year for our outstanding contractual obligations as of june30, 2014:
(in millions)
2016-2017
2018-2019
thereafter
total
long-term
debt:(a)
principal payments
$
$
2,500
$
3,300
$
14,945
$
20,745
interest payments
1,069
1,015
6,110
8,760
construction commitments(b)
operating
leases(c)
1,419
1,054
1,063
4,414
purchase commitments(d)
12,995
14,774
other long-term liabilities(e)
total contractual obligations
$
15,319
$
6,311
$
6,106
$
22,664
$
50,400
(a)
see note 12  debt of the notes to financial statements (part ii, item8 of this form 10-k).
(b)
these amounts represent commitments for the construction of buildings, building improvements, and leasehold improvements.
(c)
these amounts represent undiscounted future minimum rental commitments under noncancellable facilities leases.
(d)
these amounts represent purchase commitments, including all open purchase orders and all contracts that are take-or-pay contracts that are not presented as
construction commitments above.
(e)
we have excluded long-term tax contingencies, other tax liabilities, and deferred income taxes of $13.3 billion from the amounts presented. we have also
excluded unearned revenue and non-cash items.  other planned uses of capital
we will continue to invest in sales, marketing, product support infrastructure, and existing and advanced areas of technology. additions to
property and equipment will continue, including new facilities, data centers, and computer systems for research and development, sales and marketing, support, and administrative staff. we expect capital expenditures to increase in coming years in
support of our cloud and devices strategy. we have operating leases for most u.s. and international sales and support offices and certain equipment. we have not engaged in any related party transactions or arrangements with unconsolidated entities
or other persons that are reasonably likely to materially affect liquidity or the availability of capital resources.  liquidity
we earn a significant amount of our operating income outside the u.s., which is deemed to be permanently reinvested in foreign jurisdictions. as a
result, as discussed above under cash, cash equivalents, and investments, the majority of our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments are held by foreign subsidiaries. we currently do not intend nor foresee a need to repatriate these
funds. we expect existing domestic cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, and cash flows from operations to continue to be sufficient to fund our domestic operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities,
such as regular quarterly dividends, debt repayment schedules, and material capital expenditures, for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. in addition, we expect existing foreign cash, cash equivalents, short-term
investments, and cash flows from operations to continue to be sufficient to fund our foreign operating activities and cash commitments for investing activities, such as material capital expenditures, for at least the next 12 months and thereafter
for the foreseeable future.  should we require more capital in the u.s. than is generated by our operations domestically, for example to
fund significant discretionary activities, such as business acquisitions and share repurchases, we could elect to repatriate future earnings from foreign jurisdictions or raise capital in the u.s. through debt or equity issuances. these alternatives
could result in higher effective tax rates, increased interest expense, or dilution of our earnings. we have borrowed funds domestically and continue to believe we have the ability to do so at reasonable interest rates.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
recent accounting guidance  recently adopted accounting guidance  in december 2011, the financial accounting standards
board (fasb) issued guidance enhancing disclosure requirements about the nature of an entitys right to offset and related arrangements associated with its financial instruments. the new guidance requires the disclosure of the gross
amounts subject to rights of set-off, amounts offset in accordance with the accounting standards followed, and the related net exposure. in january 2013, the fasb clarified that the scope of this guidance applies to derivatives, repurchase
agreements, and securities lending arrangements that are either offset or subject to an enforceable master netting arrangement, or similar agreements. we adopted this new guidance beginning july1, 2013. adoption of this new guidance resulted
only in changes to the presentation of note 5  derivatives of the notes to financial statements.  in february 2013, the fasb
issued guidance on disclosure requirements for items reclassified out of aoci. this new guidance requires entities to present (either on the face of the income statement or in the notes to financial statements) the effects on the line items of the
income statement for amounts reclassified out of aoci. we adopted this new guidance beginning july1, 2013. adoption of this new guidance resulted only in changes to the presentation of note 19  accumulated other comprehensive income of
the notes to financial statements.  recent accounting guidance not yet adopted
in march 2013, the fasb issued guidance on a parents accounting for the cumulative translation adjustment upon derecognition of a subsidiary
or group of assets within a foreign entity. this new guidance requires that the parent release any related cumulative translation adjustment into net income only if the sale or transfer results in the complete or substantially complete liquidation
of the foreign entity in which the subsidiary or group of assets had resided. the new guidance will be effective for us beginning july1, 2014. we do not anticipate material impacts on our consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
in may 2014, as part of its ongoing efforts to assist in the convergence of u.s. gaap and international financial reporting standards,
the fasb issued a new standard related to revenue recognition. under the new standard, recognition of revenue occurs when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity
expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. in addition, the standard requires disclosure of the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. the new standard will be
effective for us beginning july1, 2017 and early adoption is not permitted. we anticipate this standard will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements, and we are currently evaluating its impact.
application of critical accounting policies  our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with u.s. gaap. preparing consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect
the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. these estimates and assumptions are affected by managements application of accounting policies. critical accounting policies for us include revenue recognition, impairment of
investment securities, goodwill, research and development costs, contingencies, income taxes, and inventories.  revenue recognition
revenue recognition for multiple-element arrangements requires judgment to determine if multiple elements exist, whether elements can be accounted
for as separate units of accounting, and if so, the fair value for each of the elements.  judgment is also required to assess whether
future releases of certain software represent new products or upgrades and enhancements to existing products. certain volume licensing arrangements include a perpetual license for
table of contents
part ii  item 7
current products combined with rights to receive unspecified future versions of software products (software assurance) and are accounted for as subscriptions, with billings recorded
as unearned revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the coverage period.  software updates are evaluated on a case-by-case basis
to determine whether they meet the definition of an upgrade, which may require revenue to be deferred and recognized when the upgrade is delivered. if it is determined that implied post-contract customer support (pcs) is being provided,
revenue from the arrangement is deferred and recognized over the implied pcs term. if updates are determined to not meet the definition of an upgrade, revenue is generally recognized as products are shipped or made available.
microsoft enters into arrangements that can include various combinations of software, services, and hardware. where elements are delivered over
different periods of time, and when allowed under u.s. gaap, revenue is allocated to the respective elements based on their relative selling prices at the inception of the arrangement, and revenue is recognized as each element is delivered. we use a
hierarchy to determine the fair value to be used for allocating revenue to elements: (i)vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (vsoe), (ii)third-party evidence, and (iii)best estimate of selling price
(esp). for software elements, we follow the industry specific software guidance which only allows for the use of vsoe in establishing fair value. generally, vsoe is the price charged when the deliverable is sold separately or the price
established by management for a product that is not yet sold if it is probable that the price will not change before introduction into the marketplace. esps are established as best estimates of what the selling prices would be if the deliverables
were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. our process for determining esps requires judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable.
windows 7 revenue was subject to deferral as a result of the windows upgrade offer, which started june2, 2012. the offer provided
significantly discounted rights to purchase windows 8 pro to qualifying end-users that purchased windows 7 pcs during the eligibility period. microsoft was responsible for delivering windows 8 pro to the end customer. accordingly, revenue related to
the allocated discount for undelivered windows 8 was deferred until it was delivered or the redemption period expired.  impairment of investment
securities  we review investments quarterly for indicators of other-than-temporary impairment. this determination requires
significant judgment. in making this judgment, we employ a systematic methodology quarterly that considers available quantitative and qualitative evidence in evaluating potential impairment of our investments. if the cost of an investment exceeds
its fair value, we evaluate, among other factors, general market conditions, credit quality of debt instrument issuers, the duration and extent to which the fair value is less than cost, and for equity securities, our intent and ability to hold, or
plans to sell, the investment. for fixed-income securities, we also evaluate whether we have plans to sell the security or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery. we also consider specific adverse
conditions related to the financial health of and business outlook for the investee, including industry and sector performance, changes in technology, and operational and financing cash flow factors. once a decline in fair value is determined to be
other-than-temporary, an impairment charge is recorded to other income (expense) and a new cost basis in the investment is established. if market, industry, and/or investee conditions deteriorate, we may incur future impairments.
goodwill  we allocate goodwill to reporting
units based on the reporting unit expected to benefit from the business combination. we evaluate our reporting units on an annual basis and, if necessary, reassign goodwill using a relative fair value allocation approach. goodwill is tested for
impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating segment) on an annual basis (may 1 for us) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair
value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. these events or circumstances could include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposition of a significant
portion of a reporting unit.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of
reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units, and determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. the fair value of each reporting unit is estimated primarily through the
use of a discounted cash flow methodology. this analysis requires significant judgments, including estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on internal forecasts, estimation of the long-term rate of growth for our business, estimation of
the useful life over which cash flows will occur, and determination of our weighted average cost of capital.  the estimates used to
calculate the fair value of a reporting unit change from year to year based on operating results, market conditions, and other factors. changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and goodwill
impairment for each reporting unit.  the valuation of acquired assets and liabilities, including goodwill, resulting from the
acquisition of nds, is reflective of the enterprise value based on the long-term financial forecast for the business.in this highly competitive and volatile market, it is possible that we may not realize our forecasts. given the value assigned
to goodwill in the purchase price allocation, we will closely monitor the performance of the business versus the long-term forecast to determine if any impairments arise.  research and development costs  costs incurred internally in researching and developing a
computer software product are charged to expense until technological feasibility has been established for the product. once technological feasibility is established, all software costs are capitalized until the product is available for general
release to customers. judgment is required in determining when technological feasibility of a product is established. we have determined that technological feasibility for our software products is reached after all high-risk development issues have
been resolved through coding and testing. generally, this occurs shortly before the products are released to manufacturing. the amortization of these costs is included in cost of revenue over the estimated life of the products.
legal and other contingencies  the outcomes
of legal proceedings and claims brought against us are subject to significant uncertainty. an estimated loss from a loss contingency such as a legal proceeding or claim is accrued by a charge to income if it is probable that an asset has been
impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. in determining whether a loss should be accrued we evaluate, among other factors, the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability
to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. changes in these factors could materially impact our consolidated financial statements.  income
taxes  the objectives of accounting for income taxes are to recognize the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year
and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in an entitys financial statements or tax returns. we recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more
likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. the tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the
largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. accounting literature also provides guidance on derecognition of income tax assets and liabilities, classification of current and deferred income tax
assets and liabilities, accounting for interest and penalties associated with tax positions, and income tax disclosures. judgment is required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial
statements or tax returns. variations in the actual outcome of these future tax consequences could materially impact our consolidated financial statements.  inventories  inventories are stated at average cost, subject to the lower of cost or market.
cost includes materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead related to the purchase and production of inventories. we regularly review inventory
table of contents
part ii  item 7
quantities on hand, future purchase commitments with our suppliers, and the estimated utility of our inventory. these reviews include analysis of demand forecasts, product life cycle status,
product development plans, current sales levels, pricing strategy, and component cost trends. if our review indicates a reduction in utility below carrying value, we reduce our inventory to a new cost basis through a charge to cost of revenue. the
determination of market value and the estimated volume of demand used in the lower of cost or market analysis require significant judgment.
table of contents
part ii  item 7
statement of managements responsibility for financial statements
management is responsible for the preparation of the consolidated financial statements and related information that are presented in this report.
the consolidated financial statements, which include amounts based on managements estimates and judgments, have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america.
the company designs and maintains accounting and internal control systems to provide reasonable assurance at reasonable cost that assets are
safeguarded against loss from unauthorized use or disposition, and that the financial records are reliable for preparing consolidated financial statements and maintaining accountability for assets. these systems are augmented by written policies, an
organizational structure providing division of responsibilities, careful selection and training of qualified personnel, and a program of internal audits.  the company engaged deloitte& touche llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, to audit and render an opinion on the consolidated financial statements and internal control over financial
reporting in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).  the board of directors,
through its audit committee, consisting solely of independent directors of the company, meets periodically with management, internal auditors, and our independent registered public accounting firm to ensure that each is meeting its responsibilities
and to discuss matters concerning internal controls and financial reporting. deloitte& touche llp and the internal auditors each have full and free access to the audit committee.
satya nadella
chief executive officer
amy e. hood
executive vice president and chief financial officer
frank h. brod
corporate vice president, finance and administration;
chief accounting officer
table of contents
part ii  item 7a
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk  risks  we are exposed to economic risk from foreign currency exchange rates, interest rates, credit risk, equity prices, and commodity prices. a portion of these risks is hedged, but they may impact our consolidated
financial statements.  foreign currency  certain forecasted transactions, assets, and liabilities are exposed to foreign currency risk. we monitor our foreign currency exposures daily and use hedges where practicable to offset the risks and maximize the
economic effectiveness of our foreign currency positions. principal currencies hedged include the euro, japanese yen, british pound, and canadian dollar.
interest rate  our fixed-income portfolio
is diversified across credit sectors and maturities, consisting primarily of investment-grade securities. the credit risk and average maturity of the fixed-income portfolio is managed to achieve economic returns that correlate to certain global and
domestic fixed-income indices. in addition, we use to be announced forward purchase commitments of mortgage-backed assets to gain exposure to agency and mortgage-backed securities.
equity  our equity portfolio consists of
global, developed, and emerging market securities that are subject to market price risk.we manage the securities relative to certain global and domestic indices and expect their economic risk and return to correlate with these indices.
commodity  we use broad-based
commodity exposures to enhance portfolio returns and facilitate portfolio diversification. our investment portfolio has exposure to a variety of commodities, including precious metals, energy, and grain. we manage these exposures relative to global
commodity indices and expect their economic risk and return to correlate with these indices.  value-at-risk
we use a value-at-risk (var) model to estimate and quantify our market risks. var is the expected loss, for a given confidence level,
in the fair value of our portfolio due to adverse market movements over a defined time horizon. the var model is not intended to represent actual losses in fair value, including determinations of other-than-temporary losses in fair value in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states (u.s. gaap), but is used as a risk estimation and management tool. the distribution of the potential changes in total market value of all holdings is computed
based on the historical volatilities and correlations among foreign currency exchange rates, interest rates, equity prices, and commodity prices, assuming normal market conditions.
the var is calculated as the total loss that will not be exceeded at the 97.5 percentile confidence level or, alternatively stated, the losses
could exceed the var in 25 out of 1,000 cases. several risk factors are not captured in the model, including liquidity risk, operational risk, and legal risk.
table of contents
part ii  item 7a
the following table sets forth the one-day var for substantially all of our positions as of
june30, 2014 and 2013 and for the year ended june30, 2014:
(in millions)
june30,2014
june30,2013
yearended june30,
risk categories
average
high
low
foreign currency
$
$
$
$
$
interest rate
$
$
$
$
$
equity
$
$
$
$
$
commodity
$
$
$
$
$
total one-day var for the combined risk categories was $333 million at june30, 2014 and $350 million at
june30, 2013. the total var is 25% less at june30, 2014, and 28% less at june30, 2013, than the sum of the separate risk categories in the table above due to the diversification benefit of the combination of risks.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
item8.financial statements and supplementary data
income statements
(in millions, except per share amounts)
year ended june30,
revenue
$
86,833
$
77,849
$
73,723
cost of revenue
26,934
20,249
17,530
gross margin
59,899
57,600
56,193
research and development
11,381
10,411
9,811
sales and marketing
15,811
15,276
13,857
general and administrative
4,821
5,149
4,569
goodwill impairment
6,193
integration and restructuring
operating income
27,759
26,764
21,763
other income, net
income before income taxes
27,820
27,052
22,267
provision for income taxes
5,746
5,189
5,289
net income
$
22,074
$
21,863
$
16,978
earnings per share:
basic
$
2.66
$
2.61
$
2.02
diluted
$
2.63
$
2.58
$
2.00
weighted average shares outstanding:
basic
8,299
8,375
8,396
diluted
8,399
8,470
8,506
cash dividends declared per common share
$
1.12
$
0.92
$
0.80
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
comprehensive income statements
(in millions)
year ended june30,
net income
$
22,074
$
21,863
$
16,978
other comprehensive income (loss):
net unrealized gains (losses) on derivatives (net of tax effects of $(4), $(14), and $137)
(35
)
(26
)
net unrealized gains (losses) on investments (net of tax effects of $936, $195, and $(210))
1,737
(390
)
translation adjustments and other (net of tax effects of $12, $(8), and $(165))
(16
)
(306
)
other comprehensive income (loss)
1,965
(441
)
comprehensive income
$
24,039
$
22,184
$
16,537
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
balance sheets
(in millions)
june30,
assets
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
8,669
$
3,804
short-term investments (including securities loaned of $541 and $579)
77,040
73,218
total cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments
85,709
77,022
accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $301 and $336
19,544
17,486
inventories
2,660
1,938
deferred income taxes
1,941
1,632
other
4,392
3,388
total current assets
114,246
101,466
property and equipment, net of accumulated depreciation of $14,793 and $12,513
13,011
9,991
equity and other investments
14,597
10,844
goodwill
20,127
14,655
intangible assets, net
6,981
3,083
other long-term assets
3,422
2,392
total assets
$
172,384
$
142,431
liabilities and stockholders equity
current liabilities:
accounts payable
$
7,432
$
4,828
short-term debt
2,000
current portion of long-term debt
2,999
accrued compensation
4,797
4,117
income taxes
short-term unearned revenue
23,150
20,639
securities lending payable
other
6,906
3,597
total current liabilities
45,625
37,417
long-term debt
20,645
12,601
long-term unearned revenue
2,008
1,760
deferred income taxes
2,728
1,709
other long-term liabilities
11,594
10,000
total liabilities
82,600
63,487
commitments and contingencies
stockholders equity:
common stock and paid-in capital  shares authorized 24,000; outstanding 8,239 and 8,328
68,366
67,306
retained earnings
17,710
9,895
accumulated other comprehensive income
3,708
1,743
total stockholders equity
89,784
78,944
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
172,384
$
142,431
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
cash flows statements
(in millions)
year ended june30,
operations
net income
$
22,074
$
21,863
$
16,978
adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash from operations:
goodwill impairment
6,193
depreciation, amortization, and other
5,212
3,755
2,967
stock-based compensation expense
2,446
2,406
2,244
net recognized losses (gains) on investments and derivatives
(109
)
(200
)
excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
(271
)
(209
)
(93
)
deferred income taxes
(331
)
(19
)
deferral of unearned revenue
44,325
44,253
36,104
recognition of unearned revenue
(41,739
)
(41,921
)
(33,347
)
changes in operating assets and liabilities:
accounts receivable
(1,120
)
(1,807
)
(1,156
)
inventories
(161
)
(802
)
other current assets
(29
)
(129
)
other long-term assets
(628
)
(478
)
(248
)
accounts payable
(31
)
other current liabilities
1,075
other long-term liabilities
1,014
1,158
net cash from operations
32,231
28,833
31,626
financing
proceeds from issuance of short-term debt, maturities of 90 days or less, net
proceeds from issuance of debt
10,350
4,883
repayments of debt
(3,888
)
(1,346
)
common stock issued
1,913
common stock repurchased
(7,316
)
(5,360
)
(5,029
)
common stock cash dividends paid
(8,879
)
(7,455
)
(6,385
)
excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
other
(39
)
(10
)
net cash used in financing
(8,394
)
(8,148
)
(9,408
)
investing
additions to property and equipment
(5,485
)
(4,257
)
(2,305
)
acquisition of companies, net of cash acquired, and purchases of intangible and other assets
(5,937
)
(1,584
)
(10,112
)
purchases of investments
(72,690
)
(75,396
)
(57,250
)
maturities of investments
5,272
5,130
15,575
sales of investments
60,094
52,464
29,700
securities lending payable
(87
)
(168
)
(394
)
net cash used in investing
(18,833
)
(23,811
)
(24,786
)
effect of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents
(139
)
(8
)
(104
)
net change in cash and cash equivalents
4,865
(3,134
)
(2,672
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
3,804
6,938
9,610
cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
8,669
$
3,804
$
6,938
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
stockholders equity statements
(in millions)
year ended june30,
common stock and paid-in capital
balance, beginning of period
$
67,306
$
65,797
$
63,415
common stock issued
1,924
common stock repurchased
(2,328
)
(2,014
)
(1,714
)
stock-based compensation expense
2,446
2,406
2,244
stock-based compensation income tax benefits (deficiencies)
(75
)
other, net
balance, end of period
68,366
67,306
65,797
retained earnings (deficit)
balance, beginning of period
9,895
(856
)
(8,195
)
net income
22,074
21,863
16,978
common stock cash dividends
(9,271
)
(7,694
)
(6,721
)
common stock repurchased
(4,988
)
(3,418
)
(2,918
)
balance, end of period
17,710
9,895
(856
)
accumulated other comprehensive income
balance, beginning of period
1,743
1,422
1,863
other comprehensive income (loss)
1,965
(441
)
balance, end of period
3,708
1,743
1,422
total stockholders equity
$
89,784
$
78,944
$
66,363
see accompanying notes.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
notes to financial statements
note 1  accounting policies
accounting principles
the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united
states of america (u.s. gaap).  principles of consolidation  the consolidated financial statements include the accounts of microsoft corporation and its subsidiaries. intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated. equity investments through which we are able to
exercise significant influence over but do not control the investee and are not the primary beneficiary of the investees activities are accounted for using the equity method. investments through which we are not able to exercise significant
influence over the investee and which do not have readily determinable fair values are accounted for under the cost method.  estimates and
assumptions  preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts
of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. examples of estimates include: loss contingencies; product warranties; the fair value of, and/or potential goodwill impairment for, our reporting units; product life cycles; useful lives of our tangible
and intangible assets; allowances for doubtful accounts; allowances for product returns; the market value of our inventory; and stock-based compensation forfeiture rates. examples of assumptions include: the elements comprising a software
arrangement, including the distinction between upgrades or enhancements and new products; when technological feasibility is achieved for our products; the potential outcome of future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our
consolidated financial statements or tax returns; and determining when investment impairments are other-than-temporary. actual results and outcomes may differ from managements estimates and assumptions.
recasting of certain prior period information  during the first quarter of fiscal year 2014, we changed our organizational structure as part of our transformation to a devices and services company. as a result, information that our chief operating decision
maker regularly reviews for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance changed. therefore, beginning in fiscal year 2014, we reported our financial performance based on our new segments described in note 21  segment information
and geographic data. we have recast certain prior period amounts to conform to the way we internally managed and monitored segment performance during fiscal year 2014. this change impacted note 10  goodwill, note 14  unearned revenue,
and note 21  segment information and geographic data, with no impact on our consolidated financial statements.  foreign currencies
assets and liabilities recorded in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rate on the balance sheet date. revenue and
expenses are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. translation adjustments resulting from this process are recorded to other comprehensive income (oci).
revenue recognition  revenue is recognized
when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the fee is fixed or determinable, and collectability is probable. revenue generally is recognized net of allowances for returns and any taxes collected from customers and
subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
revenue recognition for multiple-element arrangements requires judgment to determine if multiple
elements exist, whether elements can be accounted for as separate units of accounting, and if so, the fair value for each of the elements.  microsoft enters into arrangements that can include various combinations of software, services, and hardware. where elements are delivered over different periods of time, and when allowed under u.s. gaap, revenue
is allocated to the respective elements based on their relative selling prices at the inception of the arrangement, and revenue is recognized as each element is delivered. we use a hierarchy to determine the fair value to be used for allocating
revenue to elements: (i)vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (vsoe), (ii)third-party evidence, and (iii)best estimate of selling price (esp). for software elements, we follow the industry
specific software guidance which only allows for the use of vsoe in establishing fair value. generally, vsoe is the price charged when the deliverable is sold separately or the price established by management for a product that is not yet sold if it
is probable that the price will not change before introduction into the marketplace. esps are established as best estimates of what the selling prices would be if the deliverables were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. our process for
determining esps requires judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable.  revenue for retail packaged products, products licensed to original equipment manufacturers (oems), and perpetual licenses under certain volume licensing programs generally is recognized as products are
shipped or made available.  technology guarantee programs are accounted for as multiple-element arrangements as customers receive free
or significantly discounted rights to use upcoming new versions of a software product if they license existing versions of the product during the eligibility period. revenue is allocated between the existing product and the new product, and revenue
allocated to the new product is deferred until that version is delivered. the revenue allocation is based on the vsoe of fair value of the products. the vsoe of fair value for upcoming new products are based on the price determined by management
having the relevant authority when the element is not yet sold separately, but is expected to be sold in the near future at the price set by management.  software updates that will be provided free of charge are evaluated on a case-by-case basis to determine whether they meet the definition of an upgrade and create a multiple-element arrangement, which may require
revenue to be deferred and recognized when the upgrade is delivered, or if it is determined that implied post-contract customer support (pcs) is being provided, the arrangement is accounted for as a multiple-element arrangement and all
revenue from the arrangement is deferred and recognized over the implied pcs term when the vsoe of fair value does not exist. if updates are determined to not meet the definition of an upgrade, revenue is generally recognized as products are shipped
or made available.  certain volume licensing arrangements include a perpetual license for current products combined with rights to
receive unspecified future versions of software products (software assurance), which we have determined are additional software products and are therefore accounted for as subscriptions, with billings recorded as unearned revenue and
recognized as revenue ratably over the coverage period. arrangements that include term-based licenses for current products with the right to use unspecified future versions of the software during the coverage period, are also accounted for as
subscriptions, with revenue recognized ratably over the coverage period.  revenue from cloud-based services arrangements that allow for
the use of a hosted software product or service over a contractually determined period of time without taking possession of software are accounted for as subscriptions with billings recorded as unearned revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over
the coverage period beginning on the date the service is made available to customers. revenue from cloud-based services arrangements that are provided on a consumption basis (for example, the amount of storage used in a particular period) is
recognized commensurate with the customer utilization of such resources.  some volume licensing arrangements include time-based
subscriptions for cloud-based services and software offerings that are accounted for as subscriptions. these arrangements are considered multiple-element arrangements. however, because all elements are accounted for as subscriptions and have the
same coverage period and delivery pattern, they have the same revenue recognition timing.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
revenue related to phones, surface, xbox consoles, games published by us, and other hardware
components is generally recognized when ownership is transferred to the resellers or to end customers when selling directly through microsoft retail stores and online marketplaces. a portion of revenue may be deferred when these products are
combined with software elements, and/or services. revenue related to licensing for games published by third parties for use on the xbox consoles is recognized when games are manufactured by the game publishers.
display advertising revenue is recognized as advertisements are displayed. search advertising revenue is recognized when the ad appears in the
search results or when the action necessary to earn the revenue has been completed. consulting services revenue is recognized as services are rendered, generally based on the negotiated hourly rate in the consulting arrangement and the number of
hours worked during the period. consulting revenue for fixed-price services arrangements is recognized as services are provided. revenue from prepaid points redeemable for the purchase of software or services is recognized upon redemption of the
points and delivery of the software or services.  cost of revenue  cost of revenue includes: manufacturing and distribution costs for products sold and programs licensed; operating costs related to product support service centers and product distribution centers; costs incurred to
include software on pcs sold by oems, to drive traffic to our websites, and to acquire online advertising space (traffic acquisition costs); costs incurred to support and maintain internet-based products and services, including
datacenter costs and royalties; warranty costs; inventory valuation adjustments; costs associated with the delivery of consulting services; and the amortization of capitalized research and development costs. capitalized research and development
costs are amortized over the estimated lives of the products.  product warranty
we provide for the estimated costs of fulfilling our obligations under hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is
recognized. for hardware warranties, we estimate the costs based on historical and projected product failure rates, historical and projected repair costs, and knowledge of specific product failures (if any). the specific hardware warranty terms and
conditions vary depending upon the product sold and the country in which we do business, but generally include parts and labor over a period generally ranging from 90days to three years. for software warranties, we estimate the costs to
provide bug fixes, such as security patches, over the estimated life of the software. we regularly reevaluate our estimates to assess the adequacy of the recorded warranty liabilities and adjust the amounts as necessary.
research and development  research and
development expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and other headcount-related expenses associated with product development. research and development expenses also include third-party development and
programming costs, localization costs incurred to translate software for international markets, and the amortization of purchased software code and services content. such costs related to software development are included in research and development
expense until the point that technological feasibility is reached, which for our software products, is generally shortly before the products are released to manufacturing. once technological feasibility is reached, such costs are capitalized and
amortized to cost of revenue over the estimated lives of the products.  sales and marketing
sales and marketing expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and other headcount-related expenses associated
with sales and marketing personnel, and the costs of advertising, promotions, trade shows, seminars, and other programs. advertising costs are expensed as incurred. advertising expense was $2.3 billion, $2.6 billion, and $1.6 billion in fiscal years
2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
stock-based compensation  we measure stock-based compensation cost at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize it as expense, net of estimated forfeitures, over the vesting or service period, as applicable, of the
stock award (generally four to five years) using the straight-line method.  employee stock purchase plan
shares of our common stock may be purchased by employees at three-month intervals at 90% of the fair market value of the stock on the last day of
each three-month period. compensation expense for the employee stock purchase plan is measured as the discount the employee is entitled to upon purchase and is recognized in the period of purchase.
income taxes  income tax expense includes
u.s. and international income taxes, the provision for u.s. taxes on undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries not deemed to be permanently invested, and interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions. certain income and expenses are
not reported in tax returns and financial statements in the same year. the tax effect of such temporary differences is reported as deferred income taxes. deferred tax assets are reported net of a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not
that a tax benefit will not be realized. the deferred income taxes are classified as current or long-term based on the classification of the related asset or liability.  fair value measurements  we account for certain assets and liabilities at fair value. the
hierarchy below lists three levels of fair value based on the extent to which inputs used in measuring fair value are observable in the market.we categorize each of our fair value measurements in one of these three levels based on the lowest
level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety. these levels are:
level 1  inputs are based upon unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments traded in active markets. our level 1 non-derivative
investments primarily include u.s. government securities, domestic and international equities, and actively traded mutual funds.our level 1 derivative assets and liabilities include those actively traded on exchanges.
level 2  inputs are based upon quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in
markets that are not active, and model-based valuation techniques (e.g. the black-scholes model) for which all significant inputs are observable in the market or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the
assets or liabilities. where applicable, these models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to a present value using market-based observable inputs including interest rate curves, credit spreads, foreign exchange rates, and
forward and spot prices for currencies and commodities. our level 2 non-derivative investments consist primarily of corporate notes and bonds, common and preferred stock, mortgage-backed securities, certificates of deposit, and foreign government
bonds. our level 2 derivative assets and liabilities primarily include certain over-the-counter option and swap contracts.
level 3  inputs are generally unobservable and typically reflect managements estimates of assumptions that market participants would use in
pricing the asset or liability. the fair values are therefore determined using model-based techniques, including option pricing models and discounted cash flow models. our level 3 non-derivative assets primarily comprise investments in common and
preferred stock and goodwill when it is recorded at fair value due to an impairment charge.unobservable inputs used in the models are significant to the fair values of the assets and liabilities.
we measure certain assets, including our cost and equity method investments, at fair value on a nonrecurring basis when they are deemed to be
other-than-temporarily impaired. the fair values of these investments are determined
table of contents
part ii  item 8
based on valuation techniques using the best information available, and may include quoted market prices, market comparables, and discounted cash flow projections. an impairment charge is
recorded when the cost of the investment exceeds its fair value and this condition is determined to be other-than-temporary.  our other
current financial assets and our current financial liabilities have fair values that approximate their carrying values.  financial instruments
we consider all highly liquid interest-earning investments with a maturity of three months or less at the date of purchase to be
cash equivalents. the fair values of these investments approximate their carrying values. in general, investments with original maturities of greater than three months and remaining maturities of less than one year are classified as short-term
investments. investments with maturities beyond one year may be classified as short-term based on their highly liquid nature and because such marketable securities represent the investment of cash that is available for current operations. all cash
equivalents and short-term investments are classified as available-for-sale and realized gains and losses are recorded using the specific identification method. changes in market value, excluding other-than-temporary impairments, are reflected in
oci.  equity and other investments classified as long-term include both debt and equity instruments. with the exception of certain
corporate notes that are classified as held-to-maturity, debt and publicly-traded equity securities are classified as available-for-sale and realized gains and losses are recorded using the specific identification method. changes in the market value
of available-for-sale securities, excluding other-than-temporary impairments, are reflected in oci. held-to-maturity investments are recorded and held at amortized cost. common and preferred stock and other investments that are restricted for more
than one year or are not publicly traded are recorded at cost or using the equity method.  we lend certain fixed-income and equity
securities to increase investment returns. the loaned securities continue to be carried as investments on our balance sheet. cash and/or security interests are received as collateral for the loaned securities with the amount determined based upon
the underlying security lent and the creditworthiness of the borrower. cash received is recorded as an asset with a corresponding liability.  investments are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value is judged to be other-than-temporary. fair value is calculated based on publicly available market information or other estimates determined by
management. we employ a systematic methodology on a quarterly basis that considers available quantitative and qualitative evidence in evaluating potential impairment of our investments. if the cost of an investment exceeds its fair value, we
evaluate, among other factors, general market conditions, credit quality of debt instrument issuers, the duration and extent to which the fair value is less than cost, and for equity securities, our intent and ability to hold, or plans to sell, the
investment. for fixed-income securities, we also evaluate whether we have plans to sell the security or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery. we also consider specific adverse conditions related to
the financial health of and business outlook for the investee, including industry and sector performance, changes in technology, and operational and financing cash flow factors. once a decline in fair value is determined to be other-than-temporary,
an impairment charge is recorded to other income (expense) and a new cost basis in the investment is established.  derivative
instruments are recognized as either assets or liabilities and are measured at fair value. the accounting for changes in the fair value of a derivative depends on the intended use of the derivative and the resulting designation.
for derivative instruments designated as fair value hedges, the gains (losses) are recognized in earnings in the periods of change together with
the offsetting losses (gains) on the hedged items attributed to the risk being hedged. for options designated as fair value hedges, changes in the time value are excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and are recognized in earnings.
for derivative instruments designated as cash-flow hedges, the effective portion of the gains (losses) on the derivatives is initially
reported as a component of oci and is subsequently recognized in earnings when the hedged
table of contents
part ii  item 8
exposure is recognized in earnings. for options designated as cash-flow hedges, changes in the time value are excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and are recognized in earnings.
gains (losses) on derivatives representing either hedge components excluded from the assessment of effectiveness or hedge ineffectiveness are recognized in earnings.  for derivative instruments that are not designated as hedges, gains (losses) from changes in fair values are primarily recognized in other income (expense). other than those derivatives entered into for investment
purposes, such as commodity contracts, the gains (losses) are generally economically offset by unrealized gains (losses) in the underlying available-for-sale securities, which are recorded as a component of oci until the securities are sold or
other-than-temporarily impaired, at which time the amounts are reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (aoci) into other income (expense).  allowance for doubtful accounts  the allowance for doubtful accounts reflects our best
estimate of probable losses inherent in the accounts receivable balance. we determine the allowance based on known troubled accounts, historical experience, and other currently available evidence. activity in the allowance for doubtful accounts was
as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
balance, beginning of period
$
$
$
charged to costs and other
write-offs
(51
)
(57
)
(59
)
balance, end of period
$
$
$
inventories
inventories are stated at average cost, subject to the lower of cost or market. cost includes materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead related
to the purchase and production of inventories. we regularly review inventory quantities on hand, future purchase commitments with our suppliers, and the estimated utility of our inventory. if our review indicates a reduction in utility below
carrying value, we reduce our inventory to a new cost basis through a charge to cost of revenue. the determination of market value and the estimated volume of demand used in the lower of cost or market analysis require significant judgment.
property and equipment
property and equipment is stated at cost and depreciated using the straight-line method over the shorter of the estimated useful life of the asset
or the lease term. the estimated useful lives of our property and equipment are generally as follows: computer software developed or acquired for internal use, three to seven years; computer equipment, two to three years; buildings and improvements,
five to 15 years; leasehold improvements, two to 20 years; and furniture and equipment, one to 10 years. land is not depreciated.  goodwill
goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating segment) on an
annual basis (may 1 for us) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value.
intangible assets  all of our intangible
assets are subject to amortization and are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated period of benefit, ranging from one to 15 years. we evaluate the recoverability of intangible assets periodically by taking into account events
or circumstances that may warrant revised estimates of useful lives or that indicate the asset may be impaired.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
recent accounting guidance  recently adopted accounting guidance  in december 2011, the financial accounting standards
board (fasb) issued guidance enhancing disclosure requirements about the nature of an entitys right to offset and related arrangements associated with its financial instruments. the new guidance requires the disclosure of the gross
amounts subject to rights of set-off, amounts offset in accordance with the accounting standards followed, and the related net exposure. in january 2013, the fasb clarified that the scope of this guidance applies to derivatives, repurchase
agreements, and securities lending arrangements that are either offset or subject to an enforceable master netting arrangement, or similar agreements. we adopted this new guidance beginning july1, 2013. adoption of this new guidance resulted
only in changes to the presentation of note 5  derivatives.  in february 2013, the fasb issued guidance on disclosure requirements
for items reclassified out of aoci. this new guidance requires entities to present (either on the face of the income statement or in the notes to financial statements) the effects on the line items of the income statement for amounts reclassified
out of aoci. we adopted this new guidance beginning july1, 2013. adoption of this new guidance resulted only in changes to the presentation of note 19  accumulated other comprehensive income.
recent accounting guidance not yet adopted
in march 2013, the fasb issued guidance on a parents accounting for the cumulative translation adjustment upon derecognition of a subsidiary
or group of assets within a foreign entity. this new guidance requires that the parent release any related cumulative translation adjustment into net income only if the sale or transfer results in the complete or substantially complete liquidation
of the foreign entity in which the subsidiary or group of assets had resided. the new guidance will be effective for us beginning july1, 2014. we do not anticipate material impacts on our consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
in may 2014, as part of its ongoing efforts to assist in the convergence of u.s. gaap and international financial reporting standards,
the fasb issued a new standard related to revenue recognition. under the new standard, recognition of revenue occurs when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity
expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. in addition, the standard requires disclosure of the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. the new standard will be
effective for us beginning july1, 2017 and early adoption is not permitted. we anticipate this standard will have a material impact, and we are currently evaluating the impact this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements.
note 2  earnings per share
basic earnings per share (eps) is computed based on the weighted average number of shares of common stock
outstanding during the period. diluted eps is computed based on the weighted average number of shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. dilutive
potential common shares include outstanding stock options and stock awards.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the components of basic and diluted eps are as follows:
(in millions, except earnings per share)
year ended june30,
net income available for common shareholders (a)
$
22,074
$
21,863
$
16,978
weighted average outstanding shares of common stock (b)
8,299
8,375
8,396
dilutive effect of stock-based awards
common stock and common stock equivalents (c)
8,399
8,470
8,506
earnings per share
basic (a/b)
$
2.66
$
2.61
$
2.02
diluted (a/c)
$
2.63
$
2.58
$
2.00
anti-dilutive stock-based awards excluded from the calculations of diluted eps were immaterial during the periods
presented.
note 3  other income (expense)
the components of other income (expense) were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
dividends and interest income
$
$
$
interest expense
(597
)
(429
)
(380
)
net recognized gains on investments
net losses on derivatives
(328
)
(196
)
(364
)
net losses on foreign currency remeasurements
(165
)
(74
)
(117
)
other
(169
)
total
$
$
$
following are details of net recognized gains (losses) on investments during the periods reported:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
other-than-temporary impairments of investments
$
(106
)
$
(208
)
$
(298
)
realized gains from sales of available-for-sale securities
1,418
realized losses from sales of available-for-sale securities
(233
)
(165
)
(556
)
total
$
$
$
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 4  investments
investment components
the components of investments, including associated derivatives, but excluding held-to-maturity investments, were as follows:
(in millions)
costbasis
unrealized gains
unrealized losses
recorded basis
cash and cash equivalents
short-term investments
equity and other investments
june30, 2014
cash
$
4,980
$
$
$
4,980
$
4,980
$
$
mutual funds
commercial paper
certificates of deposit
1,197
1,197
u.s. government and agency securities
66,952
(29
)
67,026
66,917
foreign government bonds
3,328
(10
)
3,335
2,027
1,308
mortgage-backed securities
(2
)
1,019
1,019
corporate notes and bonds
6,845
(9
)
7,027
7,018
municipal securities
common and preferred stock
6,785
5,207
(81
)
11,911
11,911
other investments
1,164
1,164
1,150
total
$
93,308
$
5,593
$
(131
)
$
98,770
$
8,669
$
77,040
$
13,061
(in millions)
costbasis
unrealized gains
unrealized losses
recorded basis
cash and cash equivalents
short-term investments
equity and other investments
june30, 2013
cash
$
1,967
$
$
$
1,967
$
1,967
$
$
mutual funds
commercial paper
certificates of deposit
u.s. government and agency securities
64,934
(84
)
64,897
64,751
foreign government bonds
(41
)
mortgage-backed securities
1,258
(13
)
1,288
1,288
corporate notes and bonds
4,993
(40
)
5,122
5,122
municipal securities
(1
)
common and preferred stock
6,931
2,938
(281
)
9,588
9,588
other investments
1,279
1,279
1,256
total
$
85,077
$
3,249
$
(460
)
$
87,866
$
3,804
$
73,218
$
10,844
in addition to the investments in the table above, we also own corporate notes that were purchased in connection
with our agreement to lend $2.0 billion to the group that completed their acquisition of dell on october29, 2013. these corporate notes are classified as held-to-maturity investments and are included in equity and other investments on the
balance sheet.as of june30, 2014, the amortized cost, recorded basis, and estimated fair value of these corporate notes was $1.5 billion, $1.5 billion, and $1.7 billion, respectively, while their associated gross unrecognized holding
gains were $164 million.  as of june30, 2014 and 2013, the recorded bases of common and preferred stock that are restricted for
more than one year or are not publicly traded were $520 million and $395 million, respectively. these investments are carried at cost and are reviewed quarterly for indicators of other-than-temporary impairment. it is not practicable for us to
reliably estimate the fair value of these investments.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
unrealized losses on investments  investments, excluding those held-to-maturity, with continuous unrealized losses for less than 12 months and 12 months or greater and their related fair values were as follows:
less than 12 months
12 months or greater
totalunrealizedlosses
(in millions)
fairvalue
unrealizedlosses
fairvalue
unrealizedlosses
totalfairvalue
june30, 2014
u.s. government and agency securities
$
4,161
$
(29
)
$
$
$
5,011
$
(29
)
foreign government bonds
(4
)
(6
)
(10
)
mortgage-backed securities
(2
)
(2
)
corporate notes and bonds
1,154
(8
)
(1
)
1,188
(9
)
common and preferred stock
(48
)
(33
)
(81
)
total
$
6,464
$
(89
)
$
1,223
$
(42
)
$
7,687
$
(131
)
less than 12 months
12 months or greater
totalunrealizedlosses
(in millions)
fairvalue
unrealizedlosses
fairvalue
unrealizedlosses
totalfairvalue
june30, 2013
u.s. government and agency securities
$
2,208
$
(84
)
$
$
$
2,208
$
(84
)
foreign government bonds
(18
)
(23
)
(41
)
mortgage-backed securities
(12
)
(1
)
(13
)
corporate notes and bonds
1,142
(38
)
(2
)
1,169
(40
)
municipal securities
(1
)
(1
)
common and preferred stock
1,166
(168
)
(113
)
1,575
(281
)
total
$
5,506
$
(321
)
$
$
(139
)
$
6,050
$
(460
)
as of june30, 2014, we did not hold any held-to-maturity investments that are in an unrealized loss position.
unrealized losses from fixed-income securities are primarily attributable to changes in interest rates. unrealized losses from domestic
and international equities are due to market price movements. management does not believe any remaining unrealized losses represent other-than-temporary impairments based on our evaluation of available evidence as of june30, 2014.
debt investment maturities
(in millions)
costbasis
estimated fairvalue
june30, 2014
due in one year or less
$
28,681
$
28,719
due after one year through five years
46,734
46,881
due after five years through 10 years
2,910
2,987
due after 10 years
1,464
1,538
total(a)
$
79,789
$
80,125
(a)
excludes held-to-maturity investments due october31, 2023 with a cost basis and estimated fair value at june30, 2014 of $1.5 billion and $1.7
billion, respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 5  derivatives
we use derivative instruments to manage risks related to foreign currencies, equity prices, interest rates, and credit; to
enhance investment returns; and to facilitate portfolio diversification. our objectives for holding derivatives include reducing, eliminating, and efficiently managing the economic impact of these exposures as effectively as possible. our derivative
programs include strategies that both qualify and do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment. all notional amounts presented below are measured in u.s. dollar equivalents.  foreign currency  certain forecasted transactions, assets, and liabilities are exposed to
foreign currency risk. we monitor our foreign currency exposures daily to maximize the economic effectiveness of our foreign currency hedge positions. option and forward contracts are used to hedge a portion of forecasted international revenue for
up to three years in the future and are designated as cash flow hedging instruments. principal currencies hedged include the euro, japanese yen, british pound, and canadian dollar. as of june30, 2014 and june30, 2013, the total notional
amounts of these foreign exchange contracts sold were $4.9 billion and $5.1 billion, respectively.  foreign currency risks related to
certain non-u.s. dollar denominated securities are hedged using foreign exchange forward contracts that are designated as fair value hedging instruments. as of june30, 2014 and june30, 2013, the total notional amounts of these foreign
exchange contracts sold were $3.1 billion and $407 million, respectively.  certain options and forwards not designated as hedging
instruments are also used to manage the variability in exchange rates on accounts receivable, cash, and intercompany positions, and to manage other foreign currency exposures.as of june30, 2014, the total notional amounts of these
foreign exchange contracts purchased and sold were $6.2 billion and $8.5 billion, respectively. as of june30, 2013, the total notional amounts of these foreign exchange contracts purchased and sold were $5.0 billion and $7.9 billion,
respectively.  equity
securities held in our equity and other investments portfolio are subject to market price risk.market price risk is managed relative to
broad-based global and domestic equity indices using certain convertible preferred investments, options, futures, and swap contracts not designated as hedging instruments. from time to time, to hedge our price risk, we may use and designate equity
derivatives as hedging instruments, including puts, calls, swaps, and forwards.as of june30, 2014, the total notional amounts of equity contracts purchased and sold for managing market price risk were $3.1 billion and $2.1 billion,
respectively, of which $362 million and $420 million, respectively, were designated as hedging instruments. as of june30, 2013, the total notional amounts of equity contracts purchased and sold for managing market price risk were $898 million
and $1.0 billion, respectively, none of which were designated as hedging instruments.  interest rate
securities held in our fixed-income portfolio are subject to different interest rate risks based on their maturities. we manage the average
maturity of our fixed-income portfolio to achieve economic returns that correlate to certain broad-based fixed-income indices using exchange-traded option and futures contracts and over-the-counter swap and option contracts, none of which are
designated as hedging instruments. as of june30, 2014, the total notional amounts of fixed-interest rate contracts purchased and sold were $503 million and $741 million, respectively. as of june30, 2013, the total notional amounts of
fixed-interest rate contracts purchased and sold were $1.1 billion and $809 million, respectively.  in addition, we use to be
announced forward purchase commitments of mortgage-backed assets to gain exposure to agency mortgage-backed securities.these meet the definition of a derivative instrument in cases where physical delivery of the assets is not taken at
the earliest available delivery date. as of june30, 2014 and 2013, the total notional derivative amounts of mortgage contracts purchased were $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
credit  our fixed-income portfolio is diversified and consists primarily of investment-grade securities. we use credit default swap contracts, not designated as hedging instruments, to manage credit exposures relative to
broad-based indices and to facilitate portfolio diversification. we use credit default swaps as they are a low cost method of managing exposure to individual credit risks or groups of credit risks. as of june30, 2014, the total notional
amounts of credit contracts purchased and sold were $412 million and $440 million, respectively. as of june30, 2013, the total notional amounts of credit contracts purchased and sold were $377 million and $501 million, respectively.
commodity  we use broad-based
commodity exposures to enhance portfolio returns and to facilitate portfolio diversification. we use swaps, futures, and option contracts, not designated as hedging instruments, to generate and manage exposures to broad-based commodity indices. we
use derivatives on commodities as they can be low-cost alternatives to the purchase and storage of a variety of commodities, including, but not limited to, precious metals, energy, and grain. as of june30, 2014, the total notional amounts of
commodity contracts purchased and sold were $1.4 billion and $408 million, respectively. as of june30, 2013, the total notional amounts of commodity contracts purchased and sold were $1.2 billion and $249 million, respectively.
credit-risk-related contingent features
certain of our counterparty agreements for derivative instruments contain provisions that require our issued and outstanding long-term unsecured
debt to maintain an investment grade credit rating and require us to maintain minimum liquidity of $1.0 billion. to the extent we fail to meet these requirements, we will be required to post collateral, similar to the standard convention related to
over-the-counter derivatives. as of june30, 2014, our long-term unsecured debt rating was aaa, and cash investments were in excess of $1.0 billion. as a result, no collateral was required to be posted.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
fair values of derivative instruments
the following tables present the fair values of derivative instruments designated as hedging instruments (designated hedge derivatives)
and not designated as hedging instruments (non-designated hedge derivatives). the fair values exclude the impact of netting derivative assets and liabilities when a legally enforceable master netting agreement exists and fair value
adjustments related to our own credit risk and counterparty credit risk:
june30, 2014
june30, 2013
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
short-terminvestments
othercurrentassets
equityandotherinvestments
othercurrentliabilities
short-terminvestments
othercurrentassets
othercurrentliabilities
non-designated hedge derivatives
foreign exchange contracts
$
$
$
$
(97
)
$
$
$
(63
)
equity contracts
(21
)
(9
)
interest rate contracts
(12
)
(45
)
credit contracts
(13
)
(17
)
commodity contracts
(1
)
(1
)
total
$
$
$
$
(144
)
$
$
$
(135
)
designated hedge derivatives
foreign exchange contracts
$
$
$
$
(15
)
$
$
$
equity contracts
(125
)
total
$
$
$
$
(140
)
$
$
$
total gross amounts of derivatives
$
$
$
$
(284
)
$
$
$
(135
)
gross derivatives either offset or subject to an enforceable master netting agreement
$
$
$
$
(284
)
$
$
$
(97
)
gross amounts offset in the balance sheet
(77
)
(71
)
(7
)
(72
)
(9
)
net amounts presented in the balance sheet
$
$
$
$
(129
)
$
$
$
(17
)
gross amounts not offset in the balance sheet
net amount
$
$
$
$
(129
)
$
$
$
(17
)
see also note 4  investments and note6 fair value measurements.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
fair value hedge gains (losses)  we recognized in other income (expense) the following gains (losses) on contracts designated as fair value hedges and their related hedged items:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
foreign exchange contracts
derivatives
$
(14
)
$
$
hedged items
(69
)
(50
)
total amount of ineffectiveness
$
(8
)
$
$
equity contracts
derivatives
$
(110
)
$
$
hedged items
total amount of ineffectiveness
$
$
$
amount of equity contracts excluded from effectiveness assessment
$
(9
)
$
$
cash flow hedge gains (losses)  we recognized the following gains (losses) on foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges (our only cash flow hedges during the periods presented):
(in millions)
year ended june30,
effective portion
gains recognized in oci, net of tax effects of $2, $54 and $127
$
$
$
gains (losses) reclassified from aoci into revenue
$
$
$
(27
)
amount excluded from effectiveness assessment and ineffective portion
losses recognized in other income (expense)
$
(239
)
$
(168
)
$
(231
)
we estimate that $32 million of net derivative gains included in aoci at june30, 2014 will be reclassified
into earnings within the following 12 months. no significant amounts of gains (losses) were reclassified from aoci into earnings as a result of forecasted transactions that failed to occur during fiscal year 2014.
non-designated derivative gains (losses)
gains (losses) from changes in fair values of derivatives that are not designated as hedges are primarily recognized in other income (expense).
these amounts are shown in the table below, with the exception of gains (losses) on derivatives presented in income statement line items other than other income (expense), which were immaterial for the periods presented. other than those derivatives
entered into for investment purposes, such as commodity contracts, the gains (losses) below are generally economically offset by unrealized gains (losses) in the underlying available-for-sale securities.
(in millions)
year ended june30,
foreign exchange contracts
$
(78
)
$
$
(119
)
equity contracts
(64
)
(85
)
interest-rate contracts
(11
)
credit contracts
(3
)
(7
)
commodity contracts
(42
)
(121
)
total
$
(34
)
$
(22
)
$
(239
)
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 6  fair value measurements
assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis
the following tables present the fair value of our financial instruments that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis:
(in millions)
level 1
level 2
level3
gross fair
value
netting
(a)
net fairvalue
june30, 2014
assets
mutual funds
$
$
$
$
$
$
commercial paper
certificates of deposit
1,197
1,197
1,197
u.s. government and agency securities
66,288
67,033
67,033
foreign government bonds
3,210
3,349
3,349
mortgage-backed securities
1,015
1,015
1,015
corporate notes and bonds
6,863
6,863
6,863
municipal securities
common and preferred stock
9,552
1,825
11,391
11,391
derivatives
(155
)
total
$
76,574
$
15,724
$
$
92,319
$
(155
)
$
92,164
liabilities
derivatives and other
$
$
$
$
$
(155
)
$
(in millions)
level 1
level 2
level3
gross fair
value
netting
(a)
net fairvalue
june30, 2013
assets
mutual funds
$
$
$
$
$
$
commercial paper
certificates of deposit
u.s. government and agency securities
62,237
2,664
64,901
64,901
foreign government bonds
mortgage-backed securities
1,311
1,311
1,311
corporate notes and bonds
4,915
4,934
4,934
municipal securities
common and preferred stock
8,470
9,192
9,192
derivatives
(81
)
total
$
71,596
$
12,929
$
$
84,549
$
(81
)
$
84,468
liabilities
derivatives and other
$
$
$
$
$
(80
)
$
(a)
these amounts represent the impact of netting derivative assets and derivative liabilities when a legally enforceable master netting agreement exists and
fair value adjustments related to our own credit risk and counterparty credit risk.  in connection with the
transaction to acquire substantially all of nokia corporations (nokia) devices and services business (nds), on september23, 2013 we provided nokia 1.5 billion ($2.1 billion) principal of convertible notes classified as level 3 financial instruments. upon closing of the acquisition, nokia repurchased these notes at their principal amount plus accrued
interest. all other changes in our level 3 financial instruments that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis were immaterial during the periods presented.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the following table reconciles the total net fair value of assets above to the balance sheet
presentation of these same assets in note 4  investments.
(in millions)
june30,
net fair value of assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis
$
92,164
$
84,468
cash
4,980
1,967
common and preferred stock measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis
other investments measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis
1,150
1,256
less derivative net assets classified as other current assets
(38
)
(213
)
other
(6
)
(7
)
recorded basis of investment components(a)
$
98,770
$
87,866
(a)
excludes held-to-maturity investments recorded at amortized cost and measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis.
financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis  during fiscal year 2014 and 2013, we did not record any material other-than-temporary impairments on financial assets required to be measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis.
note 7  inventories
the components of inventories were as follows:
(in millions)
june30,
raw materials
$
$
work in process
finished goods
1,450
1,409
total
$
2,660
$
1,938
note 8  property and equipment
the components of property and equipment were as follows:
(in millions)
june30,
land
$
$
buildings and improvements
8,867
7,326
leasehold improvements
3,560
2,946
computer equipment and software
11,430
9,242
furniture and equipment
3,406
2,465
total, at cost
27,804
22,504
accumulated depreciation
(14,793
)
(12,513
)
total, net
$
13,011
$
9,991
during fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, depreciation expense was $3.4 billion, $2.6 billion, and $2.2 billion,
respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 9  business combinations
nokias devices and services business  on april25, 2014, we completed the transaction to acquire substantially all of nds for a total purchase price of $9.5 billion, including cash acquired of $1.5 billion (the acquisition). the
purchase price consisted primarily of cash of $7.1 billion and nokias repurchase of convertible notes of $2.1 billion which was a non-cash transaction. the acquisition is expected to accelerate the growth of our devices and consumer
(d&c) business through faster innovation, synergies, and unified branding and marketing.  the purchase price allocation
as of the date of the acquisition was based on a preliminary valuation and is subject to revision as more detailed analyses are completed and additional information about the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed become available.
the major classes of assets and liabilities to which we have preliminarily allocated the purchase price were as follows:
(in millions)
cash
$
1,503
accounts
receivable(a)
inventories
other current assets
property and equipment
intangible assets
4,509
goodwill(b)
5,458
other
current liabilities
(4,576
)
long-term liabilities
(917
)
total purchase price
$
9,465
(a)
gross accounts receivable is $901 million, of which $147 million is expected to be uncollectible.
(b)
goodwill was assigned to our new phone hardware segment. the goodwill was primarily attributed to increased synergies that are expected to be achieved from
the integration of nds. goodwill of $4.5 billion is expected to be deductible in finland for tax purposes.  following
are the details of the purchase price allocated to the intangible assets acquired:
(in millions)
amount
weighted averagelife
technology-based
$
2,493
9years
contract-based
1,500
9years
customer-related
3years
marketing-related (trade names)
2years
fair value of intangible assets acquired
$
4,509
8years
our consolidated income statement for fiscal year 2014 includes revenue and operating loss of $2.0 billion and $692
million, respectively, attributable to nds since the acquisition.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
following are the supplemental consolidated results of microsoft corporation on an unaudited pro
forma basis, as if the acquisition had been consummated on july1, 2012:
(in millions, except per share amounts)
year ended june30,
revenue
$
96,248
$
93,243
net income
$
20,234
$
20,153
diluted earnings per share
$
2.41
$
2.38
these pro forma results were based on estimates and assumptions, which we believe are reasonable. they are not the
results that would have been realized had we been a combined company during the periods presented and are not necessarily indicative of our consolidated results of operations in future periods. the pro forma results include adjustments primarily
related to purchase accounting adjustments and the elimination of related party transactions between microsoft and nds. acquisition costs and other non-recurring charges incurred are included in the earliest period presented.
during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014, we incurred $21 million of acquisition costs associated with the purchase of nds. acquisition costs
are primarily comprised of transaction fees and direct acquisition costs, including legal, finance, consulting, and other professional fees. these costs are included in integration and restructuring costs on our consolidated income statement for
fiscal year 2014.  certain concurrent transactions were recognized separately from the acquisition. prior to the acquisition, we had
joint strategic initiatives with nokia; this contractual relationship was terminated in conjunction with the acquisition. no gain or loss was recorded upon termination of this agreement, as it was determined to be at market value. in addition, we
agreed to license nokias mapping services and will pay nokia separately for the services provided under a four-year license as they are rendered.
yammer  on july18, 2012, we acquired
yammer, inc. (yammer), a leading provider of enterprise social networks, for $1.1 billion in cash. yammer will continue to develop its standalone service and will add an enterprise social networking service to microsofts portfolio
of complementary cloud-based services. the major classes of assets to which we allocated the purchase price were goodwill of $937 million and identifiable intangible assets of $178 million. we assigned the goodwill to commercial other under our
current segment structure. yammer was consolidated into our results of operations starting on the acquisition date.  skype
on october13, 2011, we acquired skype global s. r.l. (skype), a leading global provider of software applications and
related internet communications products based in luxembourg, for $8.6 billion, primarily in cash. the major classes of assets and liabilities to which we allocated the purchase price were goodwill of $7.1 billion, identifiable intangible assets of
$1.6 billion, and unearned revenue of $222 million. the goodwill recognized in connection with the acquisition is primarily attributable to our expectation of extending skypes brand and the reach of its networked platform, while enhancing
microsofts existing portfolio of real-time communications products and services. we assigned the goodwill to the following segments under our current segment structure: $5.6 billion to commercial licensing, $1.4 billion to computing and gaming
hardware, and $54 million to d&c other. skype was consolidated into our results of operations starting on the acquisition date.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
following are the details of the purchase price allocated to the intangible assets acquired:
(in millions)
weightedaveragelife
marketing-related (trade names)
$
1,249
15years
technology-based
5 years
customer-related
5 years
contract-based
4 years
total
$
1,648
13 years
other
during fiscal year 2014, we completed five additional acquisitions for total consideration of $140 million, all of which was paid in cash. these
entities have been included in our consolidated results of operations since their respective acquisition dates.  with the exception of
nds, pro forma results of operations have not been presented because the effects of the business combinations described in this note, individually and in aggregate, were not material to our consolidated results of operations.
note 10  goodwill
changes in the carrying amount of goodwill were as follows:
(in millions)
june30, 2012
acquisitions
other
june30, 2013
acquisitions
other
june30,2014
devicesand consumer
licensing
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
hardware:
computingand gaming hardware
1,641
(27
)
1,689
1,698
phonehardware
5,458
(a)
(104
)
5,354
total d&c hardware
1,641
(27
)
1,689
5,458
(95
)
7,052
other
(4
)
total devices and consumer
3,249
(31
)
3,293
5,458
(93
)
8,658
commercial
licensing
10,054
(7
)
10,051
10,058
other
1,164
(2
)
1,311
(5
)
1,411
totalcommercial
10,203
1,168
(9
)
11,362
11,469
total goodwill
$
13,452
$
1,243
$
(40
)
$
14,655
$
5,565
$
(93
)
$
20,127
(a)
goodwill acquired during fiscal year 2014 related to the acquisition of nds. see note 9  business combinations for additional details.
the measurement periods for the valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed end as soon as information on
the facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition dates becomes available, but do not exceed 12 months. adjustments in purchase price allocations may require a recasting of the amounts allocated to goodwill retroactive to the periods in
which the acquisitions occurred.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
any change in the goodwill amounts resulting from foreign currency translations are presented as
other in the above table. also included in other are business dispositions and transfers between business segments due to reorganizations, as applicable.
as discussed in note 21  segment information and geographic data, during the first quarter of fiscal year 2014, we changed our organizational
structure as part of our transformation to a devices and services company. this resulted in a change in our operating segments and reporting units. we allocated goodwill to our new reporting units using a relative fair value approach. in addition,
we completed an assessment of any potential goodwill impairment for all reporting units immediately prior to the reallocation and determined that no impairment existed.  goodwill impairment  we test goodwill for impairment annually on may1 at the reporting
unit level using a discounted cash flow methodology with a peer-based, risk-adjusted weighted average cost of capital. we believe use of a discounted cash flow approach is the most reliable indicator of the fair values of the businesses.
no impairment of goodwill was identified as of may1, 2014 or may1, 2013. upon completion of the fiscal year 2012 test, the goodwill of
our osd unit (in devices and consumer other under our current segment structure) was determined to be impaired. the impairment was the result of the osd unit experiencing slower than projected growth in search queries and search advertising revenue
per query, slower growth in display revenue, and changes in the timing and implementation of certain initiatives designed to drive search and display revenue growth in the future. this goodwill impairment charge of $6.2 billion also represented our
accumulated goodwill impairment as of june30, 2014 and 2013.
note 11  intangible assets
the components of intangible assets, all of which are finite-lived, were as follows:
(in millions)
grosscarryingamount
accumulatedamortization
netcarryingamount
grosscarryingamount
accumulatedamortization
netcarryingamount
year ended june30,
technology-based(a)
$
6,440
$
(2,615
)
$
3,825
$
3,760
$
(2,110
)
$
1,650
marketing-related
1,518
(324
)
1,194
1,348
(211
)
1,137
contract-based
2,266
(716
)
1,550
(688
)
customer-related
(320
)
(219
)
total
$
10,956
$
(3,975
)
$
6,981
$
6,311
$
(3,228
)
$
3,083
(a)
technology-based intangible assets included $98 million and $218 million as of june30, 2014 and 2013, respectively, of net carrying amount of
software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed.  we estimate that we have no significant residual value
related to our intangible assets. no material impairments of intangible assets were identified during any of the periods presented.  the
components of intangible assets acquired during the periods presented were as follows:
(in millions)
amount
weighted averagelife
amount
weighted averagelife
year ended june30,
technology-based
$
2,841
9years
$
4years
marketing-related
2years
7years
contract-based
1,500
9 years
*
customer-related
3years
6years
total
$
4,878
8years
$
5years
*
not applicable
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the table above includes $4.5 billion related to the acquisition of nds during fiscal year 2014.
see note 9  business combination for additional details.  intangible assets amortization expense was $845 million, $739 million,
and $558 million for fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively. amortization of capitalized software was $200 million, $210 million, and $117 million for fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively.
the following table outlines the estimated future amortization expense related to intangible assets held at june30, 2014:
(in millions)
year ending june30,
$
1,237
1,075
thereafter
2,567
total
$
6,981
note 12  debt
as of june30, 2014, we had $22.6 billion of issued and outstanding debt, comprising $2.0 billion of short-term debt and
$20.6 billion of long-term debt. as of june 30, 2013, we had $15.6 billion of issued and outstanding long-term debt.  short-term debt
as of june30, 2014, we had $2.0 billion of commercial paper issued and outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.12% and
maturities ranging from 86 days to 91 days. the estimated fair value of this commercial paper approximates its carrying value.  we have
a $5.0 billion credit facility that expires on november14, 2018, which serves as a back-up for our commercial paper program. as of june30, 2014, we were in compliance with the only financial covenant in the credit agreement, which
requires us to maintain a coverage ratio of at least three times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization to interest expense, as defined in the credit agreement. no amounts were drawn against the credit facility during any of
the periods presented.  long-term debt  as of june30, 2014, the total carrying value and estimated fair value of our long-term debt were $20.6 billion and $21.5 billion, respectively. this is compared to a carrying value and estimated fair value of
our long-term debt, including the current portion, of $15.6 billion and $15.8 billion, respectively, as of june30, 2013. these estimated fair values are based on level 2 inputs.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
the components of our long-term debt and the associated interest rates were as follows as of
june30, 2014 and 2013:
due date
facevalue june30, 2014
facevalue june30, 2013
statedinterest rate
effectiveinterest rate
(inmillions)
notes
september27,2013
$
*
$
1,000
0.875%
1.000%
june1, 2014
*
2,000
2.950%
3.049%
september25,2015
1,750
1,750
1.625%
1.795%
february8, 2016
2.500%
2.642%
november15, 2017
0.875%
1.084%
may1, 2018
1.000%
1.106%
december6, 2018(a)
1,250
*
1.625%
1.824%
june1, 2019
1,000
1,000
4.200%
4.379%
october1, 2020
1,000
1,000
3.000%
3.137%
february8, 2021
4.000%
4.082%
december6, 2021(b)
2,396
*
2.125%
2.233%
november15, 2022
2.125%
2.239%
may1, 2023
1,000
1,000
2.375%
2.465%
december15, 2023(a)
1,500
*
3.625%
3.726%
december6, 2028(b)
2,396
*
3.125%
3.218%
may2,
2033(c)
2.625%
2.690%
june1, 2039
5.200%
5.240%
october1, 2040
1,000
1,000
4.500%
4.567%
february8, 2041
1,000
1,000
5.300%
5.361%
november15, 2042
3.500%
3.571%
may1, 2043
3.750%
3.829%
december15, 2043(a)
*
4.875%
4.918%
total
$
20,745
$
15,665
(a)
in december 2013, we issued $3.3 billion of debt securities.
(b)
in december 2013, we issued 3.5 billion of debt securities.
(c)
in april 2013, we issued 550million of debt securities.
*
not applicable.  the
notes in this table are senior unsecured obligations and rank equally with our other senior unsecured debt outstanding. interest on these notes is paid semi-annually, except for the euro-denominated debt securities on which interest is paid
annually. cash paid for interest on our debt for fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012 was $509 million, $371 million, and $344 million, respectively. as of june30, 2014 and 2013, the aggregate unamortized discount for our long-term debt,
including the current portion, was $100 million and $65 million, respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
debt service  maturities of our long-term debt for each of the next five years and thereafter are as follows:
(in millions)
year ending june30,
$
2,500
1,050
2,250
thereafter
14,945
total
$
20,745
note 13  income taxes
the components of the provision for income taxes were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
current taxes
u.s. federal
$
3,738
$
3,131
$
2,235
u.s. state and local
foreign
2,073
1,745
1,947
current taxes
6,077
5,208
4,335
deferred taxes
deferred taxes
(331
)
(19
)
provision for income taxes
$
5,746
$
5,189
$
5,289
u.s. and foreign components of income before income taxes were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
u.s.
$
7,127
$
6,674
$
1,600
foreign
20,693
20,378
20,667
income before income taxes
$
27,820
$
27,052
$
22,267
the items accounting for the difference between income taxes computed at the u.s. federal statutory rate and our
effective rate were as follows:
year ended june30,
federal statutory rate
35.0%
35.0%
35.0%
effect of:
foreign earnings taxed at lower rates
(17.1)%
(17.5)%
(21.1)%
goodwill impairment
0%
0%
9.7%
other reconciling items, net
2.8%
1.7%
0.2%
effective rate
20.7%
19.2%
23.8%
the reduction from the federal statutory rate from foreign earnings taxed at lower rates results from producing and
distributing our products and services through our foreign regional operations centers in ireland, singapore, and
table of contents
part ii  item 8
puerto rico. our foreign earnings, which are taxed at rates lower than the u.s. rate and are generated from our regional operating centers, were 81%, 79%, and 79% of our foreign income before tax
in fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively. in general, other reconciling items consist of interest, adjustments for intercompany transfer pricing, u.s. state income taxes, domestic production deductions, and credits. in fiscal years 2014,
2013, and 2012, there were no individually significant other reconciling items.  the components of the deferred income tax assets and
liabilities were as follows:
(in millions)
june30,
deferred income tax assets
stock-based compensation expense
$
$
other expense items
1,112
unearned revenue
impaired investments
loss carryforwards
other revenue items
deferred income tax assets
$
3,730
$
3,266
less valuation allowance
(903
)
(579
)
deferred income tax assets, net of valuation allowance
$
2,827
$
2,687
deferred income tax liabilities
foreign earnings
$
(1,140
)
$
(1,146
)
unrealized gain on investments
(1,911
)
(1,012
)
depreciation and amortization
(470
)
(604
)
other
(87
)
(2
)
deferred income tax liabilities
$
(3,608
)
$
(2,764
)
net deferred income tax assets (liabilities)
$
(781
)
$
(77
)
reported as
current deferred income tax assets
$
1,941
$
1,632
other current liabilities
(125
)
other long-term assets
long-term deferred income tax liabilities
(2,728
)
(1,709
)
net deferred income tax assets (liabilities)
$
(781
)
$
(77
)
as of june30, 2014, we had net operating loss carryforwards of $3.6 billion, including $2.2 billion of
foreign net operating loss carryforwards acquired through our acquisition of skype, and $545 million through our acquisition of nds. the valuation allowance disclosed in the table above relates to the foreign net operating loss carryforwards and
other net deferred tax assets that may not be realized.  deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary differences
between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases and are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when the taxes are actually paid or recovered.
as of june30, 2014, we have not provided deferred u.s. income taxes or foreign withholding taxes on temporary differences of approximately
$92.9 billion resulting from earnings for certain non-u.s. subsidiaries which are permanently reinvested outside the u.s. the unrecognized deferred tax liability associated with these temporary differences was approximately $29.6 billion at
june30, 2014.  income taxes paid were $5.5 billion, $3.9 billion, and $3.5 billion in fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012,
respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
uncertain tax positions  unrecognized tax benefits as of june30, 2014, 2013, and 2012, were $8.7 billion, $8.6 billion, and $7.2 billion, respectively. if recognized, these tax benefits would affect our effective tax rates for fiscal
years 2014, 2013, and 2012, by $7.0 billion, $6.5 billion, and $6.2 billion, respectively.  as of june30, 2014, 2013, and 2012, we
had accrued interest expense related to uncertain tax positions of $1.5 billion, $1.3 billion, and $939 million, respectively, net of federal income tax benefits. interest expense on unrecognized tax benefits was $235 million, $400 million, and $154
million in fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively.  the aggregate changes in the balance of unrecognized tax benefits were as
follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
balance, beginning of year
$
8,648
$
7,202
$
6,935
decreases related to settlements
(583
)
(30
)
(16
)
increases for tax positions related to the current year
increases for tax positions related to prior years
decreases for tax positions related to prior years
(95
)
(65
)
(292
)
decreases due to lapsed statutes of limitations
(39
)
(2
)
(24
)
balance, end of year
$
8,714
$
8,648
$
7,202
during the third quarter of fiscal year 2011, we reached a settlement of a portion of an i.r.s. audit of tax years
2004 to 2006, which reduced our income tax expense by $461 million. while we settled a portion of the i.r.s. audit, we remain under audit for these years. in february 2012, the i.r.s. withdrew its 2011 revenue agents report and reopened the audit
phase of the examination. as of june30, 2014, the primary unresolved issue relates to transfer pricing, which could have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements if not resolved favorably. we believe our allowances for
income tax contingencies are adequate. we have not received a proposed assessment for the unresolved issues and do not expect a final resolution of these issues in the next 12 months.based on the information currently available, we do not
anticipate a significant increase or decrease to our tax contingencies for these issues within the next 12 months. we also continue to be subject to examination by the i.r.s. for tax years 2007 to 2013.
we are subject to income tax in many jurisdictions outside the u.s. our operations in certain jurisdictions remain subject to examination for tax
years 1996 to 2013, some of which are currently under audit by local tax authorities. the resolutions of these audits are not expected to be material to our consolidated financial statements.
note 14  unearned revenue
unearned revenue by segment was as follows, with segments with significant balances shown separately:
(in millions)
june30,
commercial licensing
$
19,099
$
18,460
commercial other
3,934
2,272
rest of the segments
2,125
1,667
total
$
25,158
$
22,399
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 15  other long-term liabilities
(in millions)
june30,
tax contingencies and other tax liabilities
$
10,510
$
9,548
other
1,084
total
$
11,594
$
10,000
note 16  commitments and guarantees
construction and operating leases  we have committed $880 million for constructing new buildings, building improvements, and leasehold improvements as of june30, 2014.  we have operating leases for most u.s. and international sales and support offices, research and development facilities, manufacturing facilities, and certain equipment. rental expense for facilities operating
leases was $874 million, $711 million, and $639 million, in fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively. future minimum rental commitments under non-cancellable facilities operating leases in place as of june30, 2014 are as follows:
(in millions)
year ending june30,
$
thereafter
1,063
total
$
4,414
indemnifications  we provide indemnifications of varying scope and size to certain customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products and certain other matters.
we evaluate estimated losses for these indemnifications, and we consider such factors as the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. to date, we have not encountered
significant costs as a result of these obligations and have not accrued any liabilities related to these indemnifications in our consolidated financial statements.
note 17  contingencies
antitrust, unfair competition, and overcharge class actions  a large number of antitrust and unfair competition class action lawsuits were filed against us in various state, federal, and canadian courts on behalf of various classes of direct and indirect purchasers of our pc
operating system and certain other software products between 1999 and 2005.  we obtained dismissals or reached settlements of all claims
made in the united states. under the settlements, generally class members can obtain vouchers that entitle them to be reimbursed for purchases of a wide variety of platform-neutral computer hardware and software. the total value of vouchers that we
may issue varies by state. we will make available to certain schools a percentage of those vouchers that are not issued or claimed (one-half to two-
table of contents
part ii  item 8
thirds depending on the state). the total value of vouchers we ultimately issue will depend on the number of class members who make claims and are issued vouchers. we estimate the total remaining
cost of the settlements is approximately $400 million, all of which had been accrued as of june30, 2014.  three similar cases
pending in british columbia, ontario, and quebec, canada have not been settled. in march 2010, the court in the british columbia case certified it as a class action. the plaintiffs successfully appealed a british columbia court of appeal decision
reversing class certification and dismissing the case. in october 2013, the canadian supreme court reversed the appellate court and reinstated part of the british columbia case, which is now scheduled for trial in september 2015. the other two cases
were inactive pending action by the supreme court on the british columbia case.  other antitrust litigation and claims
novell litigation  in november 2004,
novell, inc. (novell) filed a complaint in u.s. district court for the district of utah (later transferred to federal court in maryland), asserting antitrust and unfair competition claims against us related to novells ownership of
wordperfect and other productivity applications during the period between june 1994 and march 1996. after the trial court dismissed or granted summary judgment on a number of novells claims, trial of the one remaining claim took place in late
2011 and resulted in a mistrial. in july 2012, the trial court granted microsofts motion for judgment as a matter of law. novell appealed this decision to the u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit, which affirmed the trial courts
decision in september 2013. the supreme court denied novells petition for review in april 2014.  go computer litigation
in june 2005, go computer inc. and co-founder jerry kaplan filed a complaint in california state court asserting antitrust claims under the
cartwright act related to the business of the former go corporation in the early 1990s and its successor in interest, lucent corporation in the early 2000s. all claims prior to june 2001 have been dismissed with prejudice as barred by the statute of
limitations. after a mini-trial on standing issues, the case is now moving forward with discovery, and a trial is set for september 2015.  china
state administration for industry and commerce investigation  on july 28, 2014, microsoft was informed that chinas state
administration for industry and commerce (saic) had begun a formal investigation relating to chinas anti-monopoly law, and the saic conducted onsite inspections of microsoft offices in beijing, shanghai, guangzhou, and chengdu. saic has stated
the investigation relates to compatibility, bundle sales, and file verification issues related to windows and office software.  patent and
intellectual property claims  motorola litigation  in october 2010, microsoft filed patent infringement complaints against motorola mobility (motorola) with the international trade commission (itc) and in u.s. district court in seattle for
infringement of nine microsoft patents by motorolas android devices. since then, microsoft and motorola have filed additional claims against each other with the itc, in federal district courts in seattle, wisconsin, florida, and california,
and in courts in germany and the united kingdom. the nature of the claims asserted and status of individual matters are summarized below.
international trade commission  in may
2012, the itc issued a limited exclusion order against motorola on one microsoft patent, which became effective in july2012 and was affirmed on appeal in december 2013. in july 2013, microsoft filed an action in u.s. district court in
washington, d.c. seeking an order to compel enforcement of the itcs may 2012 import ban against infringing motorola products by the bureau of customs and border protection (cbp), after learning that cbp had failed to fully enforce
the order.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
in november 2010, motorola filed an action against microsoft with the itc alleging infringement of
five motorola patents by xbox consoles and accessories and seeking an exclusion order to prohibit importation of the allegedly infringing xbox products. at motorolas request, the itc terminated its investigation of four motorola patents. in
march 2013, the itc affirmed there was no violation of the remaining motorola patent. motorola appealed the itcs decision to the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit.  u.s. district court  the seattle district court case filed in october 2010 by microsoft as a
companion to microsofts itc case against motorola was stayed pending the outcome of the itc case.  in november 2010, microsoft
sued motorola for breach of contract in u.s. district court in seattle, alleging that motorola breached its commitments to standards-setting organizations to license to microsoft certain patents on reasonable and non-discriminatory
(rand) terms and conditions. motorola has declared these patents essential to the implementation of the h.264 video standard and the 802.11 wi-fi standard. in the motorola itc case described above and in suits described below, motorola
or a motorola affiliate subsequently sued microsoft on those patents in u.s. district courts, in the itc, and in germany. in february 2012, the seattle district court granted a partial summary judgment in favor of microsoft ruling that
(1)motorola had committed to standards organizations to license its declared-essential patents on rand terms and conditions; and (2)microsoft is a third-party beneficiary of those commitments. after trial, the seattle district court set
per unit royalties for motorolas h.264 and 802.11 patents, which resulted in an immaterial microsoft liability. in september 2013, following trial of microsofts breach of contract claim, a jury awarded $14.5 million in damages to
microsoft. motorola appealed.  cases filed by motorola in wisconsin, california, and florida, with the exception of one currently stayed
case in wisconsin (a companion case to motorolas itc action), have been transferred to the u.s district court in seattle. motorola and microsoft both seek damages as well as injunctive relief. the court has stayed these cases on agreement of
the parties.
in the transferred cases, motorola asserts 15 patents are infringed by a range of microsoft products including mobile and pc operating system, productivity,
server, communication, browser and gaming products.
in the motorola action originally filed in california, motorola asserts microsoft violated antitrust laws in connection with microsofts assertion of
patents against motorola that microsoft agreed to license to certain qualifying entities on rand terms and conditions.
in counterclaims, microsoft asserts 14 patents are infringed by motorola android devices and certain motorola digital video recorders.
germany  in
july 2011, motorola filed patent infringement actions in germany against microsoft and several microsoft subsidiaries.
motorola asserts two patents (one now expired) are essential to implementation of the h.264 video standard, and motorola alleges that h.264 capable products
including xbox 360, windows 7, media player, and internet explorer infringe those patents. in may 2012, the court issued an injunction relating to all h.264 capable microsoft products in germany, which microsoft appealed. orders in the litigation
pending in seattle, washington described above enjoin motorola from enforcing the german injunction.
motorola asserts that one patent covers certain syncing functionality in the activesync protocol employed by windows phone 7, outlook mobile, hotmail mobile,
exchange online, exchange server, and hotmail server. in april 2013, the court stayed the case pending the outcome of parallel proceedings in which microsoft is seeking to invalidate the patent. in november 2013, the federal patent court invalidated
the originally issued patent claims, but ruled that certain new amended claims were patentable. both motorola and microsoft appealed. in june 2014, the court reopened infringement proceedings and scheduled a hearing in november 2014.
microsoft may be able to mitigate the adverse impact of any injunction by altering its products to avoid motorolas infringement claims.
any damages would be determined in separate proceedings.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
in lawsuits microsoft filed in germany in 2011 and 2012, microsoft asserts that motorola android
devices infringe microsoft patents and is seeking damages and injunctions. in 2012, regional courts in germany issued injunctions on three of the microsoft patents, which motorola appealed. one judgment has been affirmed on appeal (and motorola has
further appealed), and the other two appeals are pending. in actions filed separately by motorola to invalidate these patents, the federal patent court in 2013 and 2014 held the microsoft patents invalid, and microsoft appealed. for the cases in
which microsoft obtained injunctions, if motorola were to prevail following all appeals, motorola could have a claim against microsoft for damages caused by an erroneously granted injunction.  united kingdom  in december 2011, microsoft filed an action against motorola in the high court
of justice, chancery division, patents court, in london, england, seeking to revoke the uk part of the european patent asserted by motorola in germany against the activesync protocol. in february 2012, motorola counterclaimed alleging infringement
of the patent and seeking damages and an injunction. in december 2012, the court ruled that motorolas patent is invalid. the court also ruled that the patent, even if valid, would be licensed under the grant-back clause in googles
activesync license. motorola appealed and the appeals court affirmed the lower courts ruling in microsofts favor in november 2013. motorola has exhausted all appeals and the rulings in microsofts favor are final.
ipcom patent litigation  ipcom
gmbh& co. is a german company that holds a large portfolio of mobile technology related patents spanning about 170 patent families and addressing a broad range of cellular technologies. ipcom has asserted 19 of these patents in litigation
against nokia and many of the leading cell phone companies and operators. three of the infringement suits against nokia (now assumed by microsoft through the nds acquisition) are still pending in courts in germany, england, and italy. these courts
have held a number of ipcoms patents were invalid or not infringed. we continue to contest the validity or infringement of the patents remaining in dispute.  interdigital patent litigation  interdigital technology corporation and interdigital
communications corporation (collectively, idt) filed four patent infringement cases against nokia in the itc and in u.s. district court for the district of delaware between 2007 and 2013. we are being substituted for nokia in these
cases. each case includes other co-defendants because most of the patents at issue allegedly relate to 3g and 4g wireless communications standards essential functionality. the suite of cases include three itc investigations where idt is seeking an
order excluding importation of 3g and 4g phones into the u.s. and one active case in u.s. district court in delaware seeking an injunction and damages.
european copyright levies  we have assumed
from nokia all potential liability due to nokias alleged failure to pay private copying levies in various european countries based upon sale of memory cards and mobile phones that incorporate blank memory.the levies are based
upon a 2001 eu directive establishing a right for end users to make copies of copyrighted works for personal or private use, but also allowing the collection of levies based upon sales of blank media or recording devices to compensate copyright
holders for private copying.various collecting societies in eu countries initiated litigation against nokia, stating that nokia must pay levies not only based upon sales of blank memory cards, but also phones that include blank memory for data
storage on the phones, regardless of actual usage of that memory.the most significant cases against nokia are pending in germany and austria, due to both high volume of sales and high levy amounts sought in these countries.we are
litigating against certain collecting societies on the basis that the levy schemes exceed what the eu directive and european court of justice decisions permit.  other patent and intellectual property claims  in addition to these cases, there are
approximately 90 other patent infringement cases pending against microsoft.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
product-related litigation  u.s. cell phone litigation  nokia, along with other handset manufacturers and network
operators, is a defendant in 19 lawsuits filed in the superior court for the district of columbia by individual plaintiffs who allege that radio emissions from cellular handsets caused their brain tumors and other adverse health effects. we have
assumed responsibility for these claims as part of the nds acquisition. nine of these cases were filed in 2002 and are consolidated for certain pre-trial proceedings; the remaining ten cases are stayed. in a separate 2009 decision, the court of
appeals for the district of columbia held that adverse health effect claims arising from the use of cellular handsets that operate within the u.s. federal communications commission radio frequency emission guidelines (fcc guidelines) are
pre-empted by federal law. the plaintiffs allege that their handsets either operated outside the fcc guidelines or were manufactured before the fcc guidelines went into effect. the lawsuits also allege an industry-wide conspiracy to manipulate the
science and testing around emission guidelines. in september 2013, defendants in the consolidated cases moved to exclude plaintiffs expert evidence of general causation on the basis of flawed scientific methodologies. the motion was heard in
december 2013 and january 2014. in march 2014, defendants filed a separate motion to preclude plaintiffs general causation testimony on the ground that it is pre-empted by federal law because the experts challenge the safety of all cellular
handsets, including those that comply with the fcc guidelines. both motions are pending.  canadian cell phone class action
nokia, along with other handset manufacturers and network operators, is a defendant in a 2013 class action lawsuit filed in the supreme court of
british columbia by a purported class of canadians who have used cellular phones for at least 1600 hours, including a subclass of users with brain tumors. microsoft was served with the complaint in june 2014. the litigation is not yet active as
several defendants remain to be served.  other  we also are subject to a variety of other claims and suits that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of our business. although management currently believes that resolving claims against us, individually
or in aggregate, will not have a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements, these matters are subject to inherent uncertainties and managements view of these matters may change in the future.
as of june30, 2014, we had accrued aggregate liabilities of $780 million in other current liabilities and $81 million in other long-term
liabilities for all of our legal matters that were contingencies as of that date. while we intend to defend these matters vigorously, adverse outcomes that we estimate could reach approximately $2.0 billion in aggregate beyond recorded amounts are
reasonably possible. were unfavorable final outcomes to occur, there exists the possibility of a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements for the period in which the effects become reasonably estimable. substantially all
changes from the prior quarter in these accruals and estimates are attributable to matters involving nokia that we assumed as a result of the nds acquisition.
note 18  stockholders equity
shares outstanding
shares of common stock outstanding were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
balance, beginning of year
8,328
8,381
8,376
issued
repurchased
(175
)
(158
)
(142
)
balance, end of year
8,239
8,328
8,381
table of contents
part ii  item 8
share repurchases  on september16, 2013, our board of directors approved a new share repurchase program authorizing up to $40.0 billion in share repurchases. the share repurchase program became effective on october1,
2013, has no expiration date, and may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice. this new share repurchase program replaced the share repurchase program that was announced on september22, 2008 and expired on september30,
2013. as of june30, 2014, $35.1 billion remained of our $40.0 billion share repurchase program. all repurchases were made using cash resources.  we repurchased the following shares of common stock under the above-described repurchase plans:
(in millions)
shares
amount
shares
amount
shares
amount
year ended june30,
2014(a)
2013(b)
2012(b)
first quarter
$
1,500
$
1,000
$
1,000
second quarter
2,000
1,607
1,000
third quarter
1,791
1,000
1,000
fourth quarter
1,118
1,000
1,000
total
$
6,409
$
4,607
$
4,000
(a)
of the 175million shares repurchased in fiscal year 2014, 128million shares were repurchased for $4.9 billion under the share repurchase
program approved by our board of directors on september16, 2013 and 47million shares were repurchased for $1.5 billion under the share repurchase program that was announced on september22, 2008 and expired on september30,
2013.
(b)
all shares repurchased in fiscal years 2013 and 2012 were repurchased under the repurchase plan that was announced on september22, 2008 and expired
on september30, 2013.  the above table excludes shares repurchased to settle statutory employee tax
withholding related to the vesting of stock awards.  dividends  in fiscal year 2014, our board of directors declared the following dividends:
declaration date
dividend pershare
record date
totalamount
paymentdate
(in millions)
september16, 2013
$0.28
november21,2013
$2,332
december12,2013
november19, 2013
$0.28
february20, 2014
$2,322
march13, 2014
march11, 2014
$0.28
may15, 2014
$2,309
june12, 2014
june10, 2014
$0.28
august21, 2014
$2,307
september11,2014
the dividend declared on june10, 2014 will be paid after the filing date of this form 10-k and was included
in other current liabilities as of june30, 2014.  in fiscal year 2013, our board of directors declared the following dividends:
declaration date
dividend pershare
record date
totalamount
paymentdate
(in millions)
september 18, 2012
$
0.23
november15,2012
$
1,933
december13,2012
november 28, 2012
$
0.23
february 21, 2013
$
1,925
march 14, 2013
march 11, 2013
$
0.23
may 16, 2013
$
1,921
june 13, 2013
june 12, 2013
$
0.23
august 15, 2013
$
1,916
september12,2013
the dividend declared on june12, 2013 was included in other current liabilities as of june30, 2013.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
note 19  accumulated other comprehensive income
the following table summarizes the changes in accumulated other comprehensive income by component:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
derivatives
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) balance, beginning of period
$
$
$
(163
)
unrealized gains (losses), net of tax effects of $2, $54 and $127
reclassification adjustments for losses (gains) included in revenue
(104
)
(195
)
tax expense (benefit) included in provision for income taxes
(10
)
amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
(98
)
(127
)
net current period other comprehensive income (loss)
(35
)
(26
)
accumulated other comprehensive income balance, end of period
$
$
$
investments
accumulated other comprehensive income balance, beginning of period
$
1,794
$
1,431
$
1,821
unrealized gains (losses), net of tax effects of $1,067, $244 and $(93)
2,053
(172
)
reclassification adjustments for gains included in other income (expense)
(447
)
(139
)
(335
)
tax expense included in provision for income taxes
amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income
(316
)
(90
)
(218
)
net current period other comprehensive income (loss)
1,737
(390
)
accumulated other comprehensive income balance, end of period
$
3,531
$
1,794
$
1,431
translation adjustments and other
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) balance, beginning of period
$
(117
)
$
(101
)
$
translation adjustments and other, net of tax effects of $12, $(8) and $(165)
(16
)
(306
)
accumulated other comprehensive loss balance, end of period
$
$
(117
)
$
(101
)
accumulated other comprehensive income, end of period
$
3,708
$
1,743
$
1,422
note 20  employee stock and savings plans
we grant stock-based compensation to directors and employees. at june30, 2014, an aggregate of 346million shares
were authorized for future grant under our stock plans, covering stock options, stock awards, and leadership stock awards. awards that expire or are canceled without delivery of shares generally become available for issuance under the plans. we
issue new shares of microsoft common stock to satisfy exercises and vesting of awards granted under all of our stock plans.  stock-based
compensation expense and related income tax benefits were as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
stock-based compensation expense
$
2,446
$
2,406
$
2,244
income tax benefits related to stock-based compensation
$
$
$
stock plans  stock
awards  stock awards (sas) are grants that entitle the holder to shares of microsoft common stock as the award vests.
sas generally vest over a four or five-year period.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
executive incentive plan  under the executive incentive plan (eip), the compensation committee awards performance-based compensation comprising both cash and sas to executive officers and certain senior executives. for executive
officers, their awards are based on an aggregate incentive pool equal to a percentage of consolidated operating income. for fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, the pool was 0.44%, 0.35%, and 0.30% of operating income, respectively. the sas vest
ratably in august of each of the four years following the grant date. the final cash awards will be determined after each performance period based on individual and business performance.  activity for all stock plans  the fair value of each award was estimated on the date of grant
using the following assumptions:
year ended june30,
dividends per share (quarterly amounts)
$
0.23-$0.28
$
0.20-$0.23
$
0.16-$0.20
interest rates range
1.3%-1.8%
0.6%-1.1%
0.7%-1.7%
during fiscal year 2014, the following activity occurred under our stock plans:
shares
weighted average grant-date
fair value
(inmillions)
stock awards
nonvested balance, beginning of year
$
25.50
granted(a)
$
31.50
vested
(93
)
$
25.12
forfeited
(24
)
$
27.01
nonvested balance, end of year
$
27.88
(a)
includes four million shares in stock replacement awards related to the acquisition of nds. the weighted average grant-date fair value was $37.64.
as of june30, 2014, there was approximately $5.2 billion of total unrecognized compensation costs related
to stock awards. these costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 3 years.  during fiscal years 2013 and
2012, the following activity occurred under our stock plans:
(in millions, except fair values)
stock awards
awards granted
weighted average grant-date fair value
$
28.37
$
24.60
total vest-date fair value of stock awards vested was $3.2 billion, $2.8 billion, and $2.4 billion, for fiscal
years 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
employee stock purchase plan  we have an employee stock purchase plan (the plan) for all eligible employees. shares of our common stock may be purchased by employees at three-month intervals at 90% of the fair market value on the
last trading day of each three-month period. employees may purchase shares having a value not exceeding 15% of their gross compensation during an offering period. employees purchased the following shares during the periods presented:
(shares in millions)
year ended june30,
shares purchased
average price per share
$
33.60
$
26.81
$
25.03
at june30, 2014, 173million shares of our common stock were reserved for future issuance through the
plan.  savings plan  we have a
savings plan in the u.s. that qualifies under section401(k) of the internal revenue code, and a number of savings plans in international locations. participating u.s. employees may contribute up to 75% of their salary, but not more than
statutory limits. we contribute fifty cents for each dollar of the first 6% a participant contributes in this plan, with a maximum contribution of the lesser of 3% of a participants earnings or 3% of the irs compensation limit for the given
year. matching contributions for all plans were $420 million, $393 million, and $373 million in fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively, and were expensed as contributed. matching contributions are invested proportionate to each
participants voluntary contributions in the investment options provided under the plan. investment options in the u.s. plan include microsoft common stock, but neither participant nor our matching contributions are required to be invested in
microsoft common stock.
note 21  segment information and geographic data
in its operation of the business, management, including our chief operating decision maker, the companys chief executive
officer, reviews certain financial information, including segmented internal profit and loss statements prepared on a basis not consistent with u.s. gaap. the segment information in this note is reported on that basis.
during the first quarter of fiscal year 2014, we changed our organizational structure as part of our transformation to a devices and services
company. as a result, information that our chief operating decision maker regularly reviews for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance changed. therefore, beginning in fiscal year 2014, we reported our financial performance based
on our new segments; d&c licensing, d&c hardware, d&c other, commercial licensing, and commercial other. we have recast certain prior period amounts to conform to the way we internally managed and monitored segment performance during
fiscal year 2014.  on april25, 2014, we acquired substantially all of nds. see note 9  business combinations for additional
details. nds has been included in our consolidated results of operations starting on the acquisition date. we report the financial performance of the acquired business in our new phone hardware segment. prior to the acquisition of nds, financial
results associated with our joint strategic initiatives with nokia were reflected in our d&c licensing segment. the contractual relationship with nokia related to those initiatives terminated in conjunction with the acquisition. with the
creation of the new phone hardware segment, the d&c hardware segment was renamed computing and gaming hardware in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014.  our reportable segments are described below.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
devices and consumer  our d&c segments develop, manufacture, market, and support products and services designed to entertain and connect people, increase personal productivity, help people simplify tasks and make more informed
decisions online, and help advertisers connect with audiences. our d&c segments are:
d&c licensing, comprising: windows, including all oem licensing (windows oem) and other non-volume licensing and academic volume
licensing of the windows operating system and related software; non-volume licensing of microsoft office, comprising the core office product set, for consumers (office consumer); windows phone operating system, including related patent
licensing; and certain other patent licensing revenue;
computing and gaming hardware, comprising: xbox gaming and entertainment consoles and accessories, second-party and third-party video game royalties,
and xbox live subscriptions (xbox platform); surface devices and accessories; and microsoft pc accessories;
phone hardware, comprising: lumia smartphones and other non-lumia phones, beginning with the acquisition of nds; and
d&c other, comprising: resale, including windows store, xbox live transactions, and windows phone store; search advertising; display advertising;
office 365 consumer, comprising office 365 home and office 365 personal; studios, comprising first-party video games; our retail stores; and certain other consumer products and services not included in the categories above.
commercial
our commercial segments develop, market, and support software and services designed to increase individual, team, and organizational productivity
and efficiency, including simplifying everyday tasks through seamless operations across the users hardware and software. our commercial segments are:
commercial licensing, comprising: server products, including windows server, microsoft sql server, visual studio, system center, and related client
access licenses (cals); windows embedded; volume licensing of the windows operating system, excluding academic (windows commercial); microsoft office for business, including office, exchange, sharepoint, lync, and related
cals (office commercial); microsoft dynamics business solutions, excluding dynamics crm online; and skype; and
commercial other, comprising: enterprise services, including premier support services and microsoft consulting services; commercial cloud, comprising
office 365 commercial, other microsoft office online offerings, dynamics crm online, and microsoft azure; and certain other commercial products and online services not included in the categories above.
revenue and cost of revenue are generally directly attributed to our segments. certain revenue contracts are allocated among the segments based on
the relative value of the underlying products and services. cost of revenue is directly charged to our hardware segments. for the remaining segments, cost of revenue is directly charged in most cases and allocated in certain cases, generally using a
relative revenue methodology.  we do not allocate operating expenses to our segments. rather, we allocate them to our two segment
groups, devices and consumer and commercial. due to the integrated structure of our business, allocations of expenses are made in certain cases to incent cross-collaboration among our segment groups so that a segment group is not solely burdened by
the cost of a mutually beneficial activity as we seek to deliver seamless experiences across devices, whether on-premises or in the cloud.  operating expenses are attributed to our segment groups as follows:
sales and marketing expenses are primarily recorded directly to each segment group based on identified customer segment.
research and development expenses are primarily shared across the segment groups based on relative gross margin but are mapped directly in certain cases where
the value of the expense only accrues to that segment group.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
general and administrative expenses are primarily allocated based on relative gross margin.
certain corporate-level activity is not allocated to our segment groups, including costs of: legal, including expenses, settlements, and fines;
information technology; human resources; finance; excise taxes; and integration and restructuring costs.  segment revenue and gross
margin were as follows during the periods presented:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
revenue
devicesandconsumer
licensing
$
18,803
$
19,021
$
19,495
hardware:
computing and gaming hardware
9,628
6,461
6,740
phone hardware
1,985
total d&c hardware
11,613
6,461
6,740
other
7,258
6,618
6,203
total devices and consumer
37,674
32,100
32,438
commercial
licensing
42,027
39,686
37,126
other
7,547
5,660
4,644
total commercial
49,574
45,346
41,770
corporate and other
(415
)
(485
)
total revenue
$
86,833
$
77,849
$
73,723
(in millions)
year ended june30,
gross margin
devices and consumer
licensing
$
17,216
$
17,044
$
17,240
hardware:
computing and gaming hardware
2,495
phone hardware
total d&c hardware
2,495
other
1,770
2,046
1,998
total devices and consumer
19,933
20,046
21,733
commercial
licensing
38,604
36,261
34,463
other
1,856
total commercial
40,460
37,182
35,042
corporate and other
(494
)
(582
)
total gross margin
$
59,899
$
57,600
$
56,193
following is operating expenses by segment group. as discussed above, we do not allocate operating expenses below
cost of revenue to our segments.
(in millions)
year ended june30,
devices and consumer
$
11,219
$
10,625
$
15,682
commercial
16,993
16,050
15,064
corporate and other
3,928
4,161
3,684
total operating expenses
$
32,140
$
30,836
$
34,430
table of contents
part ii  item 8
following is operating income (loss) by segment group.
(in millions)
year ended june30,
devices and consumer
$
8,714
$
9,421
$
6,051
commercial
23,467
21,132
19,978
corporate and other
(4,422
)
(3,789
)
(4,266
)
total operating income
$
27,759
$
26,764
$
21,763
corporate and other operating income includes adjustments to conform our internal accounting policies to u.s. gaap
and corporate-level activity not specifically attributed to a segment. significant internal accounting policies that differ from u.s. gaap relate to revenue recognition, income statement classification, and depreciation.
corporate and other activity was as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
corporate(a)
$
(3,888
)
$
(4,236
)
$
(3,671
)
other (adjustments to u.s. gaap):
revenue reconciling amounts(b)
(415
)
(485
)
cost of revenue reconciling amounts
(79
)
(31
)
(97
)
operating expenses reconciling amounts
(40
)
(13
)
total corporate and other
$
(4,422
)
$
(3,789
)
$
(4,266
)
(a)
corporate is presented on the basis of our internal accounting policies and excludes the adjustments to u.s. gaap that are presented separately in those
line items.
(b)
revenue reconciling amounts for fiscal year 2014 included a net $349 million of revenue deferrals related to sales of certain devices bundled with other
products and services (bundled offerings). revenue reconciling amounts for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 included the deferral and subsequent recognition, respectively, of $540 million of revenue related to the windows upgrade offer.
no sales to an individual customer or country other than the united states accounted for more than 10% of fiscal
year 2014, 2013, or 2012 revenue. revenue, classified by the major geographic areas in which our customers are located, was as follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
united
states(a)
$
43,474
$
41,344
$
38,846
other countries
43,359
36,505
34,877
total
$
86,833
$
77,849
$
73,723
(a)
includes billings to oems and certain multinational organizations because of the nature of these businesses and the impracticability of determining the
geographic source of the revenue.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
revenue from external customers, classified by significant product and service offerings were as
follows:
(in millions)
year ended june30,
microsoft office system
$
24,323
$
22,995
$
22,299
windows pc operating system
16,856
17,529
17,320
server products and tools
17,055
15,408
14,232
xbox platform
8,643
7,100
8,045
consulting and product support services
4,767
4,372
3,976
advertising
4,016
3,387
3,181
phone
3,073
surface
1,883
other
6,217
5,590
4,508
total
$
86,833
$
77,849
$
73,723
our total commercial cloud revenue was $2.8 billion, $1.3 billion, and $0.7 billion in fiscal years 2014, 2013, and
2012, respectively. these amounts are included in their respective product categories in the table above.  assets are not allocated to
segments for internal reporting presentations. a portion of amortization and depreciation is charged to the respective segment. it is impracticable for us to separately identify the amount of amortization and depreciation by segment that is included
in the measure of segment profit or loss.  long-lived assets, excluding financial instruments and tax assets, classified by the location
of the controlling statutory company and with countries over 10% of the total shown separately, were as follows:
(in millions)
june30,
united states
$
17,653
$
16,615
$
14,081
finland
9,840
luxembourg
6,913
6,943
6,975
other countries
5,713
4,159
3,827
total
$
40,119
$
27,729
$
24,891
note 22  quarterly information (unaudited)
(in millions, except per share amounts)
quarter ended
september30
december31
march31
june30
(a)
total
(a)
fiscal year 2014
revenue
$18,529
$24,519
$20,403
$23,382
$86,833
gross margin
13,415
16,235
14,462
15,787
59,899
net income
5,244
6,558
5,660
4,612
(b)
22,074
(b)
basic earnings per share
0.63
0.79
0.68
0.56
2.66
diluted earnings per share
0.62
0.78
0.68
0.55
(b)
2.63
(b)
fiscal year 2013
revenue
$16,008
$21,456
$20,489
$19,896
$77,849
gross margin
11,840
15,764
15,702
14,294
57,600
net income
4,466
6,377
6,055
(c)
4,965
(d)
21,863
(e)
basic earnings per share
0.53
0.76
0.72
0.59
2.61
diluted earnings per share
0.53
0.76
0.72
(c)
0.59
(d)
2.58
(e)
(a)
nds has been included in our consolidated results of operations starting on april25, 2014, the date of acquisition.
(b)
includes a tax provision adjustment recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014 related to adjustments to prior years liabilities for
intercompany transfer pricing which decreased net income by $458 million and diluted earnings per share by $0.05.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
(c)
includes a charge related to a fine imposed by the european commission in march 2013 which decreased net income by $733 million (561 million) and
diluted earnings per share by $0.09.
(d)
includes a charge for surface rt inventory adjustments recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2013, which decreased net income by $596 million and
diluted earnings per share by $0.07.
(e)
includes a charge related to a fine imposed by the european commission in march 2013 which decreased net income by $733 million (561 million) and
diluted earnings per share by $0.09. also includes a charge for surface rt inventory adjustments recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2013, which decreased net income by $596 million and diluted earnings per share by $0.07.
note 23  subsequent event
on july17, 2014, we announced a restructuring plan to simplify our organization and align the recently acquired nds
business with our companys overall strategy. we will eliminate up to 18,000 positions over the next year, including 12,500 professional and factory positions related to the acquisition of nds. we expect to incur pre-tax charges of
approximately $1.1 billion to $1.6 billion in fiscal year 2015.
table of contents
part ii  item 8
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and stockholders of microsoft corporation  redmond, washington  we have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of microsoft
corporation and subsidiaries (the company) as of june30, 2014 and 2013, and the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, cash flows, and stockholders equity for each of the three years in the period
ended june30, 2014.these financial statements are the responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements.an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.  in our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of microsoft corporation and subsidiaries as of june30, 2014 and 2013, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended june30, 2014, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america.  we have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states), the companys internal control over financial reporting as of june30, 2014, based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated framework
(2013)issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission and our report dated july31, 2014, expressed an unqualified opinion on the companys internal control over financial reporting.
/s/deloitte& touche llp
seattle, washington  july31,
table of contents
part ii  item 9, 9a
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure  not applicable.  item9a. controls and procedures  under the supervision and
with the participation of our management, including the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, we have evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as required by exchange act rule 13a-15(b) as of the end of
the period covered by this report. based on that evaluation, the chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective.
report of management on internal control over financial reporting
our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting for the company. internal control
over financial reporting is a process to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of our financial reporting for external purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. internal
control over financial reporting includes maintaining records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect our transactions; providing reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary for preparation of our financial
statements; providing reasonable assurance that receipts and expenditures of company assets are made in accordance with management authorization; and providing reasonable assurance that unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of company assets
that could have a material effect on our financial statements would be prevented or detected on a timely basis. because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting is not intended to provide absolute assurance that a
misstatement of our financial statements would be prevented or detected.  management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in internal control  integrated framework (2013)issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission. our assessment of, and conclusion on,
the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting did not include the internal controls of nokia corporations devices and services business, acquired on april25, 2014, which is included in our 2014 consolidated financial
statements and represented approximately 9% of our total assets as of june30, 2014, and 2% of our total revenues for the year ended june30, 2014. based on this evaluation, management concluded that the companys internal control
over financial reporting was effective as of june30, 2014. there were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the quarter ended june30, 2014 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially
affect, our internal control over financial reporting. deloitte& touche llp has audited our internal control over financial reporting as of june30, 2014; their report is included in item9a.
table of contents
part ii  item 9a
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and stockholders of microsoft corporation
redmond, washington  we have audited the internal
control over financial reporting of microsoft corporation and subsidiaries (the company) as of june30, 2014, based on criteria established in internal control  integrated framework (2013)issued by the committee
of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission.as described in the report of management on internal control over financial reporting, management excluded from its assessment the internal control over financial reporting at nokia
corporations devices and services business, acquired on april25, 2014 and whose financial statements constitute 9% of total assets as of june30, 2014 and 2% of total revenues for the year ended june30, 2014. accordingly, our
audit did not include the internal control over financial reporting at nokia corporations devices and services business. the companys management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for
its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying report of management on internal control over financial reporting.our responsibility is to express an opinion on the companys
internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.  we conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states).those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects.our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on
the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the companys principal
executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the companys board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.a companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
(1)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors
of the company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper
management override of controls, material misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting to
future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of june30, 2014,
based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated framework (2013)issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission.
we have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated financial
statements as of and for the year ended june30, 2014, of the company and our report dated july31, 2014, expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements.  /s/deloitte& touche llp
seattle, washington  july31,
table of contents
part ii, iii  item 9b, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
item9b. other information
effective july1, 2014, we amended our bylaws to establish the size of the board of directors as a range of 5 to 14 members, and to designate
the chief executive officer as the sole officer with authority to appoint corporate officers. the amended bylaws are filed as exhibit 3.2 to this report.  part iii  item10. directors, executive officers and
corporate governance  a list of our executive officers and biographical information appears in part i, item1 of this form
10-k. information about our directors may be found under the caption our director nominees in our proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders to be held december3, 2014 (the proxy statement). information
about our audit committee may be found under the caption board committees in the proxy statement. that information is incorporated herein by reference.  the information in the proxy statement set forth under the caption section 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance is incorporated herein by reference.
we have adopted the microsoft finance code of professional conduct (the finance code of ethics), a code of ethics that applies to our
chief executive officer, chief financial officer, chief accounting officer and corporate controller, and other finance organization employees. the finance code of ethics is publicly available on our website at
www.microsoft.com/investor/msfinancecode. if we make any substantive amendments to the finance code of ethics or grant any waiver, including any implicit waiver, from a provision of the code to our chief executive officer, chief financial officer,
or chief accounting officer and corporate controller, we will disclose the nature of the amendment or waiver on that website or in a report on form8-k.  item11. executive compensation  the information in the proxy
statement set forth under the captions director compensation, named executive officer compensation, compensation committee interlocks and insider participation, and compensation committee report is
incorporated herein by reference.  item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and related stockholder matters  the information in the proxy statement set forth under the captions information
regarding beneficial ownership of principal shareholders, directors, and management and equity compensation plan information is incorporated herein by reference.
item13. certain relationships and related transactions, and directorindependence
the information set forth in the proxy statement under the captions director independence and certain relationships and related
transactions is incorporated herein by reference.  item14. principal accounting fees and
services  information concerning principal accountant fees and services appears in the proxy statement under the headings fees
billed by deloitte& touche and policy on audit committee pre-approval of audit and permissible non-audit services of independent auditor and is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
part iv  item 15
part iv  item15. exhibits, financial statement schedules
(a)
financial statements and schedules  the financial statements are set forth under item8 of this form 10-k, as indexed below. financial statement schedules have been omitted since they either are not required, not applicable, or the information
is otherwise included.
index to financial statements
page
income statements
comprehensive income statements
balance sheets
cash flows statements
stockholders equity statements
notes to financial statements
report of independent registered public accounting firm
(b)
exhibit listing
incorporated by reference
exhibitnumber
exhibit description
filed
herewith
form
period
ending
exhibit
filingdate
3.1
amended and restated articles of incorporation of microsoft corporation
10-q
12/31/09
3.1
1/28/10
3.2
bylaws of microsoft corporation
x
4.1
form of indenture between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee (base indenture)
3-asr
4.1
11/20/08
4.2
form of first supplemental indenture for 2.95% notes due 2014, 4.20% notes due 2019, and 5.20% notes due 2039, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york
mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the base indenture
8-k
4.2
5/15/09
4.5
form of second supplemental indenture for 0.875% notes due 2013, 1.625% notes due 2015, 3.00% notes due 2020, and 4.50% notes due 2040, dated as of september27, 2010, between microsoft
corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.5
9/27/10
table of contents
part iv  item 15
incorporated by reference
exhibitnumber
exhibit description
filed
herewith
form
period
ending
exhibit
filingdate
4.6
third supplemental indenture for 2.500% notes due 2016, 4.000% notes due 2021, and 5.300% notes due 2041, dated as of february8, 2011, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new
york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.6
2/8/11
4.7
fourth supplemental indenture for 0.875% notes due 2017, 2.125% notes due 2022, and 3.500% notes due 2042, dated as of november 7, 2012, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york
mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.7
11/7/12
4.8
fifth supplemental indenture for 2.625% notes due 2033, dated as of may 2, 2013 between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the
indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.1
5/1/13
4.9
sixth supplemental indenture for 1.000% notes due 2018, 2.375% notes due 2023, and 3.750% notes due 2043, dated as of may 2, 2013, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york
mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.2
5/1/13
4.10
seventh supplemental indenture for 2.125% notes due 2021 and 3.125% notes due 2028, dated as of december 6, 2013, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company,
n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may 18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.1
12/6/13
table of contents
part iv  item 15
incorporated by reference
exhibitnumber
exhibit description
filed
herewith
form
period
ending
exhibit
filingdate
4.11
eighth supplemental indenture for 1.625% notes due 2018, 3.625% notes due 2023, and 4.875% notes due 2043, dated as of december6, 2013, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new
york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee, to the indenture, dated as of may18, 2009, between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, n.a., as trustee
8-k
4.2
12/6/13
10.1*
microsoft corporation 2001 stock plan
10-q
12/31/11
10.1
1/19/12
10.3*
microsoft corporation 1999 stock plan for non-employee directors
8-k
10.3
11/15/04
10.4*
microsoft corporation employee stock purchase plan
10-k
6/30/12
10.4
7/26/12
10.5*
microsoft corporation deferred compensation plan
10-q
3/31/12
10.5
4/19/12
10.7*
form of stock award agreement for non-employee directors under the microsoft corporation 1999 stock plan for non-employee directors
10-k
6/30/04
10.9
9/1/04
10.10*
form of stock option agreement under the microsoft corporation 2001 stock plan
10-k
6/30/04
10.12
9/1/04
10.11*
form of stock option agreement for non-employee directors under the 1999 stock plan for non-employee directors
10-k
6/30/04
10.13
9/1/04
10.12
2009 officers indemnification trust agreement between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, as trustee
10-k
6/30/10
10.12
7/30/10
10.13
amended and restated 2003 indemnification trust agreement between microsoft corporation and the bank of new york mellon trust company, as trustee
10-k
6/30/10
10.13
7/30/10
10.14*
microsoft corporation deferred compensation plan for non-employee directors
s-8
99.2
2/28/06
10.17*
executive officer incentive plan
8-k
10.17
9/23/13
10.18*
form of executive incentive plan stock award agreement under the microsoft corporation 2001 stock plan
8-k
10.20
9/23/13
10.19*
resignation agreement and full and final release of claims between microsoft corporation and steven sinofsky
10-k
6/30/13
10.19
7/30/13
10.21
stock award agreement under the microsoft corporation 2001 stock plan (service-based)
8-k
10.21
9/23/13
10.22
senior executive severance benefit plan
8-k
10.22
9/26/13
table of contents
part iv  item 15
incorporated by reference
exhibitnumber
exhibit description
filed
herewith
form
period
ending
exhibit
filingdate
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
x
subsidiaries of registrant
x
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
x
31.1
certifications of chief executive officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
x
31.2
certifications of chief financial officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
x
32.1**
certifications of chief executive officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
x
32.2**
certifications of chief financial officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
x
101.ins
xbrl instance document
x
101.sch
xbrl taxonomy extension schema
x
101.cal
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase
x
101.def
xbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase
x
101.lab
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase
x
101.pre
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase
x
*
indicates a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement
**
furnished, not filed
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned; thereunto duly authorized, in the city of redmond, state of washington, on july31, 2014.
microsoft corporation
/s/frank h. brod
frank h. brod
corporatevicepresident,financeandadministration; chiefaccountingofficer(principalaccountingofficer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of registrant and in the capacities indicated on july31, 2014.
signature
title
/s/john w.
thompson john w. thompson
chairman
/s/satya
nadella satya nadella
director and chief executive officer
/s/steven a.
ballmer steven a. ballmer
director
/s/dina
dublon dina dublon
director
/s/william h. gates
iii william h. gates iii
director
/s/maria m.
klawe maria m. klawe
director
/s/david f.
marquardt david f. marquardt
director
/s/g. mason
morfit g. mason morfit
director
/s/charles h.
noski charles h. noski
director
/s/helmut
panke helmut panke
director
/s/amy e.
hood amy e. hood
executive vice president and chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
/s/frank h.
brod frank h. brod
corporatevicepresident,financeandadministration; chiefaccounting officer (principal accounting officer)
